###### Contents

-    1 Preface
-    2 Kaluza-Klein Picture
    -    2.1 Historical remark
    -    2.2 Introduction
    -    2.3 Coset spaces
    -    2.4 Harmonic expansion
    -    2.5 Effective Lagrangians
    -    2.6 Compactification & Stability
        -    2.6.1 The vacuum solution
        -    2.6.2 Fluctuations and gauge fixing
        -    2.6.3 Solutions to the linearized equations
    -    2.7 Chiral fermions
    -    2.8 Mass estimates for KK excitations
-    3 Warped Non-compact Extra Dimensions
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Junction conditions
    -    3.3 Randall-Sundrum scenario
    -    3.4 General solutions with Yang-Mills fields
    -    3.5 Localization of Matter
        -    3.5.1 Gravity
        -    3.5.2 Fermions
-    4 Living with Extra Dimensions
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 General bounds
    -    4.3 Kaluza-Klein Cosmology
    -    4.4 Brane Cosmology
    -    4.5 Stability of the scale of compactification
    -    4.6 Proton stability
    -    4.7 Baryogenesis with Low Scale Gravity
        -    4.7.1 Thermal correction to the coefficients
        -    4.7.2 A model for baryogenesis
-    5 Gauge Hierarchy, Electroweak Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking, &
    Fermion Chirality Linked
    -    5.1 Introduction
    -    5.2 The proposal
    -    5.3 The background solution
    -    5.4 Chiral fermions
    -    5.5 General rules for Higgs-type tachyons
    -    5.6 Examples
        -    5.6.1 Tachyons
        -    5.6.2 Fermions
    -    5.7 Higgs like Tachyons on @xmath
    -    5.8 Other scalars
    -    5.9 Massless scalars and loop-induced hierarchy
-    6 Concluding Remark

## 1 Preface

The idea of believing in and looking for a unique source to existence
have been one of the oldest continuously posed questions in the history
of man kind. The idea goes back to at least to the Sumero-Semitic
syncretism of the 3rd millennium BC, when the process of identification
(unification) of deities had already taken place before the majority of
records were written. The concept of having a mother-creator goddess,
Tiamat , is documented in the Babylonian Creation story “ Enuma Elish ’’
more than four thousand years ago. ³ ³ 3 A translation of Enuma Elish
(before 2000 BC) can be found in [ 1 ] .

A search for simplification in understanding an obviously sophisticated
and detailed phenomena happening in mother Nature is, in many senses, a
search for identification (unification), and vise versa. Many of the
human species named under physicists believe in this equivalence.

The first step towards a better “understanding” was by introducing the
concept of a cause of an action, which was eventually translated by
Newton (1665) into the more concrete concept of force . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Thanks to
gauge theories, now we also know the cause of a force!. To date we are
aware of the presence of four kind of distinct forces in Nature at very
low energies; the electromagnetic, weak, strong, and gravitational
forces. The attempt to unify these forces at higher energies (though not
the only interesting problem of physics today) by deriving their
equations of motion from a single simple renormalizable action was
pursued by realizing the covariance of their physical laws under certain
symmetries. Those symmetries reduce the number of free parameters in the
theory and therefore enhance its predictivity; this is one aspect of the
simplification sought after.

The present Standard Model (SM) of elementary particles (Abdus-Salam,
Glashow, and Weinberg; Nobel Prize 1979) succeeded very well in unifying
the strong and electroweak interactions under the gauge group @xmath at
energy scales around @xmath GeV.

No understanding of a similar unification of gravity with the other
forces at accessible energies to accelerators is achieved to date. The
only promising quantum theory of gravity, so far, is superstring/M
theory and its mathematical consistency requires the space-time to have
ten/eleven dimensions. The low energy field theoretical description of
string theory can be used in order to explain our four-dimensional world
using the standard Kaluza-Klein compactification of the extra dimensions
explained in the proceeding chapters.

Coming back to the SM; its main building blocks are: Action principle,
Quantum Field Theory, Poincaré and gauge invariances, and the justified
assumption of living in ( @xmath )-dimensional space-time.

The community of modern theoretical particle physicists is clearly
impressed by this model (for an obvious reason that its predictions fit
the experimental data with an impressive precision [ 2 ] ), and believes
the assumptions under which it is made are to be valid at low energies
and the concepts it is based on are to be generalized to theories where
gravity is included.

Despite the experimental success ⁵ ⁵ 5 In the recent past there has been
dissatisfaction from the experimental point of view, as well, since the
standard model is in shortage of explaining, for instance, neutrino
oscillations [ 3 ] and the recent data of @xmath of the Muon [ 4 ] .
Furthermore, there is no hint for the existence of an elementary scalar
field in Nature, while the Higgs sector is very essential in the SM (see
[ 5 ] for possible future detection of the standard model Higgs
particle). of the standard model as a theory describing the strong and
electroweak interactions of elementary particles, this model is not
theoretically satisfactory for various reasons. There are two main
sources of theoretical dissatisfaction; the first has to do with the
model itself (when it comes to explaining, flavor, and charge
quantization, for example), and the second arises when the standard
model is discussed within a more general context where the fourth
fundamental force of nature, gravity, is present; leading subsequently
to an instability of the weak scale at the quantum level (caused by the
quadratic divergences in the Higgs (mass) @xmath ).

Therefore, there are obvious urges to go beyond the standard model: the
need to explain neutrino oscillations (for instance), quantum
instability of the electroweak scale, and the hope for a quantum theory
of gravity to unify with the standard model (or its extension). Further
simplification is yet to be worked for.

The electroweak quantum instability, known as the hierarchy problem
between the electroweak and gravity scales, was the main motivation to
start searching for new physics beyond the standard model. These
searches lead to the birth of many hoping-to-be-physical ⁶ ⁶ 6 I mean by
a “physical” theory here the one which is able to fit with present
experimental data, to reproduce all what the standard model is able to
reproduce at energies @xmath GeV, and not to contradict with the
standard cosmological scenario after Big Bang Nucleosynthesis. In
addition, it should have some extra predictive power to SM preferably
testable at LHC. theories like technicolor [ 6 ] , grand unified
theories [ 7 ] , supersymmetry [ 8 ] , and recently models with large
extra dimensions [ 9 ] .

By coincidence, ⁷ ⁷ 7 It may be realized in the future that it is not a
mere coincidence. Who knows?. also the most promising theory to quantize
gravity and unify it with the other gauge forces (through superstring/M
theory) seem to require both extra dimensions, beyond the known four,
and supersymmetry as crucial ingredients for its consistency.

This strongly hints to that, hoping for a unique theory, the hierarchy
problem may be solved in a theory in higher dimensions than @xmath with
broken supersymmetry.

This thesis concerns itself to a good extent with solving the hierarchy
problem within the context of extra dimensions.

In string theory, the extra six-dimensional space is squeezed and
pressed (or compactified ) into a manifold of a tiny volume. The
original compactification scale of this theory is of order @xmath which
is extremely small and it would be impossible for any machine to detect
a modification of the gravitational law at such energies. With such a
scale, the world will definitely appear four-dimensional without any
hint to the presence of dimensions beyond the known four. Inspired by
string theory, though not as mathematically rigorous, a recent interest
in extra-dimensional models has been revived by Dvali et al [ 9 , 10 ] ,
⁸ ⁸ 8 Credits of associating a physical meaning to extra dimensions
prior to [ 9 ] go to [ 11 ] - [ 15 ] . who pointed out that the
modification to Newton’s low by introducing large extra dimensions could
be a valid possibility since no tests of gravity has been carried out to
distances much below 1 millimeter (see for instance [ 16 , 17 , 18 ] ).

The activities so far fall into two categories: models as [ 9 ] based on
the original idea of Kaluza and Klein [ 19 , 20 ] which consider a
tensor product (factorizable metric) of the four-dimensional world with
the compact internal space; and alternatives to compactification which
consider non-compact extra dimensions, [ 21 ] , with warped
(non-factorizable) metric as in [ 13 , 22 ] . The new proposals were all
aimed at a solution to the hierarchy problem by lowering the gravity
scale from @xmath GeV down to few TeV. In Kaluza-Klein (KK) like models,
the particles are free to propagate inside the internal compact space
which should be small enough not to lead to phenomena contradicting the
present knowledge of particle physics and big bang nucleosynthesis [ 23
] . There is an infinite number of images of the internal space at each
point of the four-dimensional world. When the extra dimensions are
non-compact, the only way to avoid long-range observable effects is to
localize the fields on a thin three-dimensional wall (brane). In this
case, there will not be infinite images of the brane world, and in
principle one can have only one single brane on which ordinary matter is
localized. ⁹ ⁹ 9 A special case of only one image of the 4-dimensional
space-time can also be considered, within the context of Kaluza-Klein
compactification, if ordinary matter fields are forced to be localized
around a specific point in the internal space [ 9 ] . We will not
discuss this possibility here.

In both categories, it turns out that lowering the gravity, or the
fundamental, scale of the theory does not by itself solve the problem.
It rather addresses it in a different way as it introduces other sources
of fine-tuning into the theory like for instance explaining the size of
the manifold made by the extra dimensions or the mechanism which traps
the matter fields and gauge forces on a brane. Let alone that there is
again a huge difference between few TeV and @xmath . However, as we
shall explain later, the hierarchy problem is not having a low energy
cutoff close to the weak scale, but rather having no quadratic or
significant quantum correction to the classically computed physical
quantities.

There are generic difficulties which face models with extra dimensions
as upon compactifying down to four dimensions one may in general get new
degrees of freedom added to the spectrum of the Standard Model. The new
states can be purely from the gravitational sector, or have Standard
Model Kaluza-Klein excitations in addition (depending on whether the SM
interactions are written directly in four dimensions, using the induced
metric, or written fully in @xmath dimensions). In any case, the new
states might lead to detectable modifications of the existing
accelerator data and cosmological observations [ 24 ] . This leads to
imposing judicious bounds on the parameters of these theories. Whether
these bounds are implemented or not, the theories with large extra
dimensions experience difficulties in realizing complementary scenarios
like the standard cosmological one. For instance, imposing an upper
bound on the reheating temperature in order to avoid overproduction of
Kaluza-Klein modes of the graviton, and discrete symmetries in order to
prevent a fast proton decay make it difficult to construct a
baryogenesis model. In addition, recovering the standard
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker Universe in @xmath dimensions starting from
higher-dimensional Einstein’s equations is not straightforward whether
the compactification is standard or warped.

In both factorizable geometry and non, it is important that the internal
space has no effects interfering with the SM precision tests. This of
course does not happen naturally, and, as mentioned above, bounds on the
parameters of the model should be imposed.

So far no full and consistent model has been constructed, neither in
tensor compactification nor in the warp one, however the
phenomenological and cosmological implications have been studied
extensively, and attempts towards creating a theoretically appealing
model persist. In this report we will review the tools and basic
concepts in constructing Kaluza-Klein theories and Brane world
scenarios.

### Plan of the thesis work

This article is organized as follows: In chapter 2 an introduction to
the Kaluza-Klein theory is presented including the very basic concepts
on which the Kaluza-Klein picture and Brane-world scenarios are based.
It is far from being a complete review, neither in topics covered nor in
list of references, however it is meant to serve as a background
material mainly for Chapter 5 .

In Chapter 3 , the idea of warped extra dimensions and localization of
matter fields on a hyperspace in @xmath dimensions is reviewed with the
help of some examples taken from the literature.

Chapter 4 discusses some of the physical implications of theories with
extra dimensions, mainly the modification of the Cosmological evolution
of the Universe and the fast proton decay. The last part of this chapter
contains an example of generating baryon number violation in theories
with extra dimensions and low gravity scales.

Chapter 5 is devoted to a solution to the hierarchy problem, where an
understanding of a single source responsible for both electroweak
symmetry breaking and standard model fermion chirality is provided.

Unfortunately, it was not possible to refer to all the interesting and
important papers written in this subject due to the limitation of space
and time allowed for writing and submitting this dissertation.
Therefore, only “samples” of such contributions to the literature could
be provided.

## 2 Kaluza-Klein Picture

### 2.1 Historical remark

Although having seven heavens is not a particularly new idea, the first
to be published in a scientific journal, proposing our observed world to
be an effective theory of a fundamental theory existing in more than
four dimensions, was Nordström’s [ 25 ] back in 1914. Having no general
relativity at that time, Gunnar Nordström wrote down Maxwell’s equations
in 5 dimensional space-time, and by wrapping the fifth dimension on a
circle, he reduced the equations to Maxwell-Nordström
electromagnetic-gravitational theory in 4 dimensions.

In 1918, Hermann Weyl introduced the concept of gauge invariance [ 26 ]
in the first attempt to unify electromagnetism and gravitation in a
geometric context.

Three years later, in 1921, the mathematician Theodor Kaluza proposed [
19 ] obtaining a four dimensional Einstein-Maxwell theory starting from
Einstein’s gravity equations in five dimensions. Assuming the
five-dimensional manifold, @xmath , to be a product of a 4-dimensional
space-time @xmath and a circle @xmath , @xmath , the fifteen components
of the metric can be decomposed from a four-dimensional point of view
into 10 describing the gravity tensor, four forming the components of a
@xmath gauge field, and one degree of freedom representing a scalar
field. By Fourier expanding those fields, retaining only the zero modes,
and integrating along the circle @xmath one obtains a theory in four
dimensions which is invariant under both four-dimensional general
coordinate transformations, and a @xmath gauge transformations.

In his original work, Kaluza assumed the zero mode of the scalar field
to be constant, @xmath . In any case, the value of @xmath had to be
positive in order to insure the proper relative sign of the Einstein and
Maxwell terms so that the energy is positive. This, in turns, means that
the fifth dimension must be space like. This can also be easily
understood in terms of causality; clearly a compact time-like dimension
would lead to closed time-like curves. The abelian gauge symmetry
arising in four dimensions upon compactification originates from the
isometry of the circle. Those last two point, the requirement that the
extra dimensions must be space-like, and that the isometry of the
compact space results in a gauge symmetry (generally non-abelian) of the
effective action are general arguments [ 27 ] .

Seven years later, Oskar Klein used Kaluza’s idea in an attempt [ 20 ]
to explain the underlying quantum mechanics of Schrödinger equation by
deriving it from a five-dimensional space-time in which the Planck
constant is introduced in connection with the periodicity along the
closed fifth dimension. In this paper he also discusses the size of the
compactified circle, getting closer to giving the extra dimensions a
physical meaning than his predecessors did. In a separate work [ 28 ] ,
still in 1926, Klein proposed ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Credit to this approach goes also
to V. Fock and H. Mandel, though others worked for and achieved the same
aim as well [ 29 ] . a relativistic generalization of Schrödinger’s
equation by starting from a massless wave equation in five dimensions
and arriving at four-dimensional Klein-Gordon equation for individual
harmonics.

Afterwards, many people adopted Klauza’s idea, starting from Einstein
early last century and continuing by several physicists today. During
this period, the idea of having new dimensions to propagate in inspired
many to write the first complete models for Lagrangians unifying
Yang-Mills and gravity theories [ 30 ] , supergravity in 11 dimensions [
31 ] , and superstring theories which has to be considered in 10
dimensions for the theory to be anomaly free and hence consistent at the
quantum level.

Supergravity in eleven dimensions is special for at least three reasons:
it is unique, the maximum number of additional dimensions to four on
which a supergravity theory can be used to construct is seven (otherwise
the theory would contain massless particles of spin greater than two [
32 ] ), and moreover seven extra dimensions is the minimum number for
having the standard model gauge group @xmath generated from the isometry
group of the internal space (which could, for instance, be the so called
Witten space @xmath ).

In 1975, Sherk and Schwarz [ 11 ] attempted to put string theory (which
is consistent only in ten dimensions) in contact with the
four-dimensional world by assuming that the six extra dimensions are
curled up into a tiny small size which renders them unobserved. An
alternative to compactification was introduced in 1983 by Rubakov and
Shaposhnikov, [ 14 ] , and others [ 21 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] . The idea of
considering non-compact internal spaces was used by Wetterich in [ 21 ]
to propose a possible solution to the chirality problem [ 36 , 37 ] in
the context of Kaluza-Klein theories.

### 2.2 Introduction

In the original Kaluza-Klein framework, the particles are free to move
in the compact space, as well as the 4-dimensional one, and hence the
volume of the new dimensions should be small in order not to undesirably
interfere with the present observations and existing experimental data,
since the new idea of @xmath dimensions has a strong potential to
naturally modify the expansion of the Universe and the cross sections of
elementary particle interactions.

Upon compactification, the eigenvalues of the Laplacian (or the Dirac
operator) on the internal space will have the interpretation of masses
in four dimensions. An illustrative example is the case of a product of
a four-dimensional Minkowski space and a circle @xmath . The wave
function of a scalar field can be expanded in Fourier series along
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the coordinate on @xmath , of radius @xmath , and @xmath
is the eigenvalue of the one-dimensional angular momentum operator. The
Klein-Gordon equation of a massless @xmath can therefore be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the 4-dimensional momentum. Clearly, from a @xmath point
of view, each Kaluza-Klein mode @xmath is seen as a separate particle
with mass @xmath equal to @xmath . Below energy scales @xmath , only
massless modes with @xmath can be excited and hence the low energy
physics is effectively four-dimensional. This is just a naïve
conclusion, and we will see later on that there are various bounds and
conditions which apply to realistic Kaluza-Klein type scenarios in order
to indeed achieve phenomenologically acceptable models in four
dimensions.

As discussed in the introduction, the modern interest in having extra
dimensions is more concerned with finding a solution to the hierarchy
problem than searching for detectable hints to string theory at low
scales. If the volume of the compactified extra space is characterized
by a scale larger than @xmath , the ( @xmath )-dimensional gravity
scale, will be automatically lowered, could even be few TeV, and the
difference between the fundamental gravity and electroweak scales will
be smaller. As usual, the 4-dimensional Planck scale, @xmath GeV, is
related to the fundamental gravity scale, @xmath , of the ( @xmath
)-dimensional space via the volume, @xmath , of the internal space.
Having the gravity action in @xmath dimensions and integrating over the
coordinates of the internal space,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath and @xmath is the ( @xmath )-dimensional Ricci scalar, we
get

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

@xmath is usually proportional to the radius of compactification, @xmath
. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 This relation is not generic to all manifolds, although it is
very common. For example, for a compact hyperbolic manifold, there will
be an additional exponential dependence of the volume on the radius of
compactification.

Having a fundamental gravity scale in @xmath dimensions much different
from @xmath means, according to ( 1 ), that Newton’s low for gravity
should be modified at small distances @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where for larger distances, @xmath , the potential recovers its usual
@xmath dependence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As can be deduced from ( 2 ), or equivalently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

achieving @xmath TeV requires assuming bigger compactification radii
than the ones used in string theory, i.e. @xmath GeV @xmath . Having
lowered the fundamental gravity scale @xmath to few a TeV, the gauge
hierarchy problem will be re-addressed as the problem explaining the
size of the internal space.

For @xmath TeV, this radius can be as big as @xmath GeV @xmath for two
extra dimensions, @xmath GeV @xmath for three, @xmath GeV @xmath for
four, and so on. However, the radius should not exceed the millimeter
since we do have tests of Newton’s low up to this scale [ 17 , 18 ] .
The case of one extra dimensions for a Kaluza-Klein type scenario is
excluded for low @xmath since it requires the compactification radius to
be very big, @xmath Km!. This problem becomes milder as the number of
extra dimensions increases, however it may be desirable to avoid this
shortcoming even for a small number of them. The primary problem is not
explaining the smallness of these radii, which is obviously a
fine-tuning problem, but rather avoiding their undesirable contributions
to well studied observables (the masses of the KK excitation can be very
light).

As said above, the Kaluza-Klein idea is that there is a
multi-dimensional world of the low energy physics which could be
responsible for the internal symmetries that we observe. The scale of
this structure is assumed to be small enough to render it unobservable
at present energies; below @xmath GeV. The motivation is to obtain a
geometric interpretation of internal quantum numbers, as electric
charge, and to consider them conceptually the same as the energy and
momentum.

In these theories the starting point is a ( @xmath )-dimensional
space-time and the assumption of general coordinate invariance, in other
words adopting @xmath -dimensional Ricci scalar with perhaps some
covariant coupling to “matter”, as the Lagrangian.

One argues then that the ground state values of the fields (including
the metric tensor) must solve the classical field equations and must
have as much symmetries as possible. ¹² ¹² 12 Since we know from
experience that more symmetrical states tend to have lower energies. The
goal is to find a suitable ground state configuration. This ground state
should hence have the geometry of a product space @xmath , where @xmath
is a @xmath -dimensional space of a Minkowskian signature, and @xmath is
a @xmath -dimensional compact space of an Euclidean signature and a
small size. Both @xmath and @xmath should admit groups of motion.

In the case of @xmath being a Minkowski space, its group of motion is
the Poincaré group in four dimensions. The internal space @xmath should
admit a compact group @xmath .

The masses of the bosonic particle (or fermionic) will be determined by
the eigenvalues of the Laplacian (or Dirac) operator on @xmath , since
the operator can be written as a direct sum of the operators on @xmath
and @xmath .

The zero modes of those operators, if any, would correspond to massless
particles and these are important from the four-dimensional point of
view since they will represent the low energy effective Lagrangian. The
modes (excitations) which involve propagation on @xmath will generally
have large masses, proportional to the scale to which the size of @xmath
corresponds.

All excitations of any particle will be classified in irreducible
representations of the ground state symmetry. If this symmetry is
smaller than the Lagrangian symmetry, we end up with spontaneous
symmetry breaking.

Finding the eigenvalues of the Laplacian @xmath (or those of @xmath ) is
not a straightforward problem. In fact, there is no analytic expression
for the eigenvalues of these two operators on a generic compact manifold
(although lower and upper bounds on these values exist for a large
number of them, see [ 38 ] ). However, things can be made simpler when a
specific choice for @xmath is considered.

In this chapter the basic concepts on which the Kaluza-Klein idea is
based are briefly reviewed. Topics cover harmonic expansion on coset
spaces, effective Lagrangians, stable compactification, and the issue of
chiral fermions. The chapter is concluded with a remark on possible
geometric estimates for masses of Kaluza-Klein fields on a generic
compact space.

### 2.3 Coset spaces

Here we will focus on the most symmetrical category of compact
manifolds, the coset spaces @xmath , ¹³ ¹³ 13 Since, after all, the
purpose of Kaluza-Klein picture is to explain internal symmetries in
terms of the symmetry of the compactified space. where @xmath is the
group (here a Lie group) of motion of @xmath (which leave the metric
invariant) and @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath (the tangent space group)
[ 39 ] .An example of a coset space @xmath is @xmath . The Kaluza-Klein
reduction procedure for a generic manifold has been worked out in [ 40 ]
- [ 42 ] .

Let @xmath be generated by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath being the generators of @xmath . Note that,

@xmath .

We assume that @xmath is reductive, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and symmetric;

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath parameterize the coordinates on @xmath , and let @xmath be
the representative of each equivalence class (coset) of @xmath with
respect to its subgroup @xmath (for example one can chose @xmath ).

A generic transformation by @xmath carries @xmath into @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This equation can be solved unambiguously for @xmath and @xmath as a
function of @xmath and @xmath .

To find the @xmath -bein on @xmath , let us construct the 1-form @xmath
which necessarily belongs to the Lie algebra of @xmath and hence can be
expanded as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Knowing how @xmath transforms under @xmath , one can derive, in a
straight forward way, the the transformation rule for @xmath and show
that they are the vielbeins on @xmath and that @xmath are the connection
form on @xmath . They are [ 43 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

Firstly, note that @xmath , and hence @xmath satisfies the requirement
for an invariant @xmath -bein. Later on we shall show that the @xmath
-dependent @xmath -transformations of @xmath will give rise to the
Kaluza-Klein local gauge transformations. For the time being, we will
assume that @xmath is independent of coordinates. The equation 3
indicates an ordinary tangent space rotation of the @xmath ’s, provided
@xmath is embedded in @xmath , the tangent space group of @xmath .

In Kaluza-Klein theory, @xmath can depend on the coordinates of @xmath ,
and therefore generally @xmath . To understand the second term in ( 3 )
one has to take into account the fluctuations of the ground state. Among
these there will be a Yang-Mills vector, @xmath , which undergoes the
usual inhomogeneous transformations of a gauge potential. It turns out
that the second term in ( 3 ) is canceled precisely by the inhomogeneous
term in the transformations of @xmath [ 39 ] (see the next section). ¹⁴
¹⁴ 14 The metric on @xmath can be expressed as usual in terms of the
@xmath -beins, @xmath . The @xmath -beins form a set of linearly
independent 1-forms @xmath . When the space admits a group of motion
@xmath (leaving @xmath invariant), to each element @xmath there
corresponds a transformation @xmath such that @xmath where @xmath .

Similarly, the last term in ( 4 ) is canceled by the transformations of
@xmath , and hence ( 4 ) indicates that @xmath is a connection form on
@xmath .

In many cases of interest, the ( @xmath )-dimensional metric is coupled
to a gauge field associated with a group @xmath . When it is possible to
embed @xmath into @xmath , this gauge fields generally acquire non zero,
but @xmath invariant, values on @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the image of @xmath in the Lie algebra of @xmath .
Then on can construct the 1-form potential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be shown that its associated field strength,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfied the Yang-Mills equation [ 40 ] . The 2-form @xmath is
invariant under the left translations of @xmath associated with the
gauge transformations corresponding to the embedding of @xmath in @xmath
.

Example: @xmath

Let @xmath be parametrized by coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath .

One can chose @xmath , the @xmath orthogonal matrix to be [ 44 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we can construct @xmath , which is a @xmath antisymmetric matrix in
the Lie algebra of @xmath by decomposing it into a convenient basis.
Chose @xmath such that @xmath are the generators of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

The @xmath invariant metric of @xmath can be derived from ( 5 ) by
identifying the @xmath -beins @xmath as the coefficients of @xmath . It
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is worthwhile to note that projecting the self-dual part of @xmath in
( 6 ) yields to the @xmath instanton configuration [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

@xmath being the ’t Hooft symbols [ 45 ] . @xmath is an instanton on an
@xmath of radius @xmath . This instanton can be shown to be a solution
of the Einstein-Yang-Mills equations of motion in a background metric
@xmath [ 44 ] . We will be using examples of similar instanton/monopole
backgrounds later on.

### 2.4 Harmonic expansion

A generic function @xmath on @xmath which belongs to a unitary
irreducible representation of it can be represented by the expansion

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

@xmath is a unitary matrix of dimension @xmath , and the sum is over all
irreducible representations of @xmath . ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 This is a generalized
form of Fourier transform.

Now for functions on a coset space @xmath , the expansion is less
general, and hence subject to some restrictions. The concern here is
with multiplet of functions, @xmath , which have the property

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is some definite representation of @xmath . So,
for the case of @xmath , only the terms in ( 8 ) which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

should be included. In other words, one should keep those
representations of @xmath which upon restriction to @xmath they produce
the representation @xmath of @xmath . Moreover, in Kaluza-Klein
theories, the coefficients of expansion @xmath generally depend on the
coordinates of @xmath .

The formula for expanding a function on @xmath is hence [ 39 , 43 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath . The notation means that from
the matrix @xmath we take only the rows which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see how the four-dimensional fields transform, and hence to find out
the internal symmetry of the 4-dimensional effective action, we should
look at the transformations of @xmath . Under the transformation @xmath
induced by the @xmath -action on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using @xmath transformations we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the @xmath fields transform under @xmath , which is the
Kaluza-Klein gauge group (referred to by physicists as the isometry
group)

### 2.5 Effective Lagrangians

First of all, let us fix the notations which we will use here onwards,
unless otherwise indicated. We denote the coordinates in @xmath
dimensions by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the Greek middle alphabet indices take the values 0,1,2,3 and
their Latin counterparts take the values 4,5,…d. The internal space is
parametrized by @xmath , and the four-dimensional one by @xmath . The
tangent space metric is @xmath .

The metric in @xmath dimensions is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the vielbeins.

To see how the isometry group result in an internal gauge symmetry of
the effective action, let us start with the following ansatz for the
vielbeins in @xmath dimensions [ 46 , 47 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This ansatz is compatible with the 4-dimensional general coordinate
transformations @xmath , and the Yang-Mills transformations @xmath with
the associated frame rotations @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

@xmath and @xmath are the vielbeins on @xmath and @xmath respectively.
The equation ( 9 ) implies, in the view of the ansatz above,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

Extracting the coefficient of @xmath and @xmath from the formulae ( 3 )
and ( 4 ) one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Killing vector defined by [ 43 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After finding the transformation rule for @xmath , it is simple to
derive the formula for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Going back to ( 10 ) one finds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . This is precisely the transformation rule to be expected
for a Yang-Mills potential.

Now we arrive to the point where we derive the effective
four-dimensional gravitational action in @xmath dimensions,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar curvature of the ( @xmath )-dimensional
space-time. Upon substituting the metric ansatz into @xmath (in the case
of a zero torsion) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the usual 4-dimensional Ricci scalar, and @xmath is the
constant curvature of @xmath . Upon integrating over the internal space,
the conventional Yang-Mills term emerges since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore we get massless Yang-Mills fields and graviton.

### 2.6 Compactification & Stability

As said earlier, Scherk and Schwarz first attempted in [ 11 ] to put
string theory in contact with the observed world by compactifying the
extra dimensions. The important factor at this point was to actually
show that the product of a four-dimensional Minkowsky space-time with a
compact internal space is a solution to the equations of motion. This
was done again by Scherk and Schwarz [ 48 ] by proposing the concept of
spontaneous compactification . Until then, compactification seemed an
arbitrary condition imposed on the Kaluza-Klein picture.

Spontaneous compactification, proposed in [ 11 , 48 ] , occurs when the
ground state of an Einstein gravity theory coupled to some matter fields
(could be Yang-Mills fields [ 49 , 50 ] , non-linear sigma models [ 51 ]
, or anitsymmetric tensor gauge fields [ 52 ] ) is described by a
product of a four-dimensional space-time of a constant curvature, with a
two-dimensional sphere in the presence of a magnetic monopole
background. In this solution, the field strength of the Yang-Mills
potential contributes to the stress-energy tensor in the right-hand side
of the six-dimensional Einstein equations and generates the curvature of
@xmath .

Remarkably, it has been long realized that topological considerations
are central to the question of stability.

The existence of the solution is again not enough to consider it
physical. It should be moreover stable, in the sense that there should
not be tachyons or ghosts in small fluctuations around the background
solution. The issue of classical stability of the ( @xmath )-dimensional
Einstein-Yang-Mills theories with an arbitrary gauge group was explored
by Randjbar-Daemi, Salam and strathdee [ 53 ] and Schellekens [ 54 ] .

All stable compactifications on @xmath -dimensional spheres @xmath with
a symmetric topologically non-trivial classical gauge field which is
embedded in an @xmath -subgroup (here @xmath ) of the Yang-Mills gauge
group have been classified by Schellekens in [ 55 ] and they occur only
for @xmath 2,4,5,6,8,9,10,12, and 16.

In the following we briefly review [ 56 ] which provides a explanation
of the procedure used to probe the classical stability through an
example of spontaneous compactification of a six-dimensional
Einstein-Maxwell theory. More general treatment of spontaneous
compactification on generic symmetric coset spaces and Yang-Mills
theories is provided in [ 40 ] .

The procedure for checking the classical stability of compactification
against small perturbations, in words, is done by

-   checking if the ansatz of the desired form @xmath is a solutions of
    the bosonic equations of motion.

-   performing small perturbations around the background solution, and
    computing the physical states (the ones which couple to conserved
    currents).

-   showing that the spectrum does not contain tachyons or negative
    metric states.

There may be other ways, however we restrict ourselves in this section
to the above one.

More discussion regarding the size of the internal space is in section
4.5 .

#### 2.6.1 The vacuum solution

Consider an action of gravity in @xmath dimensions coupled to an @xmath
gauge field, @xmath , and a cosmological constant, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional Newton’s constant. The field
equations of ( 11 ) are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now consider solutions in @xmath of the form @xmath , where @xmath is
the flat @xmath -dimensional Minkowski space and @xmath is a compact
manifold. Throughout this section @xmath will be taken to be @xmath .
Furthermore we shall assume that the gauge field configuration @xmath
will be non-vanishing only on @xmath . One can of course think of many
other choices for @xmath .

The flatness of the Minkowski space implies

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath are indices in @xmath . Our problem is now to find
solutions of Yang-Mills equations in @xmath which also solve the
Einstein equation ( 14 ).

The ansatz for solutions to ( 14 ), for the case @xmath , are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the radius of @xmath to be determined, and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath , because of the proper patching on the upper and lower
hemispheres, and @xmath indicate the expression on the upper (lower)
hemispheres. @xmath are the coordinates on @xmath .

Substituting the ansatz back into ( 14 ) reduces the equations into
algebraic equations between @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 2.6.2 Fluctuations and gauge fixing

The spectrum of the four-dimensional theory is obtained by looking at
the small fluctuations around the backgrounds ( 15 ) and ( 16 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath should be read off ( 15 ), and @xmath is ( 16 ).

To study the stability of the above configuration, one must study the
response of the system to some external physical disturbance. This is
usually done by coupling the perturbations @xmath and @xmath to
appropriate sources @xmath and @xmath respectively. The sources are
constrained to respect the symmetries of ( 11 ). The new action ( 11 )
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The constraints on the sources read

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We chose the gauge fixing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The next step is to solve the linearized equations of motion, taking
into account the constraints on the sources and the gauge fixing, for
@xmath and @xmath in terms of the sources @xmath and @xmath .

The linearized equations of motion then take the form [ 56 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.6.3 Solutions to the linearized equations

To find the solutions for the above equations, it is useful to expand
the fluctuations and sources in spherical harmonics of @xmath using the
procedure given in section 2.4 .

Firstly, all fields should be decomposed into irreducible
representations of the @xmath -subgroup, in this case represented by the
@xmath rotations (or a @xmath ). Those representations are labeled by
the @xmath (named isohelicity [ 56 ] ). Let @xmath be a typical one.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath belong to the ( @xmath )-dimensional unitary irreducible
representation of @xmath . @xmath can be an integer or half an integer,
and @xmath . One can chose @xmath ( @xmath are Pauli matrices), in other
words

  -- -- -- ------
           (18)
  -- -- -- ------

To see an example of how the summation in the harmonic expansion is
done, consider the representation @xmath . The coefficients of @xmath ,
for instance, can be read from ( 18 ) and it is @xmath . The general
rule have been explained in section 2.4 .

Now we are left with the search for tachyons or negative norm states.
Among the fields @xmath and @xmath there will be following fields (the
@xmath irreducible pieces) which have a definite isohelicity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The non-zero masses are the following labeled by their spin @xmath ( the
technical details of the calculations were neatly worked out in [ 56 ]
),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it can be checked that no tachyons are present in this model, and
hence it is expected to be stable against small perturbations. There
will be in addition six massless states; the graviton ( @xmath ), a
massless “photon” ( @xmath ), and a Yang-Mills triplet ( @xmath ).

It is worthwhile to emphasis as a final point in this section that there
is a mixing of the six-dimensional metric and Maxwell fields as pointed
out in [ 56 ] . This mixing is contrary to the common assumption that
Kaluza-Klein gauge fields originate purely from the metric. This
argument is expected to hold whenever matter fields which participate in
the spontaneous compactification carry the appropriate quantum numbers [
56 ] .

### 2.7 Chiral fermions

Upon compactifying a Kaluza-Klein type theory with fermions, one expects
in general three kinds of difficulties. In order for the resulting
fermions in 4 dimensions to be chiral, they should be massless to start
with. Hence the first requirement for the Dirac operator on the compact
internal manifold is to have at least one zero mode, while not all
manifolds admit harmonic spinors. Secondly, the index of the Dirac
operator is often (not always) zero and hence the 4-dimensional theory
will be non-chiral.

Moreover, the irreducible spin representation in @xmath ( @xmath )
dimensions is always, greater than the irreducible one in four
dimensions. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Which is @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
Also the number of zero modes, though finite [ 57 ] , can lead to more
massless fermions than desired in four dimensions. So, one generally
expects more degrees of freedom, than the ones present in the standard
model, to result in the four-dimensional effective action after
compactification. Many of those extra degrees of freedom can be
eliminated once the issue of achieving chiral fermions is settled.

One way to eventually achieve a chiral Lagrangian in four dimensions
stemming from a Kaluza-Klein field theory (another way is be by using by
orbifold compactification) is by coupling the fermions in @xmath
dimensions to a stable non-trivial background, like a magnetic monopole,
as was proposed by Randjbar-Daemi, Salam and Strathdee [ 56 , 58 ] . The
problem of obtaining left-right asymmetry of fermion quantum numbers was
discussed by Witten [ 37 ] .

The necessity for a non-trivial background to get chiral fermions from
extra dimensions can be explained in the following simple example.
Consider a manifold, @xmath , in 6 dimensions where @xmath . The Dirac
equation on a generic manifold is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With the appropriate choice of Dirac matrices, the above equation can be
written as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In the absence of a background gauge field

-   @xmath has no regular solutions.

-   @xmath .

The first point can be understood easily, with and without going into
explicit computations, since, according to Lichnerowicz’s [ 59 ]
theorem, all positively curved smooth compact manifolds, including
@xmath , do not admit harmonic spinors. In order for the resulting
fermion in 4 dimensions to be chiral, it should be massless to start
with. Hence the first requirement for the Dirac operator on the compact
internal manifold is to have at least one zero mode. The existence of
fermion zero modes by couplings to gauge fields with non-trivial
topology was pointed out in [ 49 , 60 ] . Also, the index of the Dirac
operator is often (as in the case of @xmath ), however not always, zero.

Now let us couple @xmath to a magnetic monopole background described in
equation ( 16 ). ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 For simplicity, we will do the computations on
the upper hemisphere only, while taking into account the consistent
patching. Consider the coupled Dirac operator on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As can be seen from ( 16 ), the background solution is proportional to
the spin connection @xmath ( @xmath , and @xmath ).

Now let @xmath be a Weyl spinor in 6 dimensions. Using the chirality
matrix, @xmath , in four dimensions, @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Dirac equation in a monopole background on the upper hemisphere
hence simplifies to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be easily checked that regular solutions exist only for one of
the chiralities, which is here @xmath for @xmath , and for @xmath . ¹⁸
¹⁸ 18 And vise versa for @xmath .

### 2.8 Mass estimates for KK excitations

As we mentioned in the introduction, the eigenvalue problem of the
Laplacian, @xmath , is not known on a generic compact space. However, we
know that the spectrum of @xmath on a compact Riemannian manifold is
discrete, bounded from below, and the eigenvalues (counted with
multiplicity) are ordered: @xmath . In the mathematics literature there
are many results on the lower bounds on the first eigenvalue, @xmath ,
of the Laplace-Beltrami operator,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Laplacian acting on scalars) on a compact manifold. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 Upper
bounds on those eigenvalues have also been worked out (for a review see
[ 38 ] and references thererin), however these are not much of a
physical relevance since the upper bounds depend generally on the level
of excitation.

These general bounds can be helpful in estimating the masses of
Kaluza-Klein excitations, mainly of the graviton and scalar fields, in
the cases where it is difficult to perform explicit computations of the
specturm.

The lower bounds on the first eigenvalue of the Laplacian translate into
lower bounds on the 4-dimensional tree-level masses of the bosonic
particles arising from compactification.

Lichnerowicz theorem enables us to to impose similar lower bounds on
fermion masses, and also to exclude tree level massless fermions, unless
coupled to a non-trivial background (as explained in section 2.7 ), for
positively curved internal spaces.

The lower bound on the first non-zero eigenvalue of @xmath acting on
scalars, @xmath , on a generic compact manifold of a scalar curvature
bounded from below by @xmath ( @xmath ) is [ 61 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the diameter of the manifold (the longest distance). The
fundamental parameter for masses arising from compactification is hence
@xmath (this can be understood by observing that it is possible to
change the spectrum of the Laplacian by deforming the manifold, and yet
keeping its volume fixed). Usually @xmath is greater or equal than the
characteristic scale of the volume of @xmath (see for example [ 62 ] ),
and hence the estimates of the Kaluza-Klein excitations depending on
mere dimensional analysis (on complicated manifolds where explicit
computations can not be done) has to be somehow lowered.

In most cases, specially for a space of a constant curvature, one can
relate @xmath to the volume of the manifold, and hence rewrite the
bounds in terms of the volume instead (e.g. in @xmath and compact
hyperbolic manifolds). The inequality ( 20 ) translates effectively into
a statement about the bounds on the 4-dimensional masses of the lowest
excitations, @xmath . It is obvious that when the Ricci curvature,
@xmath , of @xmath is non-negative, then one recovers the standard
scenario:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where in the standard Kaluza-Klein scenario, as in [ 9 ] , @xmath is
identified with the compactification radius, @xmath ( @xmath for a
circle, @xmath ).

When @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

the lower bound may not in this case always hold [ 63 ] , specially if
some particular tuning between @xmath and the volume scale of @xmath is
needed (in order to address the hierarchy problem, for instance [ 62 ]
).

The observed massless fermions in four dimensions are nothing but the
zero modes of @xmath (which lie in @xmath ). The argument is based on
the relation between the squared Dirac operator and the scalar
curvature,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the connection Laplacian and is a positive operator. It
has been pointed out by Lichnerowicz [ 59 ] using ( 22 ) that manifolds
with a positive curvature do not admit harmonic (massless) spinors. This
can be easily seen by sandwiching ( 22 ) for @xmath inside an complete
orthonormal set of wave functions and considering a constant curvature
case, one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

obviously the above equation has no solutions for @xmath on a compact
space.

As it is the case for the Laplacian, the eigenvalues of the Dirac
operator on a compact space are discrete. Therefore, the eigenvalues of
the squared Dirac operator are discrete and positive, and in addition
any eigenvalue, @xmath ,is bounded from below by the curvature [ 64 ] ,
including @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the first eigenvalue of the Yamabe operator,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath being the positive Laplacian acting on functions. This means
that the lower bounds on the massive spin 0 and spin 1/2 excitations are
related. For constant curvature @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## 3 Warped Non-compact Extra Dimensions

### 3.1 Introduction

The notion of warped product of Riemannian manifolds was first
introduced by Bishop and O’Neill in 1969 [ 65 ] , and it was shown that
such solutions can be of a physical relevance in [ 14 , 21 , 33 , 34 ,
35 ] , and was recently revived in [ 22 , 66 , 67 ] . The recent
literature is rich of new scenarios in non-compact spaces [ 68 ] - [ 77
] . ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 For recent reviews see [ 78 , 79 , 80 ] .

The non-direct product spaces (non-factorizable geometry) of relevance
are solutions to the equations of motion in which the metric of
space-time is a product of an internal space and a scalar function of
the extra coordinates (the warp factor), and the metric ansatz
representing the space @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the warp factor , @xmath , is a smooth positive function @xmath .
The Ricci scalar is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the intrinsic curvatures of @xmath and
@xmath respectively. @xmath and is usually taken to to be equal to
@xmath .

The space @xmath is hence an ( @xmath )-dimensional extended object
inside the full mother manifold with a tension @xmath and has generally
the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The warping space is usually taken to be non-compact with an infinite
volume. ²¹ ²¹ 21 A topological space is said to be non-compact if it can
not be represented by a union of a countable number of compact subsets.
A compact subset is a set which is closed (contains the limits of all
its convergent sequences), and bounded (is contained in a sphere of
@xmath ). Non-compact spaces can also have a finite volume.

However, using a damping warp factor as a solution of the equations of
motion leads to a finite volume of the internal non-compact space [ 35 ]
by “effectively” changing the measure as we shall see later on (as in [
22 , 66 ] ). Therefore, it is perhaps more natural to use warped
geometry in the presence of non-compact internal spaces.

The idea [ 12 , 13 , 14 ] of living on a distributional brane source
embedded in a five-dimensional (or higher) manifold with non-compact
transverse direction has in principle a welcoming environment in
superstring theory, @xmath -branes [ 81 ] . A @xmath -brane is a BPS
state carrying Ramond-Ramond charge, nicely stable, being the lowest
energy state, and naturally admits localized modes on its world-volume.
There are also BPS flat domain wall solutions [ 82 ] - [ 89 ] , as well
as curved [ 90 , 91 ] , in five-dimensional gauged supergravity.

A classification of all (non D-brane) possible generalizations of
Green-Schwarz superstring action to @xmath -dimensional extended objects
is given in [ 92 ] where it was also shown that topological extenions
may arise in the @xmath -brane supersymmetry algebra [ 93 ] . In
performing the classification, the symmetries of the world-volume of the
@xmath -brane (reparametrization invariance and Sigel symmetry) were
used in order to show that gauge fixed version of the brane world-volume
action coupled to a ( @xmath )-form field will have some amount of
supersymmetry of the mother manifold, depending on the dimension of the
embedding space and the number @xmath . In this classification the
supersymmetric @xmath -brane ( @xmath -dimensional world-volume) can
occur only in @xmath and @xmath extra dimensions. The supermultiplets
will certainly be confined to the brane. Making a non-supersymmetric
gauge theoretical analogy to such a classification is obviously a
difficult task, however it remains desirable until proven impossible!.

This chapter discusses some examples of warped solutions to Einstein and
Einstein-Yang-Mills systems, as well as the conventional methods for
localizing gravity and fermions on a domain wall with a warped
non-compact transverse space.

### 3.2 Junction conditions

Consider a simple case of one extra dimension @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the last term represents a @xmath -function like co-dimension 1
sources, the simplest form of a brane , which is a hypersurface in
@xmath -dimensions characterized by the equation @xmath . The brane has
the induced metric @xmath , and a tension @xmath . The ansatz for the
background solution is @xmath as in [ 22 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

Einstein equations of this system are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is parametrized by @xmath .

Away from the origin, the above equations are just the standard
5-dimensional Einstein equations with a cosmological constant, and they
reduce to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At the origin, the solutions for the equations require proper matching
at the location of the source. This will obviously impose a relation
between the tension of the brane @xmath and the warp factor @xmath , and
consequently the cosmological constant @xmath . The procedure of
matching differs according to the model, however this feature still
holds.

The discontinuity at @xmath is characterized by the extrinsic curvature,
@xmath , which contains information of how the hypersurface is embedded
in the higher-dimensional space-time. The extrinsic curvature is defined
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a normal vector in the direction of the extra
dimension(s), which defines the orthogonal complement components of the
induced metric on the brane @xmath .

Assuming that the extrinsic curvature varies smoothly within the
neighborhood @xmath of the constant hypersurface, the discontinuity as
measured at scales larger than the thickness @xmath is given by the jump
in @xmath across the discontinuity which is described by the quantity
@xmath or equally by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

One can relate the normal derivatives of @xmath to the the usual
(intrinsic) curvature within the thin brane limit (the transverse
derivatives are negligible compared to the normal ones) [ 94 ] in the
formula, ²² ²² 22 See [ 98 ] for a generalization to a thick-wall.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which one can deduce that the dominant components of the background
Ricci tensor @xmath will be given by the asymptotic formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Matching at @xmath of the equations of motion at @xmath requires

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

The above condition is a higher-dimensional version of the so called
Israel matching conditions [ 95 ] . ²³ ²³ 23 Further discussion can be
found in [ 94 , 96 , 97 ] .

The matching condition at the origin of the solutions to the equations
of motion coming from ( 25 ) reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the prime refers to a derivative with respect to @xmath . The
above equation yields to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

The equations of motion are satisfied, in the case of a flat
four-dimensional space, when

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the additive integration constant is omitted as it just amounts to
an overall rescaling of @xmath ’s. Clearly, @xmath has to be negative;
which means that the five-dimensional space is an @xmath . ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 The
notation used here, as in [ 56 ] , is such that @xmath indicates an
anti-de Sitter space.

The equations ( 29 ) and ( 30 ) imply that the tension of the brane and
the cosmological constant are related by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, the argument of the warp factor in ( 26 ) is [ 22 , 66 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

This indicates a genuine singularity in the curvature, as can be seen by
substituting the warp factor ( 31 ) in ( 24 ). Therefore, this solution
should be embedded in a context where the singularity is avoided (like
string theory or by considering a thick wall, as in [ 13 ] , where the
thickness of the wall would act as regulator) for it to make sense.

Apart from the singularity, proving an ansatz to be a solution for the
equations of motion is not at all enough, it should also be proved
stable at least classically.

The stability can be insured if the brane is a BPS state with exact
supersymmetry in the full space-time, and/or carries a conserved charge
thorough its coupling to a four form. In fact, the stability of the
brane-models have been questioned in some recent papers, as [ 101 ] - [
106 ] , and it is far from being obvious.

### 3.3 Randall-Sundrum scenario

The Randall-Sundrum model [ 66 ] where the hierarchy problem is
addressed is an extension of the above simple example. Here is how it
works. Let us add another brane to ( 11 ) which has a tension @xmath and
consider the warp ansatz ( 26 ) of @xmath , where @xmath has a length
@xmath and parametrized by the angular coordinate @xmath (related to the
old coordinate by @xmath ).

The background metric ( 26 ) would satisfy the equations of motion of
the action with the two branes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if similar conditions to the previously discussed are fulfilled. There
is a different way in obtaining the matching conditions here, which is
coordinate dependent, and it is done by making use of the @xmath
symmetry of the internal space. The consistency of the first equation
with the orbifold symmetry @xmath implies ( 31 ) and this makes sense
only if @xmath ; indicating again that the 5-dimensional space-time
between the two branes is an anti-de Sitter space @xmath .

The second equation of motion makes sense when

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

The five-dimensional gravity scale @xmath is again linked to @xmath
through the “volume” of the internal space

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Assuming the bulk curvature @xmath to be less than @xmath , and @xmath ,
one deduces that @xmath depends weekly on @xmath , unlike the case in
Kaluza-Klein type models ( 2 ).

If we live on the brane located at @xmath , then mass scales in the
4-dimensional theory will be lowered generally by the value of the
metric at the location which is a factor of @xmath . This will remove
any fine tuning in generating the hierarchy between the Planck and
electroweak scales since @xmath .

The masses of the KK excitations are quantized with gaps @xmath [ 66 ,
79 , 107 ] . From the point of view of an observer on the brane with
@xmath , the KK gravitons will appear to have physical masses of order
@xmath , i.e. of order TeV, while their dimensionful couplings to the
above matter will be characterized by mass scales of order @xmath ,
which is roughly the weak scale.

Solving the hierarchy problem by living on the brane with negative
tension does not seem to be satisfactory. The reason is that the weak
energy principle characterized by the energy momentum tensor @xmath (for
an observer with @xmath -velocity @xmath ) will be violated [ 108 ] and
hence one may expect unphysical modes to appear in the spectrum, like
modes with arbitrary large negative energies [ 109 ] , which puts the
stability of the model under question.

There are in the literature however stable vacua with negative
cosmological constant, mainly within a supersymmetry context, as then
one of Maldacena [ 110 ] for instance which is not meant to describe the
world as it is, however did shed a light on a deeper understanding of
the relation between general relativity and conformal field theory
beyond the gauge principle.

The above model [ 22 ] resembles in its general setup the one in [ 111 ]
of the eleven-dimensional supergravity compactified on a manifold with
boundaries, this configuration was shown to be relevant to the strong
coupling limit of the @xmath heterotic string theory [ 111 ] . In five
dimensions, the effective strongly coupled heterotic string theory is
shown to be a gauged version of @xmath five-dimensional supergravity
with four-dimensional boundaries which are identified with a pair of
@xmath -brane world-volumes [ 67 ] . These branes couple to a @xmath
-form field which is the dual of the cosmological constant. There have
been various attempts to provide a supersymmetric realization to the
Randall-Sundrum [ 22 ] scenario, ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 See for example see [ 112 ,
113 ] as well as other references in this section. however no explicit
link with string theory has yet been established.

Living on the brane with positive tension has the advantage of having a
4-dimensional localized gravity [ 66 ] , and the hierarchy can be
generated when the electroweak or supersymmetry breaking is transfered
to us by some mechanism on the hidden brane of negative tension [ 114 ]
. Further discussion regarding anti-de Sitter/Conformal field theory
correspondence in the above two brane model is present in [ 127 ] .
Aother phenomenological and cosmological aspects of brane-world models
can be found in [ 115 ] - [ 127 ] .

### 3.4 General solutions with Yang-Mills fields

Here we present a generalization of the general solutions for
spontaneous compactification on symmetric spaces [ 40 ] to warp
compactification developed in [ 75 ] . As seen in section 2.3 , the
coupling to Yang-Mills fields may lead to interesting physics and could
also be necessary for the consistency of the theory. The most relevant
point about the presence of a gauge fields background configuration is
that it is crucial in obtaining chiral fermions, as well as localizing
them on a brane. The case for pure gravity was worked out in [ 35 ] ,

Consider the background ansatz,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

for an Einstein-Yang-Mills system in @xmath dimensions, where we are
thought to live on a @xmath -dimensional world-volume of a flat brane
with a @xmath -dimensional compact internal space, @xmath , and another
one-dimensional non-compact space, @xmath .

This ansatz is fairly general since several models can be regarded as
special cases of ( 34 ) by choosing specific forms of the functions
@xmath and @xmath . ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 For instance the case for which @xmath and
@xmath ( @xmath ) is the Randall-Sundrum model [ 66 ] ; @xmath and
@xmath ( @xmath ) is [ 69 ] ; @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ), as well as
other higher-dimensional solutions which localize gravity [ 72 , 70 ] .
Let us also assume that @xmath and that the Yang-Mills gauge group
contains @xmath as explained in section 2.3 . On such spaces, one can
construct the solutions [ 40 , 75 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath must be constant by virtue of @xmath -invariance.

The starting action is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last term represents a Dirac @xmath -function like simple
brane -source which depends only on @xmath . @xmath is the induced
metric, and @xmath is the tension of the @xmath -dimensional
world-volume brane. The brane is chosen to be located at @xmath .

Around the origin, the solutions for the equations of motion will
require relating the brane tension, @xmath , together with the values of
@xmath and @xmath in a similar manner as presented in sections 3.2 and
3.3 . More about such treatment can be found in [ 69 , 70 ] .

Away from @xmath the equations of motion are [ 75 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the scalar curvature of @xmath . The above equations are
valid everywhere apart from the region @xmath where the brane is
positioned in @xmath .

When @xmath is Ricci flat @xmath (e.g. a torus or a Calabi-Yau), the
solutions for @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These solutions are generalizations of the ones in [ 14 , 35 , 72 ] .
For @xmath a simple solution is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can also extend the fifth direction to @xmath for which the solution
is @xmath , and the behavior of the solutions is similar to the warp
behavior in [ 66 ] . For @xmath , solutions can be be @xmath ( @xmath )
[ 58 , 56 ] with @xmath (or @xmath for @xmath ) and @xmath (as in [ 72 ]
).

The solutions of both cases @xmath and @xmath , are compatible with the
symmetry of Einstein equations @xmath and lead to the localization of
gravity. The presence of the brane as a singular source is essential as
a consequence of the junction condition ( 28 ).

In section 3.5.2 we will see how these types of solutions can be used to
localize chiral fermions on the brane.

### 3.5 Localization of Matter

The conventional way to avoid long-range observable effects of a
non-compact internal space is to localize the fields on a thin
3-dimensional wall (brane). In this case, there will not be infinite
images of the brane world, and in principle one can have only one single
brane on which ordinary matter is localized.

A particle will be localized if its wave function dependence on the
extra dimensions has an amplitude resembling a distribution function
sharply localized around a particular point in the internal space, and
this requires a specific non-trivial dependence of this wave function on
the coordinates of the internal space.

In the direct product compactification, the zero modes are usually
constant functions over the extra space, unless they are coupled to a
background configuration, as in [ 13 ] . ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 There are no
explicitly worked out examples for localizing fermions on a hyperspace
in Kaluza-Klein field-theoretic compactification. Attempts can be found
in [ 9 ] . However in the warped geometry they may have non-trivial
dependence on the transverse space through the warp factor. ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 It
is perhaps worth mentioning that the theory of fermions in a non-trivial
background in a non-compact space with direct product can resemble a
theory with warped product, with the warp factor being the wave function
of the normalized zero modes in the internal space, see section 3.5 .

An equivalent way to read whether a particle is “trapped” or not, is
done by looking at its propagator in the full space-time. If its pole is
of a scale much larger than the typical low energy scale on the brane,
then the zero modes (light particles) will be bound to the brane and the
bulk modes will not be excited at those low energies.

The first example of localizing gravity on a domain wall was given in [
66 ] fermions in [ 13 , 128 ] , and abelian gauge fields in [ 129 ] .
The following section will provide examples to some of these mechanisms.

#### 3.5.1 Gravity

An interesting example of the warped solutions is to consider living on
the positive tension brane explained in section 3.3 and to push the one
of negative tension to infinity by taking the limit @xmath . In this
case, it is convenient to parameterize the fifth dimension with @xmath .
It is interesting precisely because this configuration “traps” the
massless graviton on the brane. To see this, let us write the linearized
Einstein equations for the graviton, @xmath , using for convenience a
change of variable @xmath ; the gauge @xmath ; and a proper
normalization for @xmath , [ 66 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Looking at the above equation one expects 1) a single bound state
supported by the @xmath -function trapped at @xmath , and 2) a
continuous spectrum due to the non-compactness of the space, no mass
gap, and asymptotic behavior as plane-waves. The amplitudes of the
continuum modes should be suppressed near @xmath due to the potential
barrier. Further details related to the linearized gravity in a brane
scenario have been worked out in [ 130 ] .

The normalized zero mode of this operator, corresponding to @xmath , is
[ 66 , 107 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is trapped in the potential, representing the brane. This zero mode,
unlike in the KK picture, depends non-trivially on the extra coordinate,
luckily with a decreasing dependence. This observation will be
replicated in section 3.5 where the wave function of the localized
fermion zero modes will have similar features.

The continuum modes are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the mass of the mode, @xmath and @xmath are Bessel
functions, and @xmath is a normalization constant. ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 Further
details related to the linearized gravity in a brane scenario have been
worked out in [ 130 ] , and more about gravitational trapping solutions
can be found in [ 105 , 131 ] . The potential generated by the exchange
of the zero and continuum modes behaves as [ 66 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the four-dimensional Newton’s constant. So, at scales
lower than @xmath , the scenario mimics a brane with pure @xmath
-dimensional gravity (it was shown, however, that the five-dimensional
gravity will again be manifest at very large distances, and that the
above potential will be a good approximation in a finite region only [
109 ] ).

Close to the brane, the wave function of the continum modes is
suppressed by a factor @xmath , and hence their coupling to matter on
the brane is weak for small @xmath and their production will be
insignificant at low energies [ 132 ] .

At large @xmath , the massive KK gravitaional modes have strong coupling
away from the brane, as their wave function behaves in this limit as
@xmath . However, the overlap between the wave functions of the zero
mode and the continum modes is small [ 66 ] , and this will ensure that
the zero mode exchange and their self-couplings are four-dimensional and
that there is no ultimate coupling of the KK excitations back to the
matter on the brane. It was shown in [ 133 ] in an explicit way that the
gravitational interaction of [ 66 ] correspond to 4-dimensional general
relativity. It was shown in [ 134 ] - [ 138 ] that the standard
Friedmann expansion of the Universe can be recovered under certain
conditions.

#### 3.5.2 Fermions

Localizing fermion fields together with gravity, in the manner explained
above, turns out to be impossible without additional Yukawa type
couplings [ 139 ] . Equivalently, a non-trivial vacuum configuration is
required. The essence of the localization here is that the kernel of the
diagonalized Dirac operator along the fifth direction is modified in the
presence of a non-trivial background in the extra space, very much the
same as explained in section 2.7 . It seems that the presence of this
background is equally essential in the warped geometry as in the direct
one for obtaining chiral fermions on the brane. For example, the coupled
Dirac operator to a background configuration in five dimensions [ 13 ]
admits two zero modes, one of them turns out to be normalizable while
the other is not. Hence, all modes which couple to the
non-renormalizable zero-mode will decouple from the action. ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 The
fermion localization procedure is very similar to the one of lattice
gauge theories. The story began with the realization that dimensional
regularization explicitly violates the chiral gauge symmetry as does the
other regularization procedures as Pauli-Villars and zeta function
teachniques. A lattice regularization was seeked, however the naïve
approach suffered from a doubler problem [ 140 ] as was shown that it is
impossible to formulate a gauge theory with continuous chiral symmetry
on a lattice without doubling the species of fermions. The concept of
domain wall fermions was introduced [ 141 ] in order to solve this
problem by simulating the behavior of chiral fermions in an even
dimensional space, @xmath , by considering a lattice theory of
interacting massive fermions in @xmath dimensions. The localization
mechanism in the theories of extra dimensions is not very different. For
comprehensive and analytical description of chiral fermions on lattice
see [ 142 , 143 ] and for a recent review [ 144 ] .

Let us first see why a Yukawa coupling to fermions is needed, in a
localized gravity context, by reviewing [ 139 ] . Consider the
relatively general metric ansatz ( 34 ). The Dirac equation on the (
@xmath )-dimensional space @xmath coupled to a gauge field is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the vielbeins, and @xmath is the spin connection, @xmath
, and @xmath is the gauge fields of a gauge group @xmath . The
non-vanishing components of the spin connection is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath matrices are the constant Dirac matrices, and @xmath is the
spin connection on @xmath derived from the metric @xmath . Assuming a
background gauge field configuration only in the internal space @xmath
and the absence of other Yang-Mills couplings to fermions the Dirac
equation ( 35 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Dirac operator on @xmath in the background gauge
field @xmath , which is assumed to admit zero modes (see section 2.7 ).
Let the zero modes of @xmath be @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The effective action in @xmath dimensions is hence

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

On the other hand, the @xmath -dimensional Newton’s constant is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the volume of the compact manifold @xmath . The
localization of gravity requires a finite @xmath , while localizing
fermions demands that ( 39 ) should converges. However, the integrals (
40 ) and ( 39 ) do not simultaneously converge in the case of an
exponential warp factor @xmath so far considered in the literature since
the function @xmath diverges.

Now let us introduce a scalar field @xmath to the model, through the
Yukawa coupling @xmath . The new Dirac equation is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the purpose of localization, as will be seen from the example given
below, the dynamics of @xmath is irrelevant. What matters is that @xmath
where @xmath is the sign function and @xmath ( i.e. behaves as a kink at
@xmath ). Assuming this together with imposing the chirality condition
@xmath or @xmath (in the case when @xmath is even) the Dirac equation
away from the origin becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which admits the solution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The condition for having localized fermions is hence

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

This can be achieved for large enough values of @xmath .

The chirality of the localized (normalizable) zero modes will be
determined by the solutions of @xmath in the presence of the background.
@xmath will be even dimensional if @xmath , and hence the solutions to
the Dirac equation on @xmath will have a definite chirality. Moreover,
in this case @xmath and @xmath will have the same chirality, and the
number of chiral fermions will be equal to the index of @xmath which is
the difference between the number of negative and positive chirality
zero modes.

#### Rubakov-Shaposhnikov mechanism

Now let us present an illustrative example of fermion localization in
the presence of a background [ 13 ] in five dimensions. The idea of [ 13
] is a special case of the above with @xmath and no compact space @xmath
. The condition ( 41 ) is automatically satisfied when @xmath is in the
positive region @xmath . As explained above, we necessarily need a
scalar field @xmath which acquires a non-zero , and varying,vacuum
expectation value only along the extra space. Obviously, @xmath breaks
the full translational invariance, as it is needed to have a preferred
direction orthogonal to the wall.

The vacuum expectation value of @xmath can be regarded as background
gauge field, as in [ 145 ] , which has a domain-wall configuration, e.g.
a kink, and this will provide an elegant dynamical origin for the
spontaneous breaking of the 5-dimensional translation invariance.

The fermionic field will localize, as will be explained below, where its
total mass

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

vanishes ( @xmath is the bare fermionic mass in the five-dimensional
theory), on a wall with three spatial dimensions characterized by a
particular position @xmath in the transverse direction.

For definiteness, we consider the theory described by the action

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the subscript “ @xmath ” indicates the value of the parameter at
zero temperature (we will discuss finite temperature effects later on),
and the fields and the parameters have the following mass dimensions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the time being we will ignore the dynamics of the field @xmath ,
since the localization mechanism is concerned only with the background
configuration. It is possible, however, that the configuration can decay
due to the dynamics of the field @xmath , e.g. interaction with
fermions, thermal, and other effects. We will discuss thermal effects in
section 4.7 , and shall assume the stability of the vacuum configuration
regarding what follows. At this point the shape of the configuration
does not matter, what matters is that it is not constant in @xmath ,
@xmath .

The coupled Dirac equation will hence be ³¹ ³¹ 31 We follow here the
notation of [ 73 ] concerning Dirac matrices,… etc .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

The spinor @xmath can be decomposed, in a Lorentz non-invariant way in 5
dimensions, into a left and right handed fermion with respect to the
chirality matrix @xmath in four dimensions as in ( 19 ). The Fourier
expansion can be carried out ³² ³² 32 We perform a discrete expansion
here in order to illustrate the idea in an easier way, while we keep in
mind that the length of the fifth dimension is to be take to infinity at
the end. One can alternatively keep the length big “enough”, and not
necessarily infinite, however this will be at the cost of introducing an
inexplicably small mass scale to the theory.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Since the kernel of the Dirac is equal to the kernel of
its square, let us look at the square of the equation ( 43 ) in our
search for the zero modes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the prime again denotes a derivative with respect to @xmath . The
equation ( 45 ) can be rewritten using ( 44 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the eigenvalues of the four-dimensional
Dirac operator @xmath related to the eigenfunctions @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

Define

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In this notation, the equation ( 46 ) and ( 47 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The eigenfunctions @xmath and @xmath can be normalized to form two sets
of orthonormal functions. Note that the operators @xmath and @xmath
commute only when @xmath is constant in @xmath . Also multiplying ( 50 )
by @xmath from the left shows that @xmath is an eigenfunction of the
operator @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath for @xmath different from zero.
So, for @xmath one can write @xmath , or in other words

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

The above relation does not hold for the zero modes @xmath and @xmath
corresponding to @xmath . The zero mode wave functions are found by
integrating the two equations @xmath and @xmath . The solutions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

If, for example, @xmath has a kink configuration as in the figure 4 and
if the extra dimension is infinite, only the left-handed mode @xmath is
normalizable and is localized around the zero of its total mass @xmath .
@xmath will not be normalizable and its coupling to other fields will
always be suppressed by the length of the fifth direction. The effective
four-dimensional theory will hence contain a massless chiral fermionic
field (in this case left-handed). The action ( 42 ) can now be expressed
in terms of the 4-dimensional fields, using the orthogonality of @xmath
and @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

The first two terms correspond to 4-dimensional two-component massless
chiral fermions, and arise from the zero modes of equations ( 50 ) and (
51 ). The third term describes an infinite tower of Dirac fermions
corresponding to the (Kaluza-Klein) modes with non-zero @xmath in the
expansion ( 44 ). If the extra space is sufficiently large, these modes
decouple completely from the low energy theory.

Let us now consider a specific shape for the configuration, as this will
serve for section 4.7 . Let the field @xmath have the following
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath have mass dimensions 1 and -1 respectively. A
solution of the equations of motion is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

which can be approximated with a straight line interpolating between the
two vacua (see figure 5 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The localization can occur only if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

since otherwise the total fermion mass @xmath never vanishes at any
specific point @xmath .

It can be shown that, from the four-dimensional point of view, a left
handed chiral massless fermionic field results from the localization
mechanism, if the above configuration ( 56 ) is assumed for the scalar
@xmath . The right handed part remains instead de-localized in the whole
space. This is not a problem since it is customary to limit the Standard
Model fermionic content only to left handed fields. The right handed
fields can also be localized if a kink–antikink solution is assumed for
the scalar @xmath . As a result, the left fields continue to be
localized on the kink, while the right ones are confined to the
antikink. If the kink and the antikink are sufficiently far apart, the
left handed and right handed fermions however do not interact and again
the model reproducing our 4-dimensional world must be built by fermions
of a definite chirality. The fermionic content of the full dimensional
theory is in this case doubled with respect to the usual one, and
observers on one of the two walls will refer to the other as to a
“mirror world”. The presence of this kink–antikink configuration may be
required by stability consideration if thermal effects are considered.

In order to give mass to the fermions, some other scalar field acting as
a Higgs in the four-dimensional theory must be considered. As it is
shown in [ 73 ] , the mechanism described above could give an
explanation to the hierarchy among the Yukawa couplings responsible for
the fermionic mass matrix. If indeed one chooses different
five-dimensional bare masses for the different fermionic fields, their
wave functions will only partially overlap, as a consquence, and
increasing the distance between them in the transverce direction to the
brane results in suppressing their mutual interaction.

## 4 Living with Extra Dimensions

### 4.1 Introduction

Imagining our Universe being extended to more than four dimensions at
energies around TeV may imply dramatic experimental consequences. First
of all, the force of gravity is expected to become comparable to the
other gauge forces at around TeV which would enable LHC and NLC ³³ ³³ 33
LHC (CERN) has a center of mass energy around 14 TeV and is scheduled to
operate in 2005, while NLC (SLAC), the anticipated @xmath collider, has
a center of mass energy 500-1500 GeV. For reviews see [ 160 , 161 ] . to
probe the quantum structure of gravity. This could also be checked by
the new experiments measuring gravity at sub-millimeter distances [ 16 ,
17 ] . Secondly, since the masses of the Kaluza-Klein excitations are
typically of order of inverse the compactification scale, they will be
excited by being exchanged or emitted at such energies and will be
expected to appear in collider experiments, Cosmological, and
Astrophysical environments [ 24 ] . Further, a multi-dimensional
Universe will generally evolve different from the usual
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker expansion law. ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 See [ 162 ] for a
breif summary of the present status of the standard Big Bang model, and
[ 163 , 164 ] for the recent interesting developments. To fit the
expected contribution of the infinitely new degrees of freedom within
the known experimental and observational data, it is necessary to bounds
on the parameters of the models with extra dimensions, both compact or
non, mainly lower bounds on the fundamental scale of gravity whether
this scale is set by the size of the compact dimensions, the
characteristic scale which enters in the localization of matter
transverse a non-compact space, or other relevant model dependent
scales. In any case, the larger the number of the extra dimensions is
the looser the bounds become.

In the following we review some of the rather established bounds imposed
on models with large extra dimensions, ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 Discussion about
searches for extra dimensions in future colliders can be found in [ 18 ]
and [ 165 , 166 , 167 ] . with more emphasis on constraints arising from
compatibility with Cosmological observations. After having done so, we
go on to present examples where the standard big bang Cosmology can be
recovered in Kaluza-Klein compactification schemes and in
Randall-Sundrum type scenarios. Then we move on to discuss briefly the
issue of stabilizing the scale of compactification, proton stability in
theories with extra dimensions, and finally baryogenesis with low scale
gravity. We conclude this chapter by presenting a model for baryogenesis
in 5 dimensions.

### 4.2 General bounds

The most stringent bound ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 It was claimed racently
nucleon-nucleon gravi-bremsstrahlung in the early Universe could give a
stronger bound that SN1987A provides [ 168 ] . on the size of the
compact space comes from the emission of the supernova SN1987A core of
large fluxes of Kaluza-Klein gravitons which affects its energy release
[ 169 , 147 ] (see [ 24 ] for a review). For @xmath , these constrains
turn out to be @xmath mm and for @xmath , @xmath mm [ 149 ] . Collider
and other bounds on the size of compact extra dimensions can be found in
[ 24 ] , and a more recent analysis in [ 147 ] - [ 156 ] .
Higher-dimensional operators suppressed by small scales are model
dependent and they do not significantly modify the SM cross sections and
precision observables for a gravity scale greater than 1TeV [ 24 ] . ³⁷
³⁷ 37 A serious problem in Kaluza-Klein large radii compactification is
proton decay. For that, a TeV gravity scale will cause a serious problem
[ 157 ] , unless a specific symmetry is imposed. The bounds on
non-compact warped, Randall-Sundrum type, scenarios are less elaborated
and more model-dependent; such constraints can be found in [ 150 , 158 ,
159 ] .

#### KK gravitons

The existence of light Kaluza-Klein gravitons is a general feature of
compact large extra dimensions, although their coupling properties to
ordinary matter is more model-dependent. ³⁸ ³⁸ 38 For the manifestation
of these states in a string theory context see for example [ 169 ] .
Each KK graviton mode interacts with the ordinary matter through the
four-dimensional energy-momentum tensor and its coupling is
gravitationally week, suppressed by @xmath , as can be read from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which shows that upon integrating over @xmath the volume of the compact
space will appear in front of the first term producing @xmath . The
proper rescaling gives a coupling @xmath with the energy momentum tensor
(ordinary matter).

Despite the gravitationally weak coupling, there are a large
multiplicity of those massive gravitons below an energy level, @xmath ,
which is enormous @xmath , and their combined effect is much stronger
than the gravitational suppression. One of the typical processes for
producing a KK graviton is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The graviton produced here will have the form of a missing energy. The
total cross section is of order @xmath and is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which becomes comparable to the electromagnetic cross section at
energies @xmath (for further details of this and others, like hadronic
processes, we refer the reader to [ 156 ] ).

Beside their possible detection in colliders, through their emission or
exchange, they can be produced at high temperature sometime in the early
Universe, and if they decay after the Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN)
they will distort the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation. Not only
that, their abundant number and large mass will change the expansion of
the Universe, and this may be done during the BBN by slowing the
expansion down since they red shift as matter, @xmath rather than
radiation @xmath . Furthermore, their energy density may over-close the
Universe if their abundance is comparable to the photon abundance at
early times. These obstacles are enough to impose a strong upper bound
on the temperature of the Universe, @xmath , after which it should
behave as the usual Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) Universe [ 24 ] .

We explain below how these bounds arise (more or less along the lines of
[ 79 ] ).

At high enough temperature @xmath , the creation rate per unit time and
volume of a KK graviton of mass @xmath , based on dimensional analysis,
³⁹ ³⁹ 39 Strictly speaking, assuming a four-dimensional KK gravity
production at scales much higher than @xmath makes little sense, since
at such high scales the Universe appears multi-dimensional presuming the
general coordinate invariance is restored at high energies (the break
down of the isometry of the full space, and the formation of a domain
wall, is usually due to a spontaneous breaking characterized by @xmath
). @xmath , where the factor @xmath is the strength of the coupling of
the KK graviton to matter. The estimate for the total rate of KK
graviton production would be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming that after a certain temperature, @xmath , after which the
Universe evolves in the standard way (presumably during the reheating
after inflation) @xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath is the effective
number of relativistic degrees of freedom, one finds that the number of
KK gravitons created in a Hubble time per relativistic species (photons)
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is fairly large, and requires @xmath .

A stronger upper bound on the temperature @xmath comes from slowing the
expansion of the Universe at temperature below @xmath , since KK
gravitons produced after this temperature red-shift as non-relativistic
particles. At the time of BBN their mass density per energy density of
photons is of order

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Requiring @xmath yields to the following upper bound on the reheating
temperature (or normalcy temperature) [ 24 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The upper bound reads for @xmath TeV in two dimensions @xmath MeV which
it too severe. The bound relaxes somehow for @xmath and is @xmath GeV.

Finally we come to the most constraining Cosmological bound which is the
risk of overclosing the Universe. The energy density of the massive KK
gravitons should not exceed the critical energy density today which
correspond to @xmath GeV. The life time of a graviton with an energy
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Gravitons produced at temperatures below @xmath MeV have lifetime at
least as the age of the Universe. The energy density stored in the
gravitons produced at a temperature @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this constrains @xmath severely from above by a value of @xmath MeV,
@xmath GeV, and @xmath GeV for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath extra
dimensions with fundamental gravity scale @xmath TeV!. This bound
suggest that @xmath TeV for this scenario to be compatible with BBN in
the case of @xmath extra dimensions.

### 4.3 Kaluza-Klein Cosmology

It is obvious that the evolution of the Universe as a system in more
than four dimensions will be different than the standard
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker scenario.

The question to pause is whether or not recovering the standard
Cosmological expansion is possible and under which conditions. The
answer to this question is yes, it is possible for the four-dimensional
Universe to evolve according to the usual Freedmann expansion law if the
internal space is small enough compared to the size of the Universe [
170 ] - [ 175 ] . Other Cosmological consequences were also discussed as
massive relics [ 176 ] , inflation [ 172 ] , and other finite
temperature effects in [ 177 , 178 ] . In the few past years the some of
the above issues were re-examined in addition to some new cosmological
and phenomenological aspects [ 179 ] - [ 196 ] .

Let us look at what happens to a Universe living in @xmath dimensions
with the following metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the metrics on the @xmath -dimensional space
@xmath ( @xmath eventually) and the @xmath -dimensional compact one
@xmath respectively. Further, we assume the Universe to have the perfect
fluid description in @xmath dimensions, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the energy density @xmath and the pressures @xmath may depend on
time, but not the space coordinates @xmath . They are also assumed to
satisfy the equation of state @xmath , ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 This equation of state
is not well justified. For a generic treatment see [ 175 ] . @xmath .

The Einstein equations for the scale factor @xmath and @xmath in terms
of the entries of the energy-momentum tensor can be derived from the
action

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

For @xmath they are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the curvature scalars of @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Looking at the equations of motion (setting @xmath ) it
was shown in [ 174 ] that, for a flat @xmath , the typical distance
@xmath between two point on @xmath increases monotonically from @xmath
to @xmath at every value of @xmath , while @xmath , the radius of @xmath
, increases from zero to a maximum then drops back to zero. A similar
varying behavior of the compactification scale has been noted in [ 173 ]
⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 There is a major difference in the two results as in [ 173 ]
the compact space tends to increase after a certain critical length, in
contrast with [ 174 ] . by taking into account combined thermal and
quantum mechanical fluctuations effects, and the instability feature
remains to be accounted for. Therefore a stabilization mechanism is
needed to set @xmath at the desired value whatever it is chosen to be in
a short enough period, not only for keeping the fundamental scale of
gravity low enough, but also in order not to cause any conflict with the
variations of the four-dimensional Newton’s constant @xmath [ 197 ] and
big bang nucleosynthesis [ 198 ] .

Assuming that such a localization mechanism exists and that its net
effect is to induce a constant effective pressure @xmath the independent
four-dimensional Einstein equations to be solved at low energies become
[ 174 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which clearly resemble the evolution of FRW Universe.

As pointed out in [ 174 ] , the temperature profile of the early
Universe is radically changed due to the presence of the extra
dimensions. If all the dimensions were expanding, the Universe would
have only cooled down by time. However, if the extra space undergoes a
period of expansion and contraction, the @xmath -dimensional Universe
will start off very hot, cools down to a certain limit, afterwhich it
reheats until it becomes effectively the observed four-dimensional
Universe.

The energy momentum tensor ( 60 ) was shown in [ 175 ] to be derived
from a free energy function of free bosonic gas in thermal equilibrium.
It was shown that at energies below the compactification mass scale, the
Universe expands as usually observed in four dimensions while the radius
of compactification remains constant. ⁴² ⁴² 42 For alternative
expansion, e.g. inflation, see for instance [ 172 , 188 , 190 ] . This
is done by adding a source term to ( 61 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath represents the contribution of matter fields, vacuum
fluctuations,… etc . Its variations defines the energy-momentum tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The stress tensor @xmath is as usual expected to have the same
invariances as the metric. In [ 175 ] the full manifold is considered
@xmath , where the 3-dimensional space is taken to be closed. The case
of flat Universe can be obtained by taking @xmath after a careful
transition from the discrete to continuum limit. The symmetry of @xmath
in this case is @xmath . The action with this metric ansatz is hence

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the spatial volumes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the effective “potential” which incorporates a classical
gravity terms arising from @xmath , from the one-loop quantum part
@xmath , and from the thermal part depending on the entropy @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Free energy to be computed is obtained by Legendre transform of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the temperature is given by @xmath . Let the pressures @xmath and
@xmath entries in ( 60 ) be defined by the thermodynamic identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the conservation of energy @xmath implies the conservation of
entropy. ⁴³ ⁴³ 43 Recall that in the usual treatment [ 199 ] the energy
density and pressure must satisfy the integrability condition

@xmath

where @xmath which imply @xmath . Since the equations of motion are
@xmath , the entropy will be constant in time. Since we have no a priori
idea of what could the equation of state for Kaluza-Klein Cosmology be,
let us suppose that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are due to a gas of
non-interacting bosons in thermal equilibrium. The free energy of this
system can be written as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is a mass parameter, @xmath , and @xmath denotes the
Laplacian on the full compact manifold @xmath and the three first terms
in ( 65 ) represent its eigenvalues. @xmath is the multiplicity factor
related to each of the eigenvalues and is equal to the dimension of
@xmath representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The divergent sum ( 65 ) can be regularized by making use of the
identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The free energy can thus be rearranged as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the functions @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Note that each of the @xmath function can be written in terms of the
Jacobi Theta function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has away from @xmath the modular property

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sums ( 66 ) hence converge and define analytic functions on the half
plane @xmath and are singular at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , the zero temperature limit corresponds to @xmath , and the
flat four-dimensional space limit of the energy density @xmath
corresponds to @xmath .

Now, in a regime in which @xmath and a relativistic gas of particles,
@xmath , the formula for the free energy converges at @xmath (see [ 175
] for the technical details) and the “s” regularization can be removed,
and the approximate expression becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The 1-loop contribution to the potential @xmath related to @xmath by (
64 ) therefore is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The full potential ( 63 ) up to one loop is therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last term @xmath is identified by the energy for a constant
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

The time evolution of the @xmath -dimensional Universe is governed by
the Euler-Lagrange equations derived from ( 62 ). Is is shown that for
an appropriate choice of @xmath and the parameters in @xmath , it is
possible to obtain a solution where the internal radius is constant
while the large radius evolves as in the standard Cosmology [ 175 ] .
For @xmath the equations of motion become

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

The compatibility of ( 67 ), ( 68 ), and ( 69 ) requires

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this constraint allows us to determines @xmath and @xmath in terms
of @xmath which upon substituting back into ( 69 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is computed from ( 67 ) to be @xmath .

As a summary, there are solutions for Einstein equations in the regime
@xmath where the size of the internal space remain constant, and the
4-dimensional Universe evolves according to the conventional
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker Cosmology, as ( 70 ) clearly indicates, for a
closed Universe in a radiation dominated era. It remains to check the
classical stability, at least, of the value of @xmath by solving the
equations for small perturbations around the desired value.

### 4.4 Brane Cosmology

Here we review an example [ 135 ] of the evolution of a brane-world
embedded in five dimensions, and under which condition the FRW expansion
can be recovered. The time evolution of the scale factor, is worked out
explicitly for the a specific choice of the equation of state @xmath (
@xmath ), and it is shown that the standard cosmological evolution can
be obtained [ 135 ] .

Since we are interested in a FRW metric for the four-dimensional
Universe, we start from the following maximally symmetric
three-dimensional metric ansatz

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we assume the brane as a hypersurface in five dimensions defined by
@xmath .

Upon substituting this ansatz into the five-dimensional Einstein
equations, the non-vanishing components of the Einstein tensor
@xmath are [ 135 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (72)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where a prime stands for a derivative with respect to @xmath while a dot
denotes the derivative with respect to @xmath .

The energy-momentum tensor can be decomposed into two parts; the bulk
matter source and the brane matter one

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the energy-momentum tensor of the bulk matter which we
assume to have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the energy density @xmath and the pressures @xmath and @xmath are
independent of the coordinate @xmath . Later we will be interested in
the special case of a Cosmological constant @xmath .

The second term @xmath corresponds to the matter content on the brane,
i͡.e at @xmath . According to our metric ansatz, the matter description
on the brane is the one of a perfect fluid in four dimensions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the energy density and
pressure on the brane and are functions of time only. The last entry
being zero means physically that there is no flow of ordinary matter
along the fifth direction, and consequently the vanishing of @xmath and
this leads in turn that ( 71 ) and ( 74 ) become

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a function of @xmath and @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

Integrating ( 75 ) over @xmath , keeping in mind that @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant of integration.

Now, by taking the time derivative of ( 75 ), the @xmath derivative of (
76 ), and assuming @xmath we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which indicates that @xmath is independent of time for @xmath , the
thing we will assume from now on. ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴ 44 If @xmath is, for example, an
exponential function of @xmath and @xmath as @xmath this assumption is
no more valid. This will indicate that @xmath .

Coming back to ( 72 ), @xmath can be written using the Bianchi identity
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is identically satisfied when @xmath as can be seen using ( 75 ).

Hence, when the bulk source is a Cosmological constant, any set of
functions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath satisfying ( 77 ) or more
explicitly

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

together with @xmath will locally be solution of Einstein equations in
five dimensions, away from @xmath .

At the position of the brane, @xmath , the junctions condition should be
taken into account (see section 3.2 ) which here take the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath defines the jump of the function @xmath across @xmath .

Assuming the symmetry @xmath (for simplicity, which is not necessarily
imply the presence of another brane), the junction condition ( 79 ) can
be used to compute @xmath at the two sides of the brane, and by
continuity, when @xmath , one sees that the equation ( 78 ) implies the
generalization of the first Friedmann equation (after setting @xmath by
a suitable change of time):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note from the above equation that the bulk energy density enters
linearly while the brane energy density enters quadratically, and the
Cosmological evolution depends on the constant @xmath , an effective
radiation term, which is determined by the initial conditions can be
constrained by BBN [ 135 ] .

Equation ( 81 ) is enough to study the cosmological evolution on the
brane whatever the metric outside looks like and whether or not @xmath .

However, let us assume @xmath and set it to @xmath . Using the equation
@xmath one can express @xmath in terms of @xmath according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath depends solely on time. Inserting this into ( 75 ) leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which applies in the bulk at both sides of the brane. Integrating it
over @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

For @xmath , the solution is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the functions @xmath , and @xmath are functions of time (or
constants) and can be determined in terms of the input parameters of the
theory.

In order to see more explicitly the Cosmological evolution on the brane,
let us decompose the energy density on the brane into two parts:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant, and @xmath stands for the contribution of
matter on the brane. Substituting in ( 81 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we chose

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

we see that for @xmath the standard Cosmology is recovered [ 134 , 135 ]
(the solution for the case @xmath is also in [ 200 ] ).

Assuming the equations of state to be @xmath , the energy density and
pressure become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. The scale factor describing the
time evolution on the brane, when ( 82 ) is satisfied, behaves as [ 135
]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore the evolution of the Universe will be non-conventional
@xmath at early times while at late times it is described by the
standard Cosmology @xmath (further discussion can be found in [ 135 ] ).

### 4.5 Stability of the scale of compactification

So far, the examples explained in sections 4.3 and 4.4 represent
equilibrium configurations, what remains is to check their stability
against the perturbations of the metric and other background fields.

The procedure of checking classical perturbative stability of a solution
to Einstein equations was explained in section 2.6 under 2.6.3 . There,
it was argued that one way to see whether the solution is stable or not
is by looking at the spectrum and making sure it contains no tachyons or
ghosts. The absence of such modes would indicate that the radius of
compactification would only oscillate around the background value and
that the configuration, say @xmath , will not acquire a shape different
from the initial ansatz. ⁴⁵ ⁴⁵ 45 It was argued in [ 201 ] that even a
manifold which is stable against all deformations will become unstable
if the temperature is raised to a critical value, which is independent
of the shape of the manifold, as on rather general grounds the free
energy could become increasingly negative above the critical
temperature. The phase transition due to this phenomena indicates the
necessity of having time-dependence for the field associated with the
evolution of the compact space.

For example, the theory provided in section 2.6 (of reference [ 56 ] )
is free of both tachyons and negative norm fields, in addition to having
a fixed value of the radius in of @xmath in terms of the other
parameters in the theory (equation ( 17 )), ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 There is no
analogue for this relation in the original Kaluza-Klein compactification
performed on a circle since @xmath is flat. and therefore the radius of
compactification is expeted to be oscilating around the value @xmath .
It is may also be helpful to note that in this model there is no
massless mode in the gravity sector to associate with the radion , the
radius of compactification.

In general, this not the case. The radion is usually massless and it has
no potential (or a flat one). Therefore, there is no reason why the
scale of its vacuum expectation value should be fixed at a specific
point which is moreover close to the electroweak scale. When put in a
cosmological context, the value of the radius should not vary much as
this may have strong impact on the Universe as observed today.
Therefore, the ground state state of the radion field has to have a
determind value for at least two reasons. The first is that there is no
experimental evidence for a variation of the fundamental constants [ 198
] ; according to observations the internal space(s) should be static or
nearly static at least from the time of nucleosynthesis. The second is
that we wish to have a lower gravity scale, preferably as low as few
TeV, as a cutoff for the standard model of particle physics. Therefore,
a good stabilization mechanism for the radion should be a part of any
realistic model.

In superstring theories, the fundamental physical constants are related
to the vacuum expectation values of the moduli fields which are defined
by the shape and size of internal space(s) of compactification. In these
theories, some stabilization mechanisms are proposed, for example in [
202 , 203 ] , and recently it was shown that the stabilization can be
enhanced due to the coupling of the dilaton, the string coupling
constant @xmath to the kinetic energy of ordinary matter fields [ 223 ]
. In the context of Kaluza-Klein theory this issue was, and is still,
subject to numerous investigations (see for instance [ 204 ] - [ 223 ]
for tensor product compactification, and [ 224 ] - [ 233 ] for warped).

Another way to stabilize the radion, than the one provided in [ 56 ] ,
is by generating a potential for the radion, through an ad hoc coupling
to a scalar field for example (as in [ 224 ] ), and checking whether
this potential has a minimum which could correspond to the desired value
of the radion. ⁴⁷ ⁴⁷ 47 In [ 224 ] the back reaction of the scalar field
into the metric was not taken into account, for a discussion about this
point see [ 231 ] . In fact, the background solution for the scalar
field in [ 224 ] is, in a sense, similar to the Yang-Mills background (
16 ), and the relation determening the value of the radion in [ 224 ] in
terms of the values of the minima of scalar potential and other
paramters of the model is somehow analogous to equation ( 17 ).

In [ 221 ] the issue of stabilization was discussed within a
cosmological time evolution context, which is essentially the same idea.
Again a potential was introduced for this purpose, with the background
metric similar to ( 59 ), and it was argued that the fluctuations of the
radion were oscillatory with positive frequency, around a value @xmath ,
and this subsequently lead to the understanding that @xmath is a minumum
of the potential. Of course one has to check that all physical modes of
the model have the feature.

We believe that the method in section 2.6 is nice since it does not
involve ad hoc potentials to stabilize the radion as usually alternative
stability checks require. It may even be that higher order corrections
result in a potential [ 234 ] which could lead to a better understanding
to the origin of stabilization potentials, which may also shed some
light on the way how supersymmetry is broken in superstring theories,
and to possible relation of the value of the radion at the minimum with
the rest of parameters in the theory. This problem remains challenging.

### 4.6 Proton stability

Another problematic issue arising from models with large extra (and also
infinite) dimensions is the potentially too fast proton decay.
Generally, the proton decay rate due to gravitational effects of, e.g.
dimension @xmath operators, is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we know from the bounds on proton life time it should satisfy
@xmath years. This implies a bound, too well known in Grand Unified
Theories, that the smallest mass which could substitute @xmath and does
not lead to an unacceptably fast proton decay is @xmath GeV. Therefore
one does generally expect a problem with proton decay at low fundamental
scales @xmath TeV.

If the particle mediating proton decay, say via the dimension five
non-renormalizable operator @xmath , has a mass @xmath TeV range, it
should be incredibly weakly coupled in order not to lead to proton
decay. A way to suppress such an operator could be by imposing certain
symmetries [ 157 ] (see also [ 235 ] - [ 239 ] . Since global symmetries
are are expected to be broken by quantum effects, those symmetries
better be gauged. Moreover, the procedure of orbifold compactification
with fixed point (which is used by some in order to achieve chiral
fermions, project out unwanted states,… etc ) is allowed only in a
string theory context, and therefore a neater way to achive acceptable
proton decay rate could be by choosing an appropriate Yang-Mills gauge
group in @xmath -dimensions together with an appropriate compact space.
It is possible to construct examples of such compactification where
operators leading to proton decay are forbidden because the quantum
numbers of quarks and leptons can not form invariant couplings under the
unbroken symmetry (could be the unbroken part of the gauge group, the
isometry group, or both) as can be checked with the @xmath model in
chapter 5 . This possibility will be discussed elsewhere.

We review here a simple mechanism for proton stability suggested in [ 73
] , as this will serve in explaining chapter 4.7 . ⁴⁸ ⁴⁸ 48 See also [
10 , 157 , 182 ] for alternative suggestions. The same idea of fermion
localization [ 13 ] explained in section 3.5.2 can be adopted to
guarantee proton stability [ 73 ] : quarks and leptons are localized at
two slightly displaced point along the fifth direction, and this
suppressed their mutual interaction. To see how, let us give leptons and
baryons the following 5-dimensional masses

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

which correspond to the localizations ⁴⁹ ⁴⁹ 49 The last inequality in
the next expression comes from ( 58 ). We assume quarks of different
generations to be located in the same @xmath position in order to avoid
dangerous FCNC mediated by the Kaluza-Klein modes of the gluons [ 193 ]
.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

The shape of the fermion wave functions along the fifth dimension is the
one in ( 53 ) up to a normalization. It can be cast in an explicit and
simple form if we consider the limit @xmath , in which the effect of the
plateau for @xmath can be neglected: ⁵⁰ ⁵⁰ 50 This is also the limit in
which the approximation ( 57 ) is valid.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We assume the Standard Model to be embedded in some theory which, in
general, contains some additional bosons @xmath whose interactions
violate baryon number conservation. If it is the case, the four fermion
interaction @xmath can be effectively described by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the mass of the intermediate boson @xmath and @xmath is
a parameter of mass dimension one related to the five-dimensional
coupling of the @xmath -particle to quarks and leptons. This scattering
is thus suppressed by ⁵¹ ⁵¹ 51 From the approximation ( 57 ), only the
squared difference of the five-dimensional masses affects the
suppression factor. For this reason, the above choice @xmath was only
done in order to simplify notation and does not have any physical
meaning.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (86)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Current proton stability [ 240 ] requires @xmath that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

The numerator in the last equation is quite insensitive to the mass
scales of the model, and – due to the logarithmic mild dependence – can
be safely assumed to be of order @xmath . For definiteness, we will thus
fix it at the value of @xmath in the rest of this chapter. Conditions (
58 ) and ( 87 ) give altogether

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

that we can rewrite

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Notice that the last limit in equations ( 89 ) is stronger than the one
given in [ 73 ] where proton stability is achieved if the ratio of the
massive scales of the model is of order @xmath . However, in ref. [ 73 ]
the field @xmath simply scales linearly as a function of @xmath , while
we expect that whenever a specific model is assumed, conditions
analogous to our ( 58 ) and ( 89 ) should be imposed [ 241 ] .

### 4.7 Baryogenesis with Low Scale Gravity

In this section we discuss a mechanism for generating baryon number
violation in a model with one extra dimensions. As explained in section
4.6 , the Rubakov-Shaposhnikov localization mechanism [ 13 ] was used in
[ 73 ] in order to insure proton stability at zero temperature. ⁵² ⁵² 52
Beside providing an way around fast proton decay in theories with low
fundamental scales, this idea has further applications as one may
reproduce the entries of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix just
placing quarks of different generations at different and appropriately
chosen positions (this requires the presence of at least two extra
dimensions, as shown in [ 242 ] ) without assuming any hierarchy in the
original Yukawa couplings of the fermions to the Higgs field. Discussion
for collider signature is in [ 243 ] . The baryon number is almost
conserved at zero temperature due to the slight overlap of the wave
functions of quarks and lepton in the internal space due to their
different localization along the fifth direction. The suppression
decreases due to finite temperature effects leading to bayon number
violation at earlier times in the history of the Universe.

Here, we review [ 241 ] where the idea of [ 73 ] is adopted for
generating operators leading to baryon number violation at finite
temperature, while such operators remain appropriately suppressed at
zero temperature.

The starting point is to assume that quarks and leptons are now ( i.e.
at zero temperature) sufficiently apart in the extra space. However, we
wonder if finite temperature effects could change this picture
increasing the interactions between quarks and leptons at early times.
This would render proton stability now compatible with baryogenesis in
the early Universe. An exact computation of the corrections on a
solitonic background presents some technical difficulties. Moreover,
relying on a perturbative analysis at a scale close to the cut-off of
the theory may be unsafe. For this reason, we do not give a precise
final value for the temperature necessary to achieve the observed baryon
asymmetry. We limit ourselves to a perturbative analysis made on
dimensional arguments, which anyhow indicates that finite temperature
effects should indeed increase the interactions between baryons and
leptons.

As it is well known, baryon number violation alone is not sufficient for
baryogenesis. To present a more complete analysis we discuss a
particular model reminiscent of GUT baryogenesis. In doing so, we meet
another problem typical of these brane scenarios. Due to the low energy
densities involved, the expansion rate of the Universe is always very
small. If baryogenesis originates from the decay of a boson @xmath , the
out of equilibrium condition requires @xmath much higher than the
physical cut-off of brane models. This problem can be overcome for
example if the temperature of the Universe never exceeds @xmath and if
these bosons are created non-thermally (for instance at preheating).
This and some other options are briefly discussed in the last section.

#### 4.7.1 Thermal correction to the coefficients

Once the localization mechanism is incorporated in a low energy
effective theory – as the system described above may be considered –,
one can legitimately ask if thermal effects could play any significant
role. We are mainly interested in any possible change in the argument of
the exponential in ( 86 ), that will be the most relevant for the
purpose of baryogenesis. For this reason, we introduce the dimensionless
quantity

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

From ( 87 ) and ( 89 ), we can set @xmath at zero temperature. Thermal
effects will modify this value. There are however some obstacles that
one meets in evaluating the finite temperature result. Apart from some
technical difficulties arising from the fact that the scalar background
is not constant, the main problem is that nonperturbative effects may
play a very relevant role at high temperature. As it is customary in
theories with extra dimensions, the model described by ( 42 ) and ( 55 )
is nonrenormalizable and one expects that there is a cut-off (generally
related to the fundamental scale of gravity) above which it stops
holding. Our considerations will thus be valid only for low temperature
effects, and may be assumed only as an indication for what is expected
to happen at higher temperature.

Being aware of these problems, by looking at the dominant
finite-temperature one-loop effects, we estimate the first corrections
to the relevant parameters to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (91)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where the @xmath ’s are dimensionless coefficients whose values are
related to the exact particle content of the theory.

In writing the above equations, the first of conditions ( 89 ) has also
been taken into account. For example, both a scalar and a fermionic loop
contribute to the thermal correction to the parameter @xmath . While the
contribution from the former is of order @xmath , the one of the latter
is of order @xmath and thus dominates. ⁵³ ⁵³ 53 Notice also that with
our choice ( 83 ) loops with internal leptons dominate over loops with
internal quarks, since the former have vanishing 5-dimensional bare mass
and thus are not Boltzmann suppressed. However, although this choice is
the simplest one, one may equally consider the most general case where
all the fermions have a nonvanishing five-dimensional mass.

Substituting equations ( 92 ) into eq. ( 90 ), we get, in the limit of
low temperature,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

From the smallness of the quantity @xmath (see ( 89 )) we can safely
assume (apart from high hierarchy between the @xmath ’s coefficients
that we do not expect to hold) that the dominant contribution in the
above expression comes from the term proportional to @xmath .

We thus simply have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

We notice that the parameter @xmath , being related to the thermal
corrections to the @xmath coefficient due to a fermion loop, is expected
to be negative [ 222 ] : the first thermal effect is to decrease the
value of the parameter @xmath , making hence the baryon number violating
reactions more efficient at finite rather than at zero temperature.

There is another effect which may be very crucial at finite temperature,
linked to the stability of the @xmath symmetry. When a temperature is
turned on, we generally expect the formation of a fermion–antifermion
condensate @xmath . If it is the case, the Yukawa coupling @xmath in the
Lagrangian ( 42 ) renders one of the two vacua unstable. While this
leads to an instantaneous decay of the kink configuration, a
kink–antikink system could have a sufficiently long lifetime provided
the two objects are enough far apart.

Let us conclude this section with an important remark. While in this
discussion we have considered only the localization of fermions along
one extra dimension, almost everything we have said can be generalized
if two or more additional dimensions are present ⁵⁴ ⁵⁴ 54 This is
mandatory in the scenario [ 9 ] , since the presence of only one large
extra dimension is phenomenologically excluded. . The index theorem
guarantees [ 244 , 245 ] indeed the possibility of localizing fermions
on a topological defect of an arbitrary dimension. Just to give an
example, let us consider the localization on a Nielsen–Olesen [ 246 ]
vortex in the case of two extra–dimensions, as it is discussed in [ 9 ]
. Also in this case, one can localize quarks and leptons at two
different positions (actually along different circles about the center
of the vortex). Once again, proton stability requires conditions
completely analogous to conditions ( 89 ) here discussed. Of course the
calculation of thermal corrections gives different results, since the
dimension of the couplings of the model changes according to the number
of spatial dimensions. However, also in the case of the two-dimensional
vortex, the qualitative result turns out to be identical to what has
been derived in the one-dimensional case: the most significant effect
comes from the variation of the coefficient @xmath of the @xmath
interaction, and it is in the direction of enhancing the quark–lepton
interaction with increasing temperature.

#### 4.7.2 A model for baryogenesis

We saw in the previous section that thermal effects may increase the
rate of baryon number violating interactions of the system. This is very
welcome, since a theory which never violates baryon number cannot lead
to baryogenesis and thus can hardly reproduce the observed Universe.
Anyhow baryon number violation is only one of the ingredients for
baryogenesis, and the aim of this section is to investigate how the
above mechanism can be embedded in a more general context.

A particular scheme which may be adopted is baryogenesis through the
decay of massive bosons @xmath . ⁵⁵ ⁵⁵ 55 We may think of these bosons
as the intermediate particles which mediate the four fermion interaction
described by the term ( 85 ). This scheme closely resembles GUT
baryogenesis, but there are some important peculiarities due to the
different scales of energy involved. In GUT baryogenesis the massive
boson @xmath , coupled to matter by the interaction @xmath , has the
decay rate

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

An important condition is that the @xmath boson decays when the
temperature of the Universe is below its mass (out of equilibrium
decay), in order to avoid thermal regeneration. From the standard
equation for the expansion of the Universe,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

(where @xmath is the number of relativistic degrees of freedom at the
temperature @xmath ), this condition rewrites

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath is a Higgs particle, @xmath can be as low as @xmath . Even in
this case however the @xmath boson must be very massive. In principle
this may be problematic in the theories with extra dimensions we are
interested in, which have the main goal of having a very low fundamental
scale.

There are some possibilities to overcome this problem. One is related to
a possible deviation of the expansion of the system from the standard
Friedmann law. This is a concrete possibility, since the exact expansion
law is very dependent on the particular brane model one is considering
and on the fact that the size of the compact dimension is or is not
stabilized. For example, we will show in the next chapter that the
Randall-Sundrum model [ 22 ] with a stabilized radion can have
(depending on the energy density on the zero brane) an expansion rate
higher than the standard one for temperatures close to the cut-off scale
of the system (that is TeV). This accelerated expansion could in
principle favor the out of equilibrium condition for the @xmath bosons.

However this issue is very dependent on the specific cosmological
scenario adopted, and one may be interested in more general solutions
for the out of equilibrium problem. One very natural possibility is to
create the @xmath particles non thermally and to require the temperature
of the Universe to have been always smaller than their mass @xmath . In
this way, one kinematically forbids regeneration of the @xmath particles
after their decay. In addition, although interactions among these bosons
can bring them to thermal equilibrium, chemical equilibrium cannot be
achieved.

Nonthermal creation of matter has raised a considerable interest in the
last years. In particular, the mechanism of preheating has proven quite
successful, as we have discuss in the first part of this work. The
efficiency of preheating has been exploited in the work [ 247 ] to
revive GUT baryogenesis in the context of standard four-dimensional
theories. Here, we will not go into the details of the processes that
could have lead to the production of the @xmath bosons. Rather, we will
simply assume that, after inflation, their number density is @xmath . To
simplify our computations, we will also suppose that their energy
density dominates over the thermal bath produced by the perturbative
decay of the inflaton field. ⁵⁶ ⁵⁶ 56 An alternative way to overcome the
bound ( 97 ) relies on the fact that, as observed in the works [ 248 ,
249 ] , the maximal temperature reached by the thermal bath during
reheating can indeed be much higher than the final reheating
temperature. In this case, even if @xmath is considerably lower than
@xmath , @xmath particles can be produced in a significant amount, and
the out of equilibrium condition is easily achieved. However, the
treatment of this mechanism is in our case somewhat different from the
one given in [ 248 ] : due to the slowness of the expansion of the
Universe, the @xmath bosons will decay before the freeze out of their
production. The final baryon asymmetry cannot be estimated with the use
of the formulae of [ 248 ] , which are valid only if the decay of the
@xmath particles occurs well after their freeze out.

Just for definiteness, let us consider a very simple model where there
are two species of @xmath boson which can decay into quarks and leptons,
according to the 4-dimensional effective interactions ⁵⁷ ⁵⁷ 57 Here one
can not really adopt a GUT regime, since in unified theories the quarks
and leptons are in the same multiplets which is not consistent with the
idea of separation in the extra space.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

where (remember the suppression given by the different localization of
quarks and leptons) the quantity @xmath is defined in eq. ( 90 ). Again
for definiteness we will consider the minimal model where no extra
fermionic degrees of freedom are added to the ones present in the
Standard Model. Moreover we will assume @xmath to be conserved, even
though the extension to a more general scheme can be easily performed.

The decay of the @xmath bosons will reheat the Universe to a temperature
that can be evaluated to be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since we do not want the @xmath particles to be thermally regenerated
after their decay, we require @xmath , that can be rewritten as an upper
bound on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

Another limit comes from the necessity to forbid the @xmath violating
four fermion interaction ( 85 ) to erase the @xmath asymmetry that has
been just created by the decay of the @xmath bosons. We thus require the
interaction ( 85 ) to be out of equilibrium at temperatures lower than
@xmath . From eq. ( 86 ) we see that we can parameterize the four
fermion interaction with a coupling @xmath . Hence, the out of
equilibrium condition reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

One more upper bound on the reheating temperature comes from the out of
equilibrium condition for the sphalerons. This requirement is necessary
only if one chooses the theory to be @xmath invariant, while it does not
hold for @xmath violating schemes. We can approximately consider the
sphalerons to be in thermal equilibrium at temperatures above the
electroweak scale. Thus, if @xmath is a conserved quantity, we will
require the reheat temperature to be smaller than about @xmath .

If one neglects the presence of the thermal bath prior to the decay of
the @xmath bosons, the very first decays will be only into couples of
quarks, since the channel into one quark and one lepton is strongly
suppressed by the @xmath factor due to the fact that the kink is not
modified by any thermal correction. However, the decay process is not an
instantaneous event. It is shown in [ 248 ] that the particles produced
in the very first decays are generally expected to thermalize very
rapidly, so to create a thermal bath even when most of the energy
density is still stored in the decaying particles. ⁵⁸ ⁵⁸ 58 As shown in
[ 248 ] , what is called the reheating temperature is indeed the
temperature of the thermal bath when it starts to dominate. After the
first decays, the temperature of the light degrees of freedom can be
even much higher than @xmath . The temperature of this bath can even be
considerably higher than the final reheating temperature. The presence
of the heat bath modifies in turn the shape of the kink, as shown in the
previous section, and we can naturally expect that this modification
enhances the @xmath violating interactions.

If the energy density of the Universe is dominated by the @xmath bosons
before they decay, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of degrees of freedom associated to the
@xmath particles and @xmath is the difference between the rates of the
decays @xmath and @xmath .

We denote with @xmath and @xmath the two species of bosons whose
interactions ( 98 ) lead to baryon number violation, and parameterize by
@xmath the strength of CP-violation in these interactions. Considering
that @xmath is always much smaller than one, we get [ 250 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the function @xmath can be estimated to be of order @xmath . It is
also reasonable to assume @xmath .

Collecting all the above estimates, and assuming @xmath to be of order
@xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the requirement @xmath we get an upper limit on the baryon
asymmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the factor @xmath has to be calculated for a value of @xmath of
the order of the reheating temperature.

We get a different limit on @xmath from the bound ( 101 ): assuming
@xmath and @xmath indeed one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the observed amount of baryon asymmetry is of order @xmath , even
in the case of maximum efficiency of the process (that is, assuming
maximal @xmath violation and @xmath ), the bounds ( 105 ) and ( 106 )
imply that @xmath . Unfortunately, the temperature at which the
condition @xmath occurs cannot be evaluated by means of the expansion of
eq. ( 94 ), that have been obtained under the assumption @xmath . On the
other hand, it is remarkable that our mechanism may work with a ratio
@xmath of order one. We thus expect that a successful baryogenesis may
be realized for a range of the parameters of this model which – although
not possible to evaluate through a perturbative analysis – should be
quite wide and reasonable.

As we have discussed in the previous chapter, in scenarios with large
extra dimensions and low scale gravity, the maximal temperature reached
by the Universe after inflation is strongly bounded from above in order
to avoid overproducing Kaluza-Klein graviton modes, which may eventually
contradict cosmological observations [ 24 ] . For instance, in models
with two large extra dimensions the reheating temperature cannot exceed
much @xmath MeV (unless the fundamental scale @xmath is unnaturally
high.

This value is too low for the scenario we are describing since @xmath is
proportional to the ratio @xmath , and hence the observed amount of
baryons would be reproduced at the price of an unnaturally small value
of @xmath . However, other schemes with extra dimensions exist where the
bounds on @xmath are less severe. For example, in the proposals [ 22 ,
62 ] the mass of the first graviton KK mode is expected to be of order
TeV. The reheating temperature can thus safely be taken to be of order
@xmath .

There are of course several possible baryogenesis schemes alternative to
the one just presented (see for instance [ 251 , 252 ] ). A possible
option which also requires a minimal extension to the Standard Model
could be to achieve the baryon asymmetry directly through the @xmath
fermions interactions @xmath in the thermal primordial bath. The out of
equilibrium condition may be provided by the change of the kink as the
temperature of the bath decreases. ⁵⁹ ⁵⁹ 59 This condition may be easily
achieved due of the exponential dependence of the rate of this process
on the temperature, see equations ( 86 ) and ( 94 ). What may be
problematic is the source of @xmath violation which may lead the
creation of the baryon asymmetry. A possibility in this regard may be
provided by considering a second Higgs doublet, but the whole mechanism
certainly deserves a deep analysis by itself.

## 5 Gauge Hierarchy, Electroweak Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking, &
Fermion Chirality Linked

### 5.1 Introduction

In the SM, the hierarchy of mass scales is present at both classical and
quantum levels. At the tree level, there is a huge difference between
the scales associated with the electroweak and the gravitational
interactions, @xmath .

If quantum corrections were not to significantly alter the value of the
Higgs (mass) @xmath computed classically, one could simply consider the
number @xmath above as one of the many extreme ratios existing in nature
(like the mass ratio of a feather and of an elephant). However, there
are huge quadratic corrections to the Higgs (mass) @xmath at the quantum
level due to the fact that the Higgs particle is described by a
fundamental scalar field. These corrections change the classical value
of the Higgs (mass) @xmath by many orders of magnitude, and adjusting
the value back to its classical one requires a fine-tuning of order
@xmath in the case of a gravitational cutoff, and another of order
@xmath in GUTs.

Supersymmetry is a very good example where the problem is nicely solved
at the quantum level, in fact once the SUSY breaking scale is set
classically, usually taken to be around few TeV, only logarithmic
corrections will alter this value. The key principle for the absence of
quadratic divergences in this theory is that the Higgs mass is protected
by the symmetry above the cutoff. Being in a multiplet with chiral
fermions, the Higgs is deemed to be massless, due to chiral symmetry, as
long as SUSY is unbroken.

The idea of large extra dimensions explains perturbative stability of
the weak scale versus the Planck scale, ⁶⁰ ⁶⁰ 60 Provided that a
convincing stabilization mechanism for the radius of compactification is
found. , by lowering the cut-off of the theory. Nevertheless, it does
not address the issue of sensitivity of the Higgs mass to the
ultraviolet cut-off. This is an important issue from the point of view
of the low energy calculability, and is the central point to be
addressed in [ 253 ] .

In the chapter we present the work [ 253 ] , where the above key
principle is employed, though without supersymmetry, to explicit models
where the Higgs mass is protected by a gauge symmetry in @xmath
dimensions. It is argued that identifying the electroweak Higgs particle
with the extra components of the gauge field in @xmath dimensions
provides a solution to the hierarchy problem. ⁶¹ ⁶¹ 61 An alternative
approach was discussed in [ 255 ] , where the Higgs mass is controlled
by a higher-dimensional extended supersymmetry, spontaneously broken
globally by Scherk-Schwarz mechanism. An alternative to the Higgs
mechanism was suggested in [ 256 ] . The idea can also be thought of as
performing a compactification on a manifold with the first betti number
@xmath .

The absence of ultraviolate quadratic divergences is due to to the
manifistation of exact gauge symmetry at energies beyond the cutoff. ⁶²
⁶² 62 Soon after the proposal in [ 253 ] , several models appeared, [
257 , 258 , 259 ] , using the same idea in explaining the finiteness of
the Higgs mass. The higher-dimensional gauge symmetry plays the role of
the “protector” in this case forbidding the Higgs (mass) @xmath from
receiving cut off dependent (and hence local) corrections. This symmetry
is spontaneously broken by compactification.

The idea is implemented within explicit models which also provide a link
between fermion chirality and electroweak symmetry breaking in four
dimensions.

### 5.2 The proposal

After compactifying extra dimensions on a monopole background, via
mechanism of [ 53 ] , some of the extra components of the gauge fields
become tachyonic and spontaneously break the electroweak symmetry. Their
quantum numbers are identical to those of SM Higgs doublet. Notice that
the monopole background is essential for generating the families of
chiral fermions in four-dimensions, and therefore is doing a double job.
If the tachyonic mass is a tree level effect the natural scale of the
symmetry breaking is @xmath , the inverse radius of extra compact space,
since the only source of spontaneous breaking of the higher-dimensional
gauge invariance is the compactification itself. In other words, since
in the infinite volume limit @xmath the full higher-dimensional gauge
invariance must be recovered, the weak scale must go as @xmath . Thus in
this case the size of extra dimensions to which gauge fields can
propagate should be @xmath TeV (as in [ 15 ] ). However, it is important
to stress that in order for the theory not to become infinitely strongly
coupled above the compactification scale, the cut-off @xmath must be
lowered as in [ 9 ] , possibly via increase of the volume of some
additional dimensions to which only gravity can spread. This issue will
not be discussed here.

The models constructed in [ 253 ] were in the direction of answering the
following question: “How close can one get the to the Standard Model, in
four dimensions, by Kaluza-Klein compactifying large extra dimensions of
an Einstein Yang-Mills theory coupled to fermions in @xmath dimensions?”
.

Eventually, the effective action of a “good” theory should provide us in
four dimensions with:

-   chiral fermions in 4 dimensions.

-   standard model gauge group (or a group containing it), spontaneously
    broken to @xmath .

-   fermions and Higgs particles in the correct representations of the
    standard model gauge group.

-   a good solution to the hierarchy problem.

-   correct quark and lepton masses.

-   suppressed proton decay.

In the following, examples will explicitly given where the first four
points mentioned above can be realized, with some hints to achieving the
last two.

In a an attempt to approaching the answer of the above question, two
principal ideas were proposed: Identifying the electroweak Higgs with
the extra components of the Yang-Mills field as a solution for the
hierarchy problem, and linking fermion chirality to the spontaneous
electroweak symmetry breaking.

Approaching the hierarchy problem:

The suggestion to solving the hierarchy problem is that the electroweak
Higgs particle is identified with the extra components of the gauge
field in @xmath dimensions.

Note that this identification will not be meaningful, from the point of
view of explaining the absence of quadratic divergences to the Higgs
mass, unless it is proven that those extra components (which are a
scalar in four dimensions) possess a @xmath potential with a negative
bilinear term so to derive the usual spontaneous symmetry breaking
described by the SM. Not only that, this scalar filed should also have
the appropriate Yukawa couplings with the fermions in the right SM group
representations.

In the examples constructed in [ 253 ] , a Higgs-type potential is
produced at the tree-level and therefore the electroweak breaking scale
will be set by the compactification scale. A more appealing regime to
implement the above idea is when the extra components of the gauge field
of interest have a vanishing tree-level (mass) @xmath and acquire a
negative bilinear term via quantum corrections, at one loop say, as can
happen in SM [ 254 ] (the procedure is outlined in section 5.9 ). This
will render the electroweak scale to be, as desired, an order of
magnitude or two less than the scale of compactification, @xmath , which
is taken usually to be few TeV.

Since the Higgs phenomena happens only in four dimensions and at low
energies, the spontaneous symmetry breaking will be dealt with exactly
as in the standard model. This description will be valid at low
energies, below @xmath , as the four-dimensional observer will only see
the effective Lagrangian of the standard model however with an extra
advantage that most of its parameters are fixed (the magic hand is the
higher-dimensional theory): the parameters in the Higgs potential;
Yukawa couplings; and the gauge couplings are all determined by the
scale of compactification and the original Yang-Mills coupling in the
higher-dimensional theory.

Suppose that we start from an Einstein Yang-Mills theory coupled to
fermions on a @xmath dimensional manifold, @xmath , @xmath . The field
content to start with consists of a graviton, @xmath , a gauge field
@xmath in the algebra of a Lie group @xmath , and a fermion @xmath .
Where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the coordinates on @xmath
and @xmath respectively. We take @xmath to be a compact manifold with a
typical volume of order TeV @xmath , and @xmath to indicate a tensor
product. Arguing that the Higgs particle is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies a solution for the quantum instability of the electroweak scale
as was first pointed out by [ 260 , 261 ] . ⁶³ ⁶³ 63 An earlier attempt
for obtaining spontaneous symmetry breaking in six dimensions is in [
262 ] .

Classically, the Planck scale is related to the fundamental @xmath
dimensional gravity scale, as we mentioned previously, by the relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath , the @xmath should be replaced by the product of the
volumes of each manifold. As an example, we take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in the model we discussed in [ 253 ] for quarks and leptons. In this
example we have the gravity scale @xmath TeV, and hence new physics is
expected to show off at around @xmath TeV. Whether one considers the
cutoff to be @xmath , @xmath , or the scale at which the gauge coupling
in @xmath dimensions becomes strong (in our case this happens at around
@xmath TeV as well), the hierarchy between the weak scale and the
cutoff, @xmath , is much milder than the one in the ordinary gravity or
grand unified theories:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Quantum mechanically, the absence of quadratic, or large, divergences as
the ones present in the standard model ⁶⁴ ⁶⁴ 64 @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath are the self coupling of the Higgs and its coupling to the
top quark respectively. can be understood via the argument of symmetry,
as in the case of SUSY, however with no fundamental scalar to start
with. The gauge symmetry in this case is spontaneously broken due to the
presence of a topologically non-trivial background, ⁶⁵ ⁶⁵ 65 In [ 263 ,
264 ] , similar ideas have been used to study dynamical breaking of
supersymmetry in the context of type I string theory. In [ 265 ] the
idea of achieving spontaneous breaking of the C, P, and rotational
symmetries by topological defects in the internal space was discussed.
as will be explained later on, however, at energies larger than the
compactification scale, it is recovered and the Higgs field is massless
being a component of the massless gauge field. In other words the Higgs
mass @xmath , @xmath , can not be larger than @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the common energy scale, and @xmath is the typical
radius of compactification. We conjecture that @xmath . In fact, it was
shown in [ 261 , 266 , 267 ] that the function @xmath is exponentially
damping at energies higher than @xmath . Finding the explicit form of
@xmath in our case is technically more complicated due to the presence
of a monopole background, however we believe that the @xmath will always
be finite.

Linking chirality and SSB:

As discussed in an earlier chapter, the only way to get chiral fermions
in Kaluza-Klein type field theories couple them to a topologically
non-trivial background [ 56 , 37 ] . This in principle changes both the
index and the kernel of @xmath and hence allows for achieving a chiral
theory, as the standard model, in four dimensions. Examples will be
shown in details in the following sections.

### 5.3 The background solution

As discussed earlier, the background solutions should satisfy the
Einstein and Yang-Mills classical equations of motion. Although the
background we are going to use will solve the field equations of any
generally covariant and gauge invariant action containing the metric and
the Yang-Mills fields only, for the sake of simplicity we start from
Einstein-Yang-Mills system in @xmath -dimensions. The action is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is in some representation of the gauge group @xmath . This
action can be the low energy string field theory action with the @xmath
-term induced by some mechanism. The presence of @xmath in our
discussion is required if we insist on having product spaces like @xmath
as a solution of the classical bosonic field equations, where one of the
factors in the product is flat, e.g. the flat @xmath -dimensional
Minkowski space (as discussed earlier). Our argument about chirality is
not sensitive to the flatness of any of the factors in the product. The
presence of tachyons, however, depends on the definition of a mass
operator. This is different for example in AdS @xmath and (Minkowski)
@xmath .

The bosonic field equations are ( 12 ) and ( 13 ). In this paper we
shall consider solutions of the form @xmath , where @xmath is the flat
@xmath -dimensional Minkowski space and @xmath is a compact manifold.
Therefore the equations of motion ( 14 ) will be used.

The internal space @xmath will be mostly taken to be either @xmath or
@xmath . Furthermore we shall assume that the gauge field configuration
@xmath will be non-vanishing only on @xmath . One can of course think of
many other choices for @xmath .

For @xmath the metric is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the radii of @xmath and @xmath respectively,
and @xmath is a pair of local complex coordinates in @xmath . The @xmath
metric is the standard Fubini-Study metric. There are two facts about
@xmath which are of importance for our present discussion. The first is
the isometry group @xmath of @xmath . Together with the invariance group
@xmath of the metric of @xmath , @xmath will form part of the gauge
group in @xmath . @xmath will be identified with the strong interaction
color gauge group. The low energy @xmath -dimensional gauge group will
be @xmath , where @xmath is the subgroup of the @xmath -dimensional
gauge group @xmath which leaves the background solution invariant. Note
that even with @xmath we can obtain a @xmath -dimensional gauge theory
with a gauge group @xmath . Although such a solution can produce chiral
fermions in a non-trivial representation of @xmath , it is not possible,
however, to obtain the correct Standard Model spectrum of leptons,
quarks, and the Higgs fields. For this we need a bigger @xmath . We
shall discuss this point in a greater detail in a later section.

The second important fact about @xmath is that in the absence of a
background @xmath gauge field it is not possible to have globally well
defined spinor field on it. This is principally due to the fact that the
complex coordinates @xmath do not cover @xmath globally. We need at
least three patches @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , where in @xmath we
have the transition rule @xmath and @xmath . It needs some work to show
that the two chiral spinors of the tangent space @xmath of @xmath can
not be patched consistently on the overlap. We shall give some more
details of this later on.

To write the solution of the Yang-Mills equations on @xmath we first
work out the spin connection on @xmath . It is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the first factor refers to @xmath and the second, which is a
@xmath matrix, refers to @xmath . Here @xmath as well as @xmath and
@xmath are Pauli matrices. Also the expressions are valid on the upper
hemisphere on @xmath and the local patch @xmath on @xmath . The
expressions for @xmath and @xmath can be read from the Fubini-Study
metric ( 107 ) on @xmath . We shall not need the explicit expression for
@xmath . The one for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath is the self dual Kähler form on @xmath . It is thus an
instanton type solution of the Yang-Mills equation in @xmath .

It is important note from ( 108 ) that the @xmath spin-connection takes
its values in the subgroup @xmath of the tangent space @xmath .
Furthermore, under @xmath the two chiral spinors of @xmath decompose
according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (110)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the subscripts indicate the @xmath -charges. Using this fact one
can understand why spinors are not globally well defined on @xmath . The
point is that in the overlap of two patches @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined by @xmath . For @xmath to be globally well
defined @xmath should patch according to the rule @xmath . We thus
obtain transition functions which are anti-periodic under @xmath .
Coupling a background gauge field proportional to @xmath can change
this. With a little more work one can show that a similar obstruction
also prevents @xmath from being well defined.

Now we are in a position to write our solution of the Yang-Mills
equation on @xmath . It is easy to show that the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are matrices in the Cartan-subalgebra of @xmath
. The consistent patching of spinors requires that @xmath be integers
and @xmath be one half of an odd integer. Note that the substitution of
the above ansatz in the Einstein equations will require that the radii
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath are quantized.

As mentioned in the beginning of this section our ansatz for the
background configuration solves the field equations derived from any
generally covariant and gauge invariant Lagrangian in @xmath , which
contains the metric and the Yang-Mills potentials only. Such an
effective Lagrangian will contain infinite number of parameters and
therefore the relationship between the radii and other parameters will
be more involved.

### 5.4 Chiral fermions

It is a well known fact that in order to obtain chiral fermions in
@xmath we need topologically non-trivial background gauge fields on
@xmath . Our solution for the Yang-Mills equations consist of magnetic
monopole on @xmath and the potential for the Kähler form on @xmath . The
Kähler form defines a topologically non trivial line bundle on @xmath .

Consider the @xmath fermion Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the @xmath and the Lie algebra
valued spin and gauge connections. We analyze the fermion problem in two
steps. In the first step we write the manifold as @xmath .
Correspondingly we write the @xmath Dirac matrices as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively @xmath and @xmath Dirac
matrices satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and @xmath .

Substituting these @xmath ’s into @xmath and recalling that the geometry
has factorized form we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

The chiral fermions on @xmath will originate from those modes for which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

Those @xmath ’s which are not annihilated by @xmath will give rise to
massive fermionic modes on @xmath . The standard way to analyze ( 117 )
is to operate one more time with @xmath on it. Using the background
connections ( 108 ) and @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Kähler instanton @xmath is given by equation ( 109 ). Since @xmath (
118 ) will have no non-zero solutions. Thus fermions of @xmath type will
all be non-chiral and massive. Equation ( 119 ), on the other hand, can
have solutions. Their existence depends on the eigenvalues of @xmath .
Clearly for @xmath we have only one solution with @xmath . For @xmath we
obtain @xmath solutions with @xmath . They form a triplet of the
isometry group @xmath of @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath we obtain a
@xmath of @xmath . These are the only type of solutions we need to
consider.

Next we study the @xmath Dirac Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is assumed to be a solution of ( 119 ). We shall assume
that the @xmath spinor is chiral and has positive chirality. Then the
spinor of @xmath type will have negative @xmath chirality. We choose the
@xmath @xmath matrices to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath , @xmath .

Inserting the @xmath ’s in ( 122 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath are the @xmath components of an orthonormal frame on @xmath and
@xmath is the corresponding spin connection ( @xmath , @xmath in the
upper hemisphere and @xmath in the lower hemisphere ). Decomposing
@xmath , where @xmath , we obtain the analogue of ( 118 , 119 ) for the
Dirac operator on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath produces one @xmath while @xmath gives rise to two @xmath which
form a doublet of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath .

### 5.5 General rules for Higgs-type tachyons

To obtain the spectrum of the effective theory in @xmath -dimensions we
need to expand the functions about our background solution in harmonics
on @xmath . These include fluctuations of the gravitational, Yang-Mills,
as well as fermionic fields. The techniques of doing such analysis have
been developed long ago. In this paper we shall ignore the gravitational
fluctuations and consider only the Yang-Mills and fermionic fields. The
full set of linearized gravity Yang-Mills equations can be found in [ 53
] . In the same paper it was shown that there are tachyonic modes in the
components of the gauge field fluctuations tangent to @xmath . Here, we
would like to show that the rule to identify the tachyonic modes given
in [ 53 ] for @xmath is in fact quite general and applies to any gauge
group @xmath . It should be emphasized that neglecting the gravitational
fluctuations is justified as they will not mix with the gauge field
fluctuations of interest for us.

In general, we should write @xmath where @xmath is the background
solution and @xmath depends on the coordinates of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Our first interest is in the fields which are tangent to @xmath
. It is these fields, which if develop a tachyonic vacuum expectation
value, can break @xmath , provided such modes are singlets of @xmath
isometry of @xmath .

We suppress the @xmath dependence of these fields and denote by @xmath
and @xmath their components with respect to an orthonormal frame on
@xmath . It is convenient to use the “helicity” basis on @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath are matrices in the Lie algebra of @xmath . What governs their
mode expansion on @xmath is their isohelicities. This is basically the
effective charge of @xmath under the combination of @xmath
transformations which leave our background configuration invariant.
These charges can be evaluated in the same way which was done in [ 53 ]
. For the sake of simplicity, let us assumes @xmath and assume that
charge matrices @xmath and @xmath introduced in ( 113 ) are diagonal
@xmath matrices. Then @xmath are @xmath matrices with elements @xmath ,
@xmath . Their isohelicities, @xmath , are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that there is a hermiticity relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The harmonic expansion of @xmath on @xmath will produce an infinite
number of Kaluza-Klein modes. These expansions are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath are @xmath -dimensional unitary matrices.

The tachyonic modes are generally contained in the leading terms with
@xmath . The effective @xmath -dimensional mass @xmath of @xmath obtains
contributions from the appropriate Laplacian acting on @xmath and @xmath
. @xmath are charged scalar fields on @xmath . We shall analyze their
dependence on the @xmath coordinates in the next section. Here we shall
consider the @xmath contribution to their masses. The condition for this
contribution to be tachyonic is expressed in the following simple rule

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Likewise

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove these claims let us make more detailed analysis.

Since we are assuming @xmath are independent of the @xmath coordinates,
their mass term comes from the expansion of @xmath , where @xmath
indicate indices tangent to @xmath . The cubic and the quadratic parts
in @xmath will produce the interaction terms in the Higgs potential. We
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the covariant derivatives are defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath denotes the ordinary Riemannian covariant derivative on @xmath .
Now, since for @xmath ( @xmath ) @xmath we see that such modes will be
annihilated by @xmath and thus the @xmath contribution to their @xmath
action is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The mass terms hence come from @xmath term only.

To proceed it is convenient to choose the Cartan-Weyl basis for the Lie
algebra of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the basis of the Cartan
subalgebra, @xmath and @xmath the generators outside the Cartan
subalgebra. The only part of the algebra needed for the evaluation of
the mass terms is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this basis we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To simplify the discussion consider the case when only one @xmath . Set
the remaining modes to zero. Of course this is not a loss of generality.
In this case @xmath and @xmath . The mass term then becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we inserted @xmath . The kinetic part of the action for @xmath
thus becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting @xmath we obtain the mass of @xmath in terms of its
isohelicity as (recall that our signature is @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is negative for @xmath . Similar reasoning can be applied if for
some @xmath the corresponding isohelicity @xmath is non-negative.

This rule gives us an easy way of identifying possible tachyonic modes
which can act as Higgs scalars in the @xmath effective theory.

### 5.6 Examples

In this section we shall ignore the @xmath part and give some examples
of a @xmath gravity Yang-Mills theories which produce standard model
type Higgs sectors upon compactification to @xmath . Leptons and quarks
will be included in the next sections. We basically need to choose the
gauge group @xmath and assign magnetic charges @xmath .

The notation is always

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is in the Lie algebra of @xmath , @xmath give the
expression for @xmath in the upper (lower) hemispheres.

#### 5.6.1 Tachyons

#### @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

The isohelicities can be assembled in a @xmath matrix

  -- -- -- -------
           (131)
  -- -- -- -------

Using the results of section 5.4 we see that in order to obtain left
handed doublets and right handed singlets we had to take @xmath . With
these values of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath will contain
tachyonic modes in the leading term of their expansion on @xmath .

In this example the @xmath subgroup of @xmath is unbroken and the
tachyonic Higgs @xmath and @xmath form a doublet of @xmath with @xmath
charge of @xmath . We denote this doublet by @xmath . Its isohelicity is
@xmath . Therefore it will also be a doublet of the Kaluza-Klein
isometry of @xmath . One can integrate the @xmath dependence of @xmath
on @xmath and work out its @xmath effective action. The result is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have regarded @xmath as a @xmath complex matrix, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are respectively the @xmath , @xmath
, and the Kaluza-Klein @xmath gauge fields. @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
are their respective couplings. Some calculation show that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Kaluza-Klein gauge coupling @xmath can also be expressed in terms of
the fundamental scales @xmath and @xmath .

In the next section we shall work out the Yukawa couplings for this
model as well.

#### @xmath

With @xmath we can again work out the table of isohelicities for @xmath
. We shall see in section 5.6 that in order to obtain one family of
leptons and quarks we need to take @xmath . Note that since the group is
@xmath rather than @xmath , @xmath is not traceless. @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , therefore @xmath .

The tachyonic modes are contained in @xmath , and @xmath where @xmath .
They will all be doublets of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath . They also
transform under some representation of the unbroken part of @xmath ,
which is @xmath , which is generated by @xmath ,
@xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath ;
@xmath ; and the @xmath unit matrix @xmath which generates @xmath . The
tachyonic Higgs will be neutral under this @xmath , therefore their tree
level vacuum expectation value will not break it. Under @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantum numbers of the relevant Higgs tachyons will be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (136)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As we said earlier, the tachyonic modes in all these fields will be in
the doublet representation of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath . The vacuum
expectation value of the fields @xmath and @xmath will give masses to
the quarks and leptons respectively. In section 5.7 we shall show that
the leading term in their expansion on @xmath is a singlet of @xmath and
therefore their masses receive no contribution from the dependence on
the @xmath coordinates. Thus they remain tachyonic. The other tachyonic
fields, namely @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , would induce Yukawa
couplings between quarks and leptons. We shall show that in fact the
leading term in their harmonic expansion on @xmath is a triplet of
@xmath . Thus the vacuum expectation value of these fields can break the
color @xmath . We will determine the conditions to avoid this.

#### 5.6.2 Fermions

We consider the two examples of the previous section.

#### @xmath

Here we assume that @xmath and there is no @xmath factor. Let us take
@xmath in @xmath of @xmath and @xmath . According to our rules this will
produce two right handed singlets of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath which we
denote by @xmath and a left handed doublet. The singlets will form a
doublet of @xmath and the doublet of @xmath will be a singlet of @xmath
. Thus under @xmath where @xmath we have @xmath . The @xmath Yukawa and
gauge couplings can be easily worked out. The result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

This expression together with the bosonic part given in equation ( 122 )
give the total effective @xmath action for the @xmath example. Although
this example leads to interesting chiral and Higgs spectrum in @xmath
can not be considered satisfactory. It has both perturbative and global
chiral anomalies in @xmath . The perturbative anomalies can be
eliminated with the standard Green Schwarz mechanism [ 268 ] . To apply
this mechanism [ 269 ] we need first to introduce an antisymmetric rank
two potential together with three right handed @xmath @xmath singlets to
kill the pure gravitational anomaly which is given by @xmath term in the
anomaly @xmath form. The remaining terms in the anomaly @xmath -form
factorize appropriately in order to be canceled by a judicious
transformation of the antisymmetric potential. This mechanism does not
cancel the global anomalies [ 270 ] whose presence is due to the fact
that @xmath is non zero. To kill these ones we need to introduce further
@xmath multiplets or to change the gauge group altogether and chose to a
gauge group like @xmath which has a trivial @xmath .

#### @xmath

Now assume @xmath and choose @xmath to be in @xmath of @xmath and @xmath
. As before @xmath will be taken to be @xmath . According to the results
of the previous section with respect to the isometry group @xmath we
have the following chiral fermions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly the first three triplets are candidates for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The last two pieces can be identified with the leptons @xmath
and @xmath . ⁶⁶ ⁶⁶ 66 We have an extra right handed singlet in the
lepton sector. This can be removed by choosing the last entry in @xmath
to be for instance @xmath or the last entry in @xmath to be @xmath . In
this way the unbroken subgroup of @xmath will be @xmath .

These multiplets also transform in the following representation of the
unbroken @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Yukawa coupling between the quarks will be through the Higgs field
@xmath given in ( 136 ), while the electron will get its mass through
coupling to @xmath . Thus our construction leads to a multi Higgs theory
in which the quarks and leptons obtain their masses from their Yukawa
couplings to different Higgs scalars. Note also that there is no common
@xmath under which both Higgs multiplets are charged. The hypercharge
coupling in our model is different from the standard electroweak theory.

### 5.7 Higgs like Tachyons on @xmath

If the total space-time dimension is @xmath the masses of the Higgs like
tachyons are given by ( 128 ). In the case of a @xmath theory we need to
take into account the contribution of @xmath part as well. The fields
@xmath are like scalar fields on @xmath which are charged with respect
to the @xmath part of the background gauge field ( 113 ), viz, @xmath .
The @xmath contribution to the masses of @xmath come from the commutator
term in the @xmath covariant derivative of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To be specific let us consider the example of the @xmath model for which
@xmath . Write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath each is a @xmath matrix.
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This indicates that out of the Higgs fields given in equations ( 136 –
137 ) the ones which give masses to quarks and leptons, namely, @xmath
and @xmath (which lie respectively inside @xmath and @xmath in the above
notation), do not couple to the background @xmath field on @xmath . The
leading term in their harmonic expansion on @xmath will be a constant
(independent of the coordinates of @xmath ). Their masses will be
tachyonic and will be given by ( 128 ) for @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

The remaining fields @xmath and @xmath on the other hand are located
inside @xmath and they couple to the background @xmath -field. Their
masses will receive contribution from @xmath and in principle can become
non-tachyonic. To verify this we need to evaluate the eigenvalues of
@xmath on these fields. Their covariant derivatives are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since they couple with the same strength to the @xmath -field they will
receive the same contribution from @xmath . It turns out that the
leading term in the expansion of any of these fields on @xmath is a
triplet of @xmath and @xmath acting on it is @xmath . Thus the total
mass @xmath of such modes will be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath were independent we could choose @xmath and make
these fields non-tachyonic. If we insist on the validity of the
background Einstein equations then the ratio of @xmath will be fixed.
Equation ( 14 ) leads to @xmath . ⁶⁷ ⁶⁷ 67 To obtain @xmath we need to
use the following results, which can be obtained by straightforward
calculation,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . With this value unfortunately
the above mass @xmath is still negative. The vacuum expectation value of
these fields will break the color @xmath .

One way to change the ratio @xmath is to couple a @xmath gauge field to
gravity in @xmath . This @xmath will not couple to anything else. In
particular the fermions will be neutral under it, so the spectrum of the
chiral fermions will be unaltered. Its sole effect will be to add an
extra term to the right hand side of Einstein equations. In particular (
14 ) will be replaced by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath refer to the extra @xmath system. Now if we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are real numbers, the ratio of @xmath will turns
out to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a big range of parameters for which @xmath .

### 5.8 Other scalars

The components of the gauge field fluctuations tangent to @xmath will
also give rise to infinite tower of Kaluza-Klein modes which will be
scalars fields in @xmath . These modes will belong to unitary
representations of @xmath . If there is a tachyon Higgs among them they
will break @xmath . We need to verify that this does not happen. To this
end we denote these fields by @xmath , where @xmath is tangent to @xmath
, and write those terms in the bilinear part of @xmath which contains
@xmath . In this section we are considering only the @xmath model. The
@xmath are @xmath Hermitian matrices. After some manipulation and the
imposition if the @xmath background gauge condition @xmath , the
bilinear terms of interest to us can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the covariant derivatives on
@xmath and @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the Riemann covariant derivative on @xmath . The contribution
of @xmath on each @xmath mode of @xmath will simply be @xmath , @xmath
where @xmath represents the isohelicities of various components of
@xmath , @xmath , where @xmath are given in equation ( 134 ).

To work out the contributions of @xmath and the commutator term @xmath ,
we represent @xmath as in ( 138 ), i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath each is a @xmath matrix. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

This indicates that the commutator terms in ( 139 ) and ( 141 ) do not
contribute to @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath acting on these fields is
just the Riemannian Laplacian acting on vectors and its contribution to
the masses of these fields will be non-tachyonic.

The only fields we need to be concerned about are those in @xmath . To
analyze the contribution of these terms we introduce @xmath complex
@xmath vectors @xmath and @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are directions tangent to
@xmath . In terms of these new fields the @xmath part of ( 141 ) can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

The contribution of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath will again be positive.

Finally we need to evaluate the contribution of @xmath to the masses of
@xmath and @xmath . After some calculation this turns out to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is seen that the contribution of this term to the @xmath mass is
non-tachyonic. However, it makes a negative contribution to the mass
@xmath of @xmath field. Upon substitution of the above in ( 141 ) we
find out that the negative contribution in ( 147 ) is off-set by the
@xmath term in equation ( 139 ), with the result that @xmath is also
non-tachyonic.

We thus conclude that all the tachyonic Higgs are singlets of @xmath and
doublets of @xmath .

### 5.9 Massless scalars and loop-induced hierarchy

So far we have been discussing tachyonic mass of the scalar particles at
the tree level of the effective @xmath dimensional theory. The natural
scale of this mass and therefore also of the symmetry breaking is the
compactification scale. This is few order of magnitude above the
electroweak symmetry breaking scale of a 200 hundred GeV. It will be
very desirable if we could find a mechanism to lower the scale of the
tachyonic mass. An obvious idea is if the tree level mass of the scalars
is zero and they obtain their tachyonic value as a consequence of loop
effects. Our theory is of course a non renormalizable one, at least in
conventional sense. However, the Higgs mass is controlled by @xmath due
to higher dimensional gauge invariance. Our main point is that the sign
of the one loop induced effective mass will depend on the imbalance
between the contribution of fermions and bosons. By a judicious choice
of the fermionic degrees of freedom this sign can be made tachyonic. Any
way whatever the justification the first step in implementing this idea
is to find tree level massless scalars in the spectrum of the effective
four dimensional theory. Unlike the massless chiral fermions whose
presence is dictated by the topology of the gauge field in compact
subspace, to verify the existence of the massless scalars in the
spectrum requires more detailed analysis of the mass spectrum and should
be carried out separately for each case. In this section we give an
example of a model in @xmath in which a monopole background on the
@xmath internal space leads to massless scalars transforming non
trivially under the @xmath isometry group of the internal space. This
example which was is only for illustrative purpose and is not going to
be used for a realistic model building.

We start from a @xmath gauge theory in @xmath dimensions and consider a
solution of equations ( 14 ) in which the internal space is @xmath . In
the notation of previous section we denote the magnetic charge matrices
on the three @xmath ’s by @xmath @xmath and @xmath . Denoting all the
quantities on @xmath with a prime our ansatz for the gauge field becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The structure of the charge matrices will determine the unbroken
subgroup of @xmath . As before we shall take them to be @xmath diagonal
real matrices.

The scalars of interest for us are those components of the fluctuations
of the vector potential which are tangent to @xmath and are in the
directions of perpendicular to the Cartan subalgebra of @xmath .
Consider the field @xmath tangent to @xmath .

The masses of these fields can be calculated using the appropriate
modification of equation ( 139 ). The result is

@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the appropriate Laplacian on the
three @xmath ’s. The eigenvalues of these Laplacians are basically
determined from the isohelicities of @xmath which are given by

@xmath

Similar expressions can be written for the bilinear parts of the fields
tangent to @xmath and @xmath .

For our illustrative example we consider an @xmath matrix which has only
the elements @xmath and @xmath different from zero and such that @xmath
. Then @xmath and according to our general rule the leading mode in this
field can be tachyonic. The question we would like to answer is if by an
appropriate choice of magnetic charges we can make the mass of this
field to vanish. It is not difficult to write down the formula for the
masses of the infinite tower of modes of @xmath . These are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To verify the existence of a massless mode first we employ the
background equations ( 14 ) to obtain the ratios

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is seen that for the choice of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the leading
mode is indeed massless. For this choice there will of course be a
similar massless mode in the fluctuations @xmath tangent to @xmath . The
@xmath quantum numbers of these modes will be
@xmath , and @xmath , respectively. We can make all other modes to have
positive masses by appropriate choices of the remaining magnetic
charges.

## 6 Concluding Remark

Considering the possibility of living in a higher-dimensional space-time
seriously opens new gates towards understanding the present problems of
particle physics, mainly the unification of gravity with the other
fundamental forces, and the gauge hierarchy problem. So far, the
dimensionality of our space-time is an assumption based on our
observational, technical, and probably mental limitations. The new
colliders, like LHC, will be able to test this possibility and detect a
possible modification of Newton’s low at energies around few TeV.

The last three years has witnessed an enormous development in
extra-dimensional model building. It is very desirable to significantly
increase the predictability of the new scenarios as a compensation of
having extra dimensions. In particular, it would be nice if these models
are free of the same problems the standard model suffers from in four
dimensions at low energies.

The hope is that, eventually, most of these models can be somehow a low
energy effective field theoretical description of a supertring theory.
Alternatively, one can be more modest and seek a consistent theory in a
field theory context trying to make the best of this approach.

Interestingly enough, by going to higher dimensions one can link some of
the features of the standard model together. The fermion chirality and
electroweak spontaneous symmetry breaking can have the same origin: a
non-trivial Yang-Mills background in the internal space. What is even
more interesting is that the mechanism in which the SM gauge group is
spontaneously broken does not involve a fundamental scalar field, the
thing which leads to the absence of quadratic corrections to the
classical value of Higgs mass square.

There are certainly many other interesting issues to discuss.
Unfortunately, it was impossible to incorporate all the work done in
this subject as the recent literature consists of more than 1,000
article written from 1998 until now, touching various sides and
implications of the new thrilling idea, while the total number of
papers, old and new, probably exceeds 2,000. Therefore, only examples
could be provided.

As perhaps all new subjects in physics, the models with extra dimensions
seem to open a way for new problems and not to completely solve any. It
remains to check the classical and semiclassical stability for many of
the scenarios with both categories of warped and factorizable geometry.
The issue of semiclassical stability was not discussed here, and can be
found in [ 271 ] - [ 274 ] for Kaluza-Klein compactification, and for
instance [ 106 ] for brane-worlds. Furthermore, the stabilization of the
compactification scale close to the electroweak scale is an open problem
although some attempts exist [ 221 , 224 ] . Other aspects not discussed
here include unification with large extra dimensions [ 275 ] ,
brane-world in [ 9 ] scenario, thick branes as [ 98 ] - [ 103 ] , the
cosmological constant problem (see [ 79 ] for a review),… etc. , in
addition to many aspects of the older literature (for which the reader
is refered to [ 274 ] and [ 29 ] ).
