###### Contents

-    1 The Standard Model and gravity
-    2 Supersymmetry
-    3 String theory
-    4 M-theory
-    5 Back to four dimensions
-    6 Compact dimensions
-    7 Compactification manifolds
    -    7.1 Constraints from supersymmetry: G-structures
        -    7.1.1 @xmath -structure in six dimensions
        -    7.1.2 @xmath -structure in seven dimensions
        -    7.1.3 @xmath -structure in seven dimensions
-    8 Four-dimensional @xmath supergravity
    -    8.1 Gauged @xmath supergravity
    -    8.2 @xmath supergravity with massive tensor multiplets
    -    8.3 Consistent truncations of @xmath to @xmath
        -    8.3.1 @xmath supergravity
-    9 Calabi-Yau compactifications
    -    9.1 Calabi-Yau compactifications as an @xmath supergravity
-    10 The vacuum degeneracy problem
-    11 Review of conifold geometry
-    12 A stringy description
-    13 The effective theory
    -    13.1 The light states
    -    13.2 The effective supergravity
        -    13.2.1 The quaternionic geometry and the gauging
        -    13.2.2 The special Kähler geometry
    -    13.3 Completing the transition
-    14 Cosmology of conifold transitions: The homogeneous case
-    15 Cosmology of conifold transitions: The inhomogeneous case
    -    15.1 Cosmic strings from conifold transitions
    -    15.2 Cosmological simulations
-    16 Summary
-    17 Spontaneous compactification of massive type IIA supergravity
-    18 The four-dimensional action
    -    18.1 The Ricci scalar
    -    18.2 The form fields
    -    18.3 Flux
    -    18.4 The gravitini mass matrix
    -    18.5 The Kaluza-Klein basis
    -    18.6 The action as a gauged @xmath supergravity
-    19 The @xmath theory
    -    19.1 Spontaneous partial supersymmetry breaking
    -    19.2 The superpotential and Kähler potential
-    20 The coset @xmath
    -    20.1 @xmath supersymmetric minima
-    21 Summary
-    22 Reduction of eleven-dimensional supergravity
    -    22.1 The Ricci scalar
    -    22.2 The form fields
    -    22.3 Flux
    -    22.4 The gravitini mass matrix
    -    22.5 The Kaluza-Klein basis
    -    22.6 The action as a gauged @xmath supergravity
-    23 Preserving @xmath supersymmetry
    -    23.1 @xmath solution
        -    23.1.1 The mass of the gravitini
    -    23.2 The coset @xmath
        -    23.2.1 Finding @xmath minima
-    24 The @xmath theory
-    25 The coset @xmath
    -    25.1 @xmath supersymmetric minima
        -    25.1.1 The structure in the vacuum
-    26 Summary
-    A Riemannian geometry
-    B Fibre bundles and differential forms
-    C Homology and co-homology
-    D Complex and almost complex manifolds
-    E Spinors
    -    E.0.1 Spinors in four Minkowski dimensions
    -    E.0.2 Spinors in six Euclidean dimensions
    -    E.0.3 Spinors in seven Euclidean dimensions
    -    E.0.4 Spinors in ten Minkowski dimensions
    -    E.0.5 Spinors is eleven Minkowski dimensions
-    F Useful identities
    -    F.1 Six-dimensional @xmath -structure identities
    -    F.2 Seven-dimensional @xmath -structure identities
    -    F.3 @xmath -structure identities
    -    F.4 ’t Hooft symbols identities
-    G @xmath
-    H @xmath
-    I @xmath

\starttext

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction: To Eleven Dimensions

The idea that the universe is governed by a set of rules and that we can
discover what those rules are dates back to the time of the Ancient
Greeks. This idea still forms the basis of physics today. However, the
original proposition, which prevailed until the sixteenth century, was
to deduce scientific rules by pure thought alone. This overestimated our
reasoning ability and although the approach led to many successes
ultimately it could only take us so far. The sixteenth century
revolution of scientific thought argued that knowledge of nature should
be gained through experiments. These two approaches, rational deduction
through thought and learning through experiments, have remained the
driving forces behind physics to this day and it is the balance between
the two that forms the motivation for this work.

By the end of the 1970s, the Standard Model (SM) and General Relativity
(GR) could, between them, account for almost all the known observations.
The problems that remained could be referred to as purely aesthetic. GR
broke down at space-time singularities which meant it could never fully
describe black holes or the Big Bang. The SM lacked explanation for the
values of nineteen parameters in the theory which had to be put in by
hand. Some of those parameters, such as the mass of the Higgs boson, had
to be highly fine-tuned to match observations. Apart from the problems
faced by each of the theories separately the most theoretically
troublesome issue was that the machinery behind the SM, that is Quantum
Field Theory (QFT), could not be used to describe gravity and so the two
theories remained separate.

The beauty and unity of the laws of physics is not something easily
ignored however. Indeed these two concepts were the driving force behind
the discovery of the SM and GR themselves. So the physics community
attempted to resolve these issues and from these motivations came ideas
such as supersymmetry, string theory and extra dimensions that shape
theoretical physics today.

The introduction to this work aims to review briefly the issues
discussed above which culminated in M-theory. In section 1 we review the
current standard model of particle physics and the current theory of
gravity. Successive attempts at unification of the two theories are
discussed in the following sections with unification of the symmetry
groups discussed in section 2 , quantum theory and gravity 3 , and the
five string theories 4 . Finally, section 5 summarises the work
presented here, which attempts to resolve the difficulties that arise
when attempting to reconcile the predicted eleven (ten) dimensions of
M-theory (string theory) with the observed four.

### 1 The Standard Model and gravity

There are four known forces in the universe: Gravity, the Weak force,
the Strong force and the Electromagnetic force. The latter three, along
with the known matter content, are described by the SM. The precise
details of the SM are not discussed here but, in short, the matter
content consists of three fermionic quark and lepton doublets and one
scalar field called the Higgs [ 1 ] . The theory that describes the
interactions between the matter and the forces is a QFT with a
Lagrangian that has an internal symmetry of the group @xmath . The
covariant derivatives on the fields that ensure this symmetry must
contain spin-one fields that gauge this symmetry and these are the force
carrier fields. More precisely the Strong force has eight massless
carriers, the gluons, that are associated with the eight generators of
the @xmath . The Weak force has three massive carriers, the @xmath and
@xmath , that are associated with an @xmath subgroup of the @xmath .
Finally the Electromagnetic force is mediated by the massless photon
which is associated with a @xmath subgroup of the @xmath . A key concept
of extensions to the SM is the unification of forces. An example of this
process is the way in which the Electromagnetic force unifies what were
once thought to be two separate forces, Electricity and Magnetism, into
one force. More precisely, Electricity and Magnetism can be shown to be
two properties of the same force. Within the SM there is evidence that
all the forces can be unified into a Grand Unified Theory (GUT) where
they are again differing properties of the same force. Such unifications
are a more quantitative measure of what was previously referred to as
the aesthetic quality of the theory. The more unified the theory the
more aesthetically pleasing it is to the physicist. But there is more to
unification than aesthetics: throughout history some of the greatest
progress in physics has come from unifications. There remains one
important unification that we have yet to address and that is of the SM
forces with the force of Gravity. The pursuit of this unification takes
us far (all the way to eleven dimensions), but first we summarise the
current formulation of gravity.

The current theory of gravity is purely classical and is formulated in
terms of the metric on four-dimensional space-time, @xmath , where
@xmath . The metric describes the geometry of space-time and from it we
can construct other useful geometrical quantities such as the Ricci
tensor @xmath and scalar @xmath which are defined in the appendix. GR
gives the relation between the geometry of space-time and the energy
present, which quantitatively is given by Einstein’s equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is Newton’s constant which can be used to define the Planck mass
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we work in units where the speed of light @xmath is set to unity.
@xmath is the energy-momentum tensor that describes the energy content.
There is also a Lagrangian formulation for GR where the action is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath standing for the determinant of the metric and @xmath are
the space-time co-ordinates. @xmath is the Lagrangian density for all
the matter content. In this formulation the Einstein equation ( 1.1 ) is
simply the equation of motion for the metric.

An important part of the SM are the symmetries of the Lagrangian. The
Lagrangian for gravity also has symmetries and these form the space-time
symmetries of the Poincaré group. The Poincaré group is the sum of all
space-time transformations that include translations, rotations and
Lorentz boosts. Overall, this group has ten elements and has a
representation in terms of vectors @xmath and symmetric @xmath matrices
@xmath that satisfy the commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the Minkowski metric @xmath . As a first step in unifying GR with
the SM we may attempt to unify the two symmetry groups and this is the
topic of the next section.

### 2 Supersymmetry

The Poincaré group is a symmetry group of external space-time
symmetries. The SM’s @xmath are symmetries of internal degrees of
freedom of the fields. A first attempt at unification might be to unify
the two types of symmetries. The only [ 2 ] possible extension to the
Poincaré group by an internal symmetry is a graded Lie algebra of the
form [ 3 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with @xmath being the Pauli spin matrices. The indices
@xmath are Weyl spinor indices and @xmath correspond to the number of
sets of such generators that can be introduced with @xmath labelled as
the central charges of the theory. The generators @xmath denote the SM
gauge groups. In order to unify internal symmetries with the space-time
symmetries we have introduced new generators and the natural question to
ask is what symmetry is generated by the @xmath s? This new symmetry is
called supersymmetry and it is a symmetry that transforms between the
bosonic and fermionic fields in the theory. To see this we introduce
anti-commuting Grassman parameters @xmath which generate a supersymmetry
transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have introduced a scalar field @xmath and have considered only
@xmath for simplicity. Then, in order for the supersymmetry algebra to
close, @xmath should transform into another field, which should in turn
transform under supersymmetry, eventually closing the algebra. The
simplest possibility linear in @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are some constants and @xmath is a fermionic
field. We see that a new field must be introduced which differs from the
transformed field by spin- @xmath and this new fermion is called the
superpartner of @xmath . To make the Lagrangian invariant under this
symmetry it is sometimes useful to group all the superpartners of a
field together into a supersymmetric invariant multiplet or a
superfield. By writing the Lagrangian in terms of these superfields we
ensure it is supersymmetric.

We have seen that supersymmetry naturally emerges from unification. It
also predicts that every particle must have a superpartner of equal mass
and with a spin difference of a half. This prediction is clearly false
since we see no such bosonic superpartners to the SM fermions. We have
arrived at a point that is a thread throughout this work: following
unification we reach a theory that does not agree with the universe we
observe. Nonetheless we continue with the hope that unification is a
strong enough principle as guide whilst bearing in mind that at the end
we should try to make contact with the observed universe. In this case
the most obvious answer to the problem of the missing particles is that
supersymmetry is a broken symmetry. Breaking supersymmetry induces a
mass gap between the observed fermions and their missing superpartners
so that if the energy scale of this mass gap, which is the energy scale
of supersymmetry breaking, is larger than that which we are able to
probe in particle accelerators, i.e. the TeV scale, the superpartners
are just too massive to have been detected yet. The scenario of a TeV
scale broken supersymmetry also offers possible solutions to current
problems in cosmology and the SM. Most notably it explains why the mass
of Higgs boson is of a TeV scale when without supersymmetry quantum loop
corrections mean its mass should naturally be of the Planck scale. It
also offers a candidate for the observed cosmological dark matter as the
lightest supersymmetric particle and forms an important part of the
unification of the forces in GUT theories.

Supersymmetry by itself is a global symmetry which means that the
spinors @xmath do not vary over space-time. This is rather unnatural as
there is no reason for such a global constraint, indeed the SM and
Poincaré symmetries previously discussed are all local symmetries.
Making supersymmetry local leads to a theory of supergravity where the
spin- @xmath graviton also has a spin- @xmath superpartner, the
gravitino. Therefore, the simplest natural theory that unifies internal
and space-time symmetries is a four-dimensional supergravity. However,
in attempting the next step of unification, that is applying QFT to
gravity, four-dimensional supergravity is not enough and an even more
radical rethinking of the universe is required.

### 3 String theory

Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) is the quantum field theory that describes
the Electromagnetic force. It has been successfully experimentally
probed to a greater accuracy than any other theory in physics. There are
also accurately tested QFTs for the Weak and Strong forces. Like the SM
forces, a truly unified theory should also be a quantum field theory of
gravity ¹ ¹ 1 The motivation of unification for a quantum theory of
gravity has been emphasised here in keeping with the theme of the
chapter. There is, however, a more fundamental reason for requiring such
a theory and that is because gravity is coupled to matter which in turn
we know is described by a quantum theory. Then making an observation of
a quantum matter distribution collapses the wavefunction thereby
altering its gravitational field instantaneously and, if the eigenstates
are that of space-like separated matter, acausally. . Gravity, however,
has a fundamental property different to the other forces that has made
this construction so far unattainable. The SM forces are forces that act
on a fixed space-time background, gravity is a force that is itself the
geometry of space-time and so can not be defined on some fixed
background. The key problem that arises from this is that causality
becomes ill-defined since the metric, which should play the role of the
quantum field, can be in some superposition of eigenstates where in one
state points can be space-like related while being time-like related in
another state. Abandoning causality would lead to even greater
conceptual difficulties. This problem remains unsolved so far and is not
discussed further in this work.

The next best thing to a full quantum theory of gravity is a QFT of
gravitational perturbations about a classical background, that is a
quantum theory of gravitons. Taking a metric of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can attempt to quantise the perturbation @xmath , that describes a
graviton, about a classical Minkowski background metric @xmath . The
problem with such a theory is that it is non-renormalisable. This can be
attributed to the fact that the loop expansion parameter @xmath is
dimensionful. Terms in the Lagrangian generated by successive loops must
have an increasing number of dimensionful integrals to counter the
dimension of @xmath . Therefore an attempt to renormalise the theory by
adding counter-terms requires an infinite number of different
counter-terms corresponding to the infinite number of loops. This is by
definition a non-renormalisable theory.

The problem of non-renormalisability of a quantum theory of gravitons
has a solution. The solution is that the fundamental constituents of the
universe are not point particles but rather strings of a finite length.
The theory describing a quantum string is a conformal QFT on the
two-dimensional worldsheet of the string with physical states
corresponding to harmonic excitations of the string. The mass of states
@xmath on the string is given in units of the inverse string tension
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of quantised excitations on the string and
@xmath is a (normal ordering) constant which takes the value of one for
an open string and two for a closed string [ 4 ] . Let us define the
creation operators for left-moving and right-moving harmonic excitations
on the string as @xmath and @xmath respectively. The index @xmath
corresponds to which space-time direction the excitation is in. Then a
state @xmath of two excitations @xmath on the closed string is massless
and is generated by the two operators acting on the vacuum state @xmath
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The massless state @xmath is a general two-tensor and so can be
decomposed into a traceless symmetric part, anti-symmetric part and a
trace

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now see that string theory necessarily has a massless spin- @xmath
state @xmath which can play the role of the graviton and is therefore a
theory of gravity. It also has a two-form @xmath which is called the
Neveu-Schwarz Neveu-Schwarz (NS-NS) two-form, and a scalar @xmath called
the dilaton. The vacuum expectation value of the dilaton also plays the
role of the string self coupling with the self coupling @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

States on the string that are not massless have masses of order @xmath .
The value of the string tension is as yet unknown but given that it is a
theory of gravity it is expected to be of order the Planck scale ² ² 2
There are however scenarios in string theory where the string scale is
actually much lower and can be as low as the TeV scale. . In general
though, in terms of making contact with experiment, we are only
interested in the lowest mass states of the theory and so can truncate
the higher mass states, a truncation which is valid well below the
string scale.

The property of string theory that solves the non-renormalisation
problem is that there is no need for a cut-off or counter terms because
all gravitational loop terms are actually finite. This key result is
difficult to derive and so will not be derived here but rather the
reader is referred literature [ 4 ] . There is however an intuitive
argument as to why this is the case. The reasoning is that, unlike point
particles, the coupling of strings to each other does not occur at a
well defined point because of their length. This means that the
gravitational interaction is ’smeared out’ over a finite volume which
resolves the divergences. The finiteness of loop amplitudes means that
string theory can potentially be a theory that describes, in a fully
consistent quantum field theoretic way, the SM forces and gravity
together. Further, space-time supersymmetry, as discussed in section 2
comes out naturally from a supersymmetric string, the superstring, which
is described by a two-dimensional supersymmetric conformal QFT.
Therefore, the low energy limit of superstring theory is a supergravity,
the content of which can be determined from the massless spectrum of the
string theory.

There are five known self-consistent superstring theories: type I, type
IIA, type IIB, heterotic @xmath and heterotic @xmath . They are all only
anomaly-free in ten space-time dimensions. They all feature the NS
states of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , but also have further states that
are particular to the type of theory. Type I is an @xmath supersymmetric
theory which has 496 vectors with a gauge group @xmath . Type IIA is
@xmath supersymmetric and has a vector @xmath and three-form @xmath .
Type IIB is again @xmath supersymmetric but has a scalar @xmath , a
two-form @xmath and a four-form @xmath . The extra states in type II
theories are called Ramond-Ramond (RR) states. Finally the heterotic
string theory is @xmath supersymmetric and has 496 vectors with gauge
group @xmath or @xmath . In terms of the physical meaning of the extra
states, the RR states in the type II theories are extra states on the
closed string corresponding to world-sheet fermions with periodic
boundary-conditions. The type I string arises from projecting out half
these states using world-sheet parity, and the heterotic theories only
have left-moving world-sheet fermions.

In the mid-nineties it was realised [ 5 ] that the spectrum of states in
string theory is significantly richer than that of just the string.
There are higher dimensional extended objects called branes on which
open strings can end. The branes are charged under the states of the
theory so that branes charged under the RR fields are called D-branes
and branes charged under the common NS two-form are called NS-branes.
The dimension of the brane is fixed by the degree of the form it couples
to and we write a @xmath dimensional brane as a p-brane (the +1
difference accounts for the time direction). Since the different string
theories contain different states they also have different brane
content. In particular D-branes only feature in type II string theories
with type IIA containing D0, D2, D4, D6 and D8 branes, and type IIB
having D1, D3, D5, D7 and D9 branes ³ ³ 3 The higher-dimensional branes
couple to the Hodge duals of the field-strengths. .

String theory is the leading candidate for a unified quantum theory of
the SM forces and gravity. As in the case of supersymmetry, there is a
price to pay for the unification since superstring theory is only
consistently defined in ten space-time dimensions. Again, this is a
prediction that is in obvious contradiction with the observed four
space-time dimensions. The resolution of this problem is discussed
extensively in the upcoming sections. There is another, slightly more
aesthetic issue to address first. The idea of a quantum unified theory
of all the interactions is really a hope for the theory of the universe.
There are however five known string theories and the natural question is
which one describes our universe? This is the topic of the next section.

### 4 M-theory

The final unification that is discussed in this chapter is that of the
five string theories. It has been shown [ 6 ] that actually the five,
ten-dimensional, string theories are all limits of a single,
eleven-dimensional, theory that has been termed M-theory. This theory is
not a theory of strings but rather a theory of two-dimensional extended
objects, i.e. membranes. The full version of the theory is as yet
unknown but its states can be related in certain limits to those that
exist in string theory. For example, taking one of the space dimensions
to be in the shape of a circle, the theory is equivalent to type IIA
string theory with the size of the circle playing the role of the string
self coupling (the dilaton). Taking the circle to have a @xmath symmetry
leads to the heterotic @xmath string. There are then further dualities
termed T, S and U dualities that connect all the string theories.

This unification has lead to the proposition that M-theory is indeed the
correct theory of the universe. This idea is further backed by a
seemingly unrelated fact. In section 2 it was argued that supergravity
is a natural first step towards unification. There are many different
consistent supergravity theories that can be defined in four space-time
dimensions and so this is not a strong enough principle to determine the
theory. However, the number of possible supergravities decreases with
increasing space-time dimensions culminating in the fact that
eleven-dimensions is the largest number of dimensions for which a
supergravity can be constructed [ 7 ] and there is a unique such theory
which is precisely the low energy limit of M-theory. This supergravity
contains the metric and a three-form @xmath which naturally couples to
the membrane.

### 5 Back to four dimensions

The unification of the SM with gravity has lead us to a theory that has
fascinating potential and is very aesthetically pleasing. M-theory has
the look of a theory to describe all the known interactions. It only has
one parameter, the membrane tension, and it predicts the number of
space-time dimensions. However, in looking for this theory we have
strayed far from the observed universe, with the most obvious
contradiction being that of the number of space-time dimensions. This
thesis is concerned with the leading candidate for a possible resolution
to this problem. The idea is that any extra unobserved spatial
dimensions (seven in M-theory and six in string theory) are curled up
(compact) with a radius much smaller than that which can be probed by
experiments. Then, although the string/membrane propagates in a
higher-dimensional universe, we observe an effective four-dimensional
universe.

The physics of ten-dimensional string theory and eleven-dimensional
M-theory is fixed by the constraints of the theory as discussed in this
introduction. The four-dimensional physics, however, depends on the
extra dimensions or more precisely on the geometry of the manifold they
specify. The task of recovering realistic models of the universe is
therefore in large an exploration of the possible geometries spanned by
the extra dimensions. In this thesis we study the effective
four-dimensional physics that arises from particular choices of
geometries. In particular we are concerned with the dynamics of the
geometry that manifests itself in four-dimensional fields termed moduli.
Determining the value of these moduli in the vacuum is an important
first step towards recovering the standard model, and the observed
cosmology, as an effective low energy four-dimensional theory. The
motivation for this endeavour stems from the first paragraph of this
introduction: theoretical aesthetics can only take us so far and it is
only by making contact with the experimentally observed universe that we
can be sure that we are on the right path to a true description of the
universe rather than one of the many constructions that seem logically
consistent to the human mind.

This thesis is formed of five chapters. Following the introduction,
chapter two reviews the idea of a compactification making the points
discussed in the introduction more mathematically precise. The chapter
also discusses some of the important problems that the resulting
four-dimensional theories face highlighting the particular problem of
moduli stabilisation. A brief review of the possible resolutions of this
problem forms the end of the chapter and the introduction to the
original work in this thesis. The three chapters that follow discuss
moduli stabilisation in varying scenarios. Chapter id1 considers the
case where the internal geometry is a Calabi-Yau manifold and studies
the moduli dynamics near conifold points in the Calabi-Yau. Chapters id1
and id1 study flux compactifications of type IIA string theory and
M-theory on six-dimensional and seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath
-structure respectively. The resulting four-dimensional theories are
studied and in particular their potential for moduli stabilisation.

## Chapter \thechapter Compactifications of String and M-theory

In the introduction it was argued that a theory that unifies gravity
with the standard model forces is naturally defined in eleven (or ten)
space-time dimensions. A possible resolution of this contradiction with
observations is that the extra dimensions are curled up with a radius
smaller than can be probed with current experiments. This idea is made
more rigorous in the following sections which also assume knowledge of
the mathematics reviewed in the appendix. Section 6 discusses the idea
of a compact spatial dimension. Section 7 generalises this to six and
seven compact dimensions and reviews the possible manifolds spanned by
the dimensions. We then proceed to derive the effective four-dimensional
action that results from the compactification which, for all the cases
we consider, is an @xmath supergravity. In section 8 we review the
important features of general @xmath supergravity in four dimensions. In
section 9 we go through a simple compactification to show how the
four-dimensional effective action can be calculated and how it fulfils
the conditions of @xmath supergravity. Section 10 discusses the main
problem that the idea of compact dimensions leads to, that is the vacuum
degeneracy problem, and the two approaches to resolving this problem
that are explored in this thesis.

### 6 Compact dimensions

The idea of extra dimensions was introduced long before any
considerations of string theory by Kaluza and Klein in an attempt to
unify the two known forces at the time of electromagnetism and gravity [
8 , 9 ] . Although this is a much simpler example than the ones explored
in this work it nevertheless includes the key issues and so forms a
useful introduction to compactifications. We begin with the
five-dimensional Einstein-Hilbert action of pure gravity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We introduce here the notation where higher dimensional quantities are
denoted by a @xmath which in this case are the five-dimensional metric
@xmath , with capital roman indices denoting higher dimensional
co-ordinates @xmath where in this case @xmath . @xmath denotes the
five-dimensional Ricci scalar. We now consider a vacuum of this theory
where the five-dimensional metric decomposes into a product of a
four-dimensional part, which we take to be the space-time metric @xmath
where @xmath , and part along the fifth dimension @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have introduced the four space-time co-ordinates @xmath and the
co-ordinate in the extra dimension @xmath . The brackets @xmath denote
vacuum expectation values of quantities. If the theory admits such a
vacuum then we can perform a spontaneous compactification of the theory.
The idea being that instead of considering all the possible solutions of
the theory we consider a particular ansatz which is a solution. This is
important when we come to generalise this idea to string and M-theory in
section 7 where the task of finding all the possible solutions is an
extremely difficult one and again we resort to considering an ansatz. We
then take this ansatz as the vacuum of the theory without considering
the dynamics of how the theory reached that state.

To see if the theory admits a spontaneous compactification we solve the
five-dimensional equations of motion which in this case is simply the
Einstein equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which admits the solution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now consider fluctuations about the vacuum that are the fields of the
theory. In this case we only have gravity and so all the fields arise
from fluctuations of the five-dimensional metric which, following [ 7 ]
, we write as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The effective fields in four dimensions are therefore the metric @xmath
, a gauge field @xmath which is called the graviphoton, and a scalar
@xmath which, anticipating future directions, we call the dilaton.
Taking the extra dimension as compact, and hence periodic, we preform a
Fourier expansion of the dependence of the fields on it as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the radius of the extra dimension. Consider the field
@xmath which obeys the five-dimensional massless Laplace equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The four-dimensional modes @xmath have masses quantised in units of
@xmath . Taking the compactification radius to be very small, so that we
do not observe it, we recover that all the excited modes are of a high
mass. We can specify an effective theory keeping only the massless mode
of @xmath and truncating the higher Kaluza-Klein (KK) modes. Finally, we
integrate out the extra dimension to recover a low energy
four-dimensional action which in this case reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the field strength of the zero mode gauge field @xmath .
We therefore recover four-dimensional gravity and electromagnetism as
manifestations of five-dimensional gravity thereby unifying them.
Unfortunately we have also ended up with unwanted baggage in the form of
a massless scalar mode of gravity, the dilaton. This is a typical
by-product of compactifications and forms one of the major problems
faced by such approaches. In fact the extra scalar mode was the reason
for the rejection of the original KK proposition as it predicted
unobserved long-range interactions. We return to this point in section
10 .

The procedure of dimensional reduction of an action as reviewed above
can be generalised to the case of six or seven extra dimensions. The
full ten or eleven-dimensional fields can be decomposed in terms of
eigenfunctions of the Laplacian into a tower of four-dimensional fields
of which we only keep the lowest mass states. The internal manifold can
then be integrated out to leave an effective four-dimensional action.
The form of this action depends on the geometry of the manifold that the
extra dimensions span. The problem of recovering the four-dimensional SM
and gravity we observe from the higher dimensional supergravity actions
(that are, in turn, the low energy limits of the string or M-theory
actions) can therefore be cast into a geometric problem and this is the
topic of the next section.

### 7 Compactification manifolds

Applying the idea of compact dimensions to string and M-theory implies
that instead of one compact dimension we should consider six and seven
compact dimensions respectively. These dimensions span a compact
manifold that we refer to as @xmath , with the remaining four space-time
dimensions of the universe spanning the manifold @xmath . Since the time
dimension lies in @xmath we take the metric on @xmath to be of Euclidean
signature. Are there other constraints we can place of @xmath ? In order
to recover a well defined four-dimensional action we require the
universe to be of the product form @xmath or of the warped product form
@xmath in which case the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the internal co-ordinates @xmath range over the six or seven
internal dimensions and @xmath is a possible warp-factor that is still
allowed for a consistent four-dimensional action. Within the spontaneous
compactification scheme this puts a constraint on the geometry of @xmath
that it should form a solution of the full higher dimensional theory of
the product type. This constraint is the only strict non-trivial
constraint on the manifold, however there are other constraints that can
be imposed to do with recovering a semi-realistic action in four
dimensions. The most useful one of these is the requirement for the
manifold to preserve some supersymmetry in four dimensions. Eventually
we wish for supersymmetry to be broken but maintaining some minimal
amount of supersymmetry serves as a good starting point form which we
may later add effects that break supersymmetry in accordance with
observations.

In the following discussion the restriction for supersymmetry is made
more rigorous through the introduction of the idea of @xmath
-structures. We then consider a compactification on the simplest, and
best understood, example of a manifold that satisfies these constraints
that is a Calabi-Yau manifold. The constraint of spontaneous
compactification is shown to be satisfied for this example but a more
general discussion of this constraint is left for chapters id1 and id1 .

#### 7.1 Constraints from supersymmetry: G-structures

In section 2 we showed that supersymmetry is associated with a Weyl
spinor @xmath . Consider the supersymmetry spinor in the higher
dimensional theory, under the product ansatz it decomposes into a number
of four-dimensional spinors in terms of a basis of globally well defined
spinors on the internal manifold. Therefore the constraint of preserving
some supersymmetry in four dimensions is a constraint on the number of
independent globally well defined spinors on the internal manifold. A
useful way to mathematically quantify this property is through the use
of @xmath -structures. In this section we review the @xmath -structure
formalism and its application to the particular cases relevant for this
work. The discussion follows the work in [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] .

The frame bundle of a @xmath -dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath is
the bundle of all the orthonormal frames, or sets of basis vectors, on
the manifold. The manifold is said to have a @xmath -structure, where
@xmath is some group, if the structure group of the frame bundle is
reduced from the most general @xmath to some subgroup @xmath . An
alternative way to define such manifolds is through the existence of
globally defined tensors and spinors that are invariants of
transformations under @xmath . By considering the set of frames where
the tensors and spinors take the same form, i.e. are singlets of the
structure group, we see that the structure group must indeed reduce to
@xmath (or a subgroup of @xmath ). Hence a manifold can be said to have
@xmath -structure if it admits a set of @xmath -invariant tensors and
spinors. Since the number of globally defined spinors is directly
related to the supersymmetry of the four-dimensional theory the @xmath
-structure of the internal manifold determines the amount of
supersymmetry in four dimensions. These ideas are quite abstract at this
stage but hopefully a discussion of some examples will be illuminating.

##### 7.1.1 @xmath-structure in six dimensions

To begin with, we consider compactifications of type II string theory
only. Preserving the minimum amount of supersymmetry requires the
minimum amount of globally defined spinors. For six dimensions this is a
single Weyl spinor @xmath and its complex conjugate @xmath . In ten
dimensions @xmath supersymmetry is parameterised by two Majorana-Weyl
spinors @xmath with @xmath . The ten-dimensional @xmath projection
matrix decomposes as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and so the ten-dimensional Weyl spinors decompose as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are four-dimensional Weyl spinors with positive chirality.
Therefore the minimum amount of supersymmetry in four dimensions is
@xmath .

Six-dimensional manifolds that have one globally defined spinor have
@xmath -structure. As outlined at the start of this section, the
approach for determining the number of spinors is to study the number of
singlets of the @xmath group under decomposition of the structure group.
For the case of @xmath and @xmath we have that a Weyl spinor in six
dimensions transforms as a @xmath and decomposes to @xmath irreducible
spinors as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore we recover one singlet spinor as required. Hence we see that
the minimal amount of supersymmetry for compactifications of type II
string theory to four dimensions is preserved by six dimensional
manifolds with @xmath -structure and so these form a particularly
interesting class of manifolds to consider.

To study compactifications on manifolds with @xmath -structure it is
more useful to deal with tensors than spinors. The spectrum of @xmath
-invariant tensors on the manifold can be constructed out of the
possible spinor bilinears

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It is possible to show that the above tensors are the only objects that
can be constructed out of the available spinors @xmath and @xmath . If
we took the manifold to have more globally defined spinors it would be
possible to construct more tensors and so the structure group would
reduce further. In this case the two objects @xmath and @xmath define an
@xmath -structure. To see the relation between the structure group and
the invariant tensors we follow the same procedure as for spinors and
decompose the two-forms, which are in the adjoint representation @xmath
of @xmath , and the three-forms, which are in the @xmath representation
into @xmath representations as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We recover one singlet two-form which we identify with @xmath and one
complex singlet three-form which is identified with @xmath .

We can obtain more information about the relations between @xmath and
@xmath . Since there is no singlet in the decomposition of the
five-forms we must have @xmath and since a six-form is itself a singlet
we must have @xmath . Also since we can always define an almost complex
structure on any even-dimensional manifold, which in this case is @xmath
, the total algebraic relations satisfied by the forms read ⁴ ⁴ 4 To
show that @xmath is an almost complex structure we can use Fierz
identities to evaluate explicitly @xmath in its spinor bi-linear form [
14 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We note that, in general, manifolds with @xmath -structure are not
necessarily Kähler or even complex, despite the existence of a globally
defined almost complex structure @xmath . More identities for @xmath
-structure manifolds are given in the appendix.

The @xmath -structure also implies differential relations between the
structure forms @xmath and @xmath . To derive these we first examine how
the deformation away from @xmath -holonomy is parameterised. @xmath
-holonomy means that the forms and spinors are constant under the
Levi-Civita connection

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This need not be the case with @xmath -structure, however it is always
possible [ 15 ] to find some connection @xmath under which the structure
forms and spinors are invariant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and which differs from the Levi-Civita connection through torsion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the contorsion tensor on the manifold which relates to the
torsion @xmath through @xmath and is antisymmetric in its last two
indices. Acting on the spinors with the Levi-Civita connection gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which when applied to the spinor bilinears gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The torsion on the manifold clearly plays an important role. It is
possible to use the @xmath -structure formalism to further classify the
manifold in terms of its torsion. Since the contorsion has two
antisymmetric indices and one other index, we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the spaces of one and two-forms
respectively, @xmath is the Lie algebra on @xmath and @xmath is its
complement in @xmath . Given that the action of @xmath on the @xmath
-structure must vanish by construction, we can decompose @xmath
according to the irreducible representations of @xmath in @xmath . In
the case of @xmath , this gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then associate each of these bracketed terms with a torsion class
@xmath that can be used to decompose ( 7.13 ) in terms of the torsion
classes and the singlet spinors as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of the @xmath representations the torsion is parameterised by
the singlet @xmath , the two vectors @xmath and @xmath , the two-form
@xmath and the three-form @xmath which are all complex. The
non-vanishing torsion classes can be used to further classify the
structure manifold. In particular manifolds where all the torsion
classes vanish are called Calabi-Yau manifolds. Manifolds where only
@xmath are called nearly-Kähler and manifolds with @xmath are called
half-flat.

To summarise we showed that requiring the minimal amount of
supersymmetry to be preserved in four dimensions places strong
restrictions on the possible manifold that the compact dimensions must
span. In particular it must have @xmath -structure. We could then
further classify different types of @xmath -structure manifolds through
their non-vanishing torsion classes. The simplest example of such
manifolds are the CY manifolds for which all the torsion classes vanish.
These manifolds form the most studied class of compactifications that
have been considered so far in the literature. In section 9 we review
how the actual compactification proceeds for such manifolds. However we
should keep in mind that these only form a small subset of all the
possible @xmath -structure manifolds and compactifications on general
@xmath -structure manifolds is the topic of chapter id1 . Before we
proceed to the CY case there are two more important cases of @xmath
-structures that we should consider.

##### 7.1.2 @xmath-structure in seven dimensions

The manifolds relevant for M-theory compactifications are
seven-dimensional and so we should consider @xmath -structures in seven
dimensions. The minimal amount of globally defined spinors on
seven-dimensional manifolds is a single Majorana spinor @xmath .
Supersymmetry in eleven dimensions is parameterised in terms of a single
Majorana spinor and so under decomposition we recover a single
four-dimensional Majorana spinor which corresponds to @xmath
supersymmetry. Manifolds with a single spinor have @xmath -structure. To
show this we follow the same arguments as in the previous section. A
Majorana spinor is in the @xmath representation of @xmath which
decomposes under @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

giving one singlet spinor.

The unique spinor bilinear defines the @xmath -structure form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The space of three-forms @xmath decomposes as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

giving one singlet three form which is @xmath . The existence of the
singlet three-form also implies there is a singlet four-form given by
@xmath . There are no neat algebraic relations analogues to ( 7.8 ) that
define a @xmath -structure on a manifold although some useful identities
are given in the appendix. Instead a manifold is said to have @xmath
-structure if it has a globally defined three-form that can be
consistently mapped at each point to the three-form @xmath on @xmath
defined as ⁵ ⁵ 5 This definition also holds for the case of @xmath
-structure in six (or seven) dimensions where the explicit forms are
given in the appendix. [ 15 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the orthonormal basis on @xmath .

As was the case for @xmath -structure, @xmath -structure manifolds can
be further classified according to their torsion. Acting on @xmath with
the Levi-Civita connection we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contorsion decomposes under @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives the differential relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of @xmath representations @xmath is a singlet, @xmath is a
vector, @xmath is a @xmath and @xmath transforms under the adjoint
representation @xmath . Manifolds with only @xmath are called weak-
@xmath and manifolds with all torsion classes vanishing have @xmath
-holonomy.

##### 7.1.3 @xmath-structure in seven dimensions

Seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure have been less
studied than their six-dimensional counterparts partly due to the fact
that for the case of no torsion where the holonomy group of the manifold
is @xmath the seven-dimensional manifold is just a direct product of a
CY manifold and a circle [ 16 ] . Therefore studying M-theory on such
manifolds is equivalent to studying type IIA string theory on a CY. Once
some torsion classes are non-vanishing a non-trivial fibration is
generated thereby making such studies different to type IIA
compactifications.

An @xmath -structure on a seven-dimensional manifold implies the
existence of two globally defined Majorana spinors @xmath and @xmath
which are independent in that they satisfy @xmath . In terms of spinor
representation we have the decomposition of the Majorana spinor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

giving the two singlet spinors. Having two independent spinors gives
@xmath supersymmetry in four dimensions. In the following we find it
more convenient to use two complex spinors @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -invariant forms @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are constructed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In comparison with six-dimensional @xmath -structures, in seven
dimensions there also exists a globally defined vector field @xmath . It
is important to bear in mind that in general this vector is not a
Killing direction and thus the manifold does not have the form of a
direct product between a six-dimensional manifold and a circle. In terms
of tensor representations the @xmath -structure is manifest through the
decomposition of the one-forms, which are in the @xmath representation
of @xmath , the two-forms in the @xmath and the three-forms which are in
the @xmath representation, as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that there are three real singlet three-forms which correspond to
@xmath and @xmath . Following the same procedure as for the
six-dimensional case gives the set of relations for the forms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The differential relations of the forms can as usual be written using
the contorsion and for the case of @xmath -structure in seven dimensions
read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The contorsion decomposes into @xmath -modules as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The differentials of the forms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given in
terms of the torsion classes as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.33)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the torsion classes contain three singlet classes @xmath (real)
and @xmath (complex), five complex vectors @xmath and @xmath , three
2-forms @xmath (real) and @xmath (complex) and two complex 3-forms
@xmath .

Before concluding this section we make more precise the relation between
the @xmath and @xmath -structures on a seven-dimensional manifold. As
@xmath , an @xmath -structure automatically defines a @xmath -structure
on the manifold. In fact an @xmath -structure on a seven-dimensional
manifold implies the existence of two independent @xmath -structures
whose intersection is precisely the @xmath -structure. Concretely, using
the spinor @xmath and @xmath defined above we can construct the two
@xmath forms @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.35)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The relation to the @xmath -structure is now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Throughout this work it is sometimes useful to use the @xmath forms and
sometimes the @xmath forms but we should keep in mind that the two
formulations are equivalent.

### 8 Four-dimensional @xmath supergravity

In section 7.1 we showed how supersymmetry imposes constraints on the
possible manifolds that the extra dimensions may span. For the cases of
type II string theory and M-theory compactified on manifolds with @xmath
-structure, the resulting four-dimensional theory preserves @xmath
supersymmetry. The actions are therefore @xmath supergravities and in
this section we review the important features of this class of theories.
The treatment is a purely four-dimensional one and the constraints on
the theory come from requiring @xmath supersymmetry. The features of the
theory discussed here form constraints and guiding principles for the
higher dimensional compactifications. We begin by reviewing ungauged
@xmath supergravity in four dimensions with only scalar and vector
matter fields [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] . We then discuss the two possible
extensions to this theory of a gauged supergravity [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] and
the addition of massive tensor multiplets [ 20 , 21 , 22 ] . Finally we
review the constraints placed on possible truncations to @xmath
supergravity [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 ] . We note that this
chapter is a review of the key concepts and so derivations are not
presented here and the reader is referred to the literature for these.

The gravitational sector of @xmath supergravity is composed of a single
@xmath gravitational multiplet which contains the graviton @xmath , two
spin- @xmath Weyl gravitini @xmath , and a vector @xmath called the
graviphoton. There are two types of matter multiplets containing scalar
fields that preserve @xmath supersymmetry with the component fields in
each multiplet transforming into each other under the supersymmetry
transformation. There are vector multiplets that contain two real scalar
fields, two fermions and one vector boson and there are hypermultiplets
whose content is four real scalar fields and two fermions ⁶ ⁶ 6 As we
discuss in section 8.2 , there are also tensor multiplets that in the
ungauged theory are dual to hypermultiplets. For simplicity we shall
refer to these as hypermultiplets unless the distinction is important. .
One of the features of (ungauged) @xmath supergravity is that the two
sectors of scalar fields do not mix. More precisely the scalar fields in
each sector can be modelled as non-linear sigma models that span two
separate manifolds. The scalar components of the vector multiplets are
labelled as complex fields @xmath and the scalar components of the
hypermultiplets as real fields @xmath with index ranges @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the number of vector multiplets and
hypermultiplets present. The full bosonic action reads [ 19 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have also written the kinetic term for the vector field
components of the vector multiplets @xmath with field-strengths @xmath
and the graviphoton @xmath so that the index @xmath . The matrix @xmath
is called the gauge kinetic matrix. The metrics @xmath and @xmath are on
two separate manifolds @xmath and @xmath respectively, with the full
scalar manifold being their direct product @xmath . The hypermultiplets
manifold is a quaternionic (Kähler) manifold and the vector multiplets
manifold is of the special Kähler type. We proceed to highlight some of
the important properties of each type of manifold.

Consider a Kähler manifold @xmath with co-ordinates @xmath that has two
types of vector bundles defined on it. The first is a complex line
bundle @xmath , and the second is a flat complex vector bundle of
dimension @xmath , @xmath with a symplectic structure group @xmath . The
symplectic group has a representation in terms of the set of @xmath
general linear matrices @xmath that satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Consider a holomorphic section of the product bundle @xmath which takes
the vector form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the index @xmath and the vector entries are called the periods of
@xmath . There is an unfortunate clash of notation of the periods @xmath
and the gauge field-strengths @xmath in ( 8.1 ). The distinction between
the two should be made by the context in which they appear and also by
the position of the index. The symplectic inner product on @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The period matrix @xmath is defined as the symplectic matrix that
transforms between the two halves of the holomorphic section

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can now define a special Kähler manifold as a Kähler manifold which
admits the structure described above such that the Kähler potential is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the Kähler potential plays an important role it is worth going
into a bit more detail as to its construction. A Kähler transformation
is a transformation of the Kähler potential by some holomorphic function
@xmath of the type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This type of transformation leaves the metric invariant and so is a
symmetry of the action. Under this type of transformation the
holomorphic section transforms as @xmath and so the set of periods
@xmath can be regarded as homogeneous co-ordinates. Provided the
Jacobian matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

is invertible we can fix the homogeneity by defining special
co-ordinates @xmath . Then these co-ordinates are a good co-ordinate
basis on the manifold so that the bottom half of the holomorphic section
composed of the periods @xmath is actually a function of the top-half
periods @xmath and can be generated from a single holomorphic function
of homogeneous degree two called the prepotential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The prepotential therefore encompasses the whole geometric structure and
in particular the period matrix can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bundle @xmath clearly plays an important role in the geometry of
special Kähler manifolds and in particular its section @xmath . It is
important to understand how this section varies as a function of the
co-ordinates of the manifold by which we mean how the covariant
derivative acts on it. Since the symplectic bundle @xmath is flat, the
only relevant connection is that of the line bundle @xmath which is a
one-form @xmath given by @xmath . Now there exists a correspondence
between line bundles and @xmath bundles such that if a transition
function on the complex line bundle is given by @xmath the equivalent
transition function on the @xmath bundle is @xmath . In terms of the
connection this means that the connection on the @xmath bundle @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let @xmath be a section of the @xmath bundle, then the covariant
derivative acting on it is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in co-ordinates reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A covariantly holomorphic section of the @xmath bundle is defined as
@xmath and so under the map @xmath covariantly holomorphic sections of
the @xmath flow into holomorphic sections of @xmath . The covariant
derivatives on the holomorphic section of @xmath read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This gives the covariant derivative, with respect to Kähler
transformations, acting on @xmath .

Supersymmetry implies that the vectors in the vector multiplet sector
should follow the same geometry as the scalars and indeed this is the
case. In fact this relation between the vectors and the scalars is the
important constraint through which the whole geometric structure is
derived. A particularly important concept is electric-magnetic duality
which corresponds to the symplectic symmetry present in the scalar
sector. We can define magnetic field-strengths @xmath in terms of the
electric field-strengths @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined as the vector part of the Lagrangian in ( 8.1 ).
This gives explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to show that the equations of motion and Bianchi identity
arising from @xmath for the gauge-fields are invariant under a
symplectic rotation of the electric and magnetic field-strengths @xmath
where @xmath is a symplectic matrix and the vector @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since such a rotation exchanges electric and magnetic field-strengths it
corresponds to symplectic electric-magnetic duality. The final important
relation in the vector multiplet sector is that the period matrix @xmath
can be identified with the gauge kinetic matrix @xmath .

The hypermultiplet sector spans a quaternionic manifold. Quaternionic
manifolds are @xmath -dimensional, where @xmath is an integer, real
manifolds that are endowed with a metric @xmath and three complex
structures @xmath , @xmath that satisfy the quaternionic algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and with respect to which the metric is Hermitian. Using these it is
possible to introduce a triplet of two-forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

that are the generalisation of the Kähler form on complex manifolds.
These forms are then required to be covariantly closed with respect to
some connection on the manifold

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the connection @xmath vanishes, i.e. the manifold is flat, the
manifold is called hyperKähler.

#### 8.1 Gauged @xmath supergravity

We have seen that @xmath supersymmetry is a restrictive condition on the
possible actions that can be written down. There are however ways that
the action ( 8.1 ) can be extended whilst still preserving @xmath
supersymmetry. It is possible to gauge the matter fields, vector
multiplets and hypermultiplets, with respect to the vectors in the
vector multiplets and the graviphoton. The gauging is done with respect
to the symmetries of the special Kähler and quaternionic sigma model
manifolds. As long as the coupling of the scalars generated in the
action are written in a way that preserves these symmetries the
symmetries remain symmetries of the full action. To implement this
gauging we first must find (holomorphic) Killing vectors of the
manifolds, @xmath and @xmath , where the subscript index denotes the
number of such Killing vectors and the superscript denotes the entry in
the vector. Then it is possible to gauge the derivatives on the
co-ordinates of the manifolds as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced coupling constants @xmath and @xmath (with
indices uncontracted) for each possible coupling. These can be absorbed
into the definitions of the Killing vectors and so are generically
dropped henceforth unless required for clarity. The interesting effect
of such gaugings is that the new coupling induces shifts in the
supersymmetry transformations of the spin- @xmath fields of the theory
which in turn means that a scalar potential is generated

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have introduced the covariant derivatives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and also the quaternionic prepotentials @xmath (not to be confused with
the prepotential @xmath of the special Kähler manifold) that are
prepotentials for the Killing vectors on the quaternionic manifold
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the purposes of comparing gauged @xmath supergravity with
compactifications of string and M-theory it is useful to consider the
form of the mass matrix for the two gravitini. The kinetic terms and
mass terms for the gravitini in the theory are given by ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that
we have different metric signature, and therefore @xmath matrix,
conventions to [ 19 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath label the two gravitini and the @xmath subscript denotes
the chirality. The action ( 8.29 ) defines the gravitini mass matrix
@xmath . In terms of the geometric structure the mass matrix reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the Pauli matrices ( E.6 ) whose indices are raised
and lowered by @xmath ⁸ ⁸ 8 The @xmath matrices in the appendix are
defined with one index up and one index down so that @xmath is actually
given by @xmath . . We note here that the gravitini mass matrix
determines all the relevant quantities of the gauged @xmath supergravity
with the exception of the gauged Killing vectors in the vector multiplet
sector. This is analogous to the @xmath case where the gravitino mass
can be used to completely determine the scalar sector of the theory.

#### 8.2 @xmath supergravity with massive tensor multiplets

In four dimensions a two-form is dual to a scalar. It is possible to
dualise a sub-sector of the hypermultiplet scalars, say @xmath with
@xmath , to anti-symmetric tensors @xmath . The dualisation procedure
leaves the vector multiplet sector unaffected. Dualisation of the
ungauged theory is rather trivial and does not introduce any interesting
features. However once the theory is gauged there appear non-trivial
extensions to the usual gauged supergravity. The gauging process
described in section 8.1 , which we refer to as electric gauging for
reasons that follow, remains unchanged apart from the constraint that
the Killing vectors in the hypermultiplet sectors must correspond to
isometries of the undualised submanifold of the full hypermultiplet
quaternionic manifold that commute with the dualised co-ordinates. In
order to carry out the dualisation, the dualised scalars must appear
only as derivatives and so they must have the translational isometry
@xmath where @xmath is a constant. The dualised scalars can be gauged
prior to the dualisation with respect to these isometries corresponding
to constant Killing vectors @xmath . After the dualisation, there also
appears the possibility of redefining the electric field-strengths with
the new tensors as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The key feature is that the full supersymmetry can still be maintained
given an appropriate shift in the fermionic supersymmetry
transformations and therefore a change to the scalar potential. Note
that this deformation of the theory means that the tensors @xmath pick
up an explicit mass term and so can not be dualised back to scalars.
However they still remain part of the original multiplet which now
becomes a tensor multiplet, so for example dualising @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting to note the coupling of the dualised tensors to the
gauge fields. Substituting ( 8.31 ) in the action ( 8.1 ), after the
gauging ( 8.24 ) with respect to the constant Killing vectors @xmath of
the undualised hypermultiplets, gives the terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The tensor couples to both electric and magnetic field-strengths. It is
a dyon, a particle charged both electrically and magnetically. The mass
parameters @xmath correspond to the magnetic charges of the tensors and
can be though of as constant magnetic Killing vectors in analogy with
@xmath . If we define the magnetic Killing vectors @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

then we can assign them magnetic prepotentials @xmath through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these definitions the shifted gravitini mass matrix reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have reinstated the gauge coupling @xmath since it appears
non-trivially. The shifted scalar potential takes on a complicated form,
which in none-the-less still fully determined by the gravitini mass
matrix and the vector multiplets Killing vectors, and is given in [ 20 ]
.

#### 8.3 Consistent truncations of @xmath to @xmath

In chapters id1 and id1 we encounter partial supersymmetry breaking from
@xmath to @xmath and so it is worthwhile considering this phenomenon at
this point. In the @xmath theory the fields are grouped into vector
multiplets and hypermultiplets. Once supersymmetry is broken these
multiplets split up into @xmath multiplets. Since the number of
supersymmetries is given by the number of massless gravitini, breaking
one supersymmetry corresponds to one gravitino becoming massive. The
@xmath gravitational multiplet therefore splits into a @xmath massless
gravitational multiplet and a massive spin- @xmath multiplet

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is a vector field which has to come from one of the vector
multiplets and @xmath is a spin- @xmath fermion which comes from a
hypermultiplet. Moreover, one also needs one Goldstone fermion and two
Goldstone bosons to be eaten by the gravitino and the two vector fields
respectively which become massive, and these additional Goldstone fields
also come from the hypermultiplet sector. The @xmath @xmath vector
multiplets break into @xmath massless @xmath vector multiplets and
@xmath massless chiral multiplets (with the other fields forming massive
multiplets) such that the scalar components of the chiral multiplets
span a Kähler manifold which is a submanifold of the full vector
multiplets special Kähler manifold. The @xmath @xmath hypermultiplets
break into @xmath massless @xmath chiral multiplets and @xmath massive
chiral multiplets with @xmath . The scalar components of the massless
chiral multiplets span a Kähler submanifold of the original quaternionic
manifold. Identifying the massless fields that preserve the residual
@xmath supersymmetry is equivalent to finding the correct complex
co-ordinates on the resulting submanifolds. With the scalar fields of
the @xmath vector multiplets the situation is quite simple as they are
already complex coordinates on a (special) Kähler manifold. However, for
the hyper-scalars this is not the case, and it is in general non-trivial
to find the right combinations that represents the correct complex
coordinates. For simple cases, that we encounter in this paper, this can
be done and one can find explicitly the correct complex combinations
which span the @xmath scalar Kähler manifold.

##### 8.3.1 @xmath supergravity

Following a consistent truncation of a @xmath supergravity we reach a
@xmath supergravity. In this section we review briefly the scalar sector
of @xmath supergravities [ 3 ] . The gravitational multiplet contains
the graviton and a single gravitino. There are also vector multiplets
which contain a vector and two fermions. The only multiplet with scalar
components is a chiral multiplet which contains two scalars and a
fermion. The scalar sector is completely determined in terms of the
superpotential @xmath , which is a holomorphic function of the
superfields, and the Kähler potential @xmath , which is the Kähler
potential for the scalar manifold spanned by the chiral multiplet
scalars. If we consider a set of chiral superfields @xmath the kinetic
terms and scalar potential read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the covariant derivatives of the chiral superfields can be gauged
with respect to the vector superfields and the kinetic metric is given
by @xmath . The Kähler covariant derivatives @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The theory has a single gravitino whose mass is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the gravitino mass completely determines the scalar sector of
the theory. Note that the only feature of the action that is not
determined is the gauge group of the vector fields.

This concludes the summary of the essential features of general matter
coupled @xmath supergravity in four dimensions. Recall from section 7
that compactifications of type II string theories and M-theory on
manifolds with @xmath -structure lead to precisely such a theory.
Throughout this work we use the constraints reviewed in this section to
help construct and to check the resulting four-dimensional theories from
such compactifications. In the next section we review how the resulting
four-dimensional action can be derived for the simplest such
compactification that is on a CY manifold.

### 9 Calabi-Yau compactifications

In this section we compactify type IIB string theory on a CY manifold
and show how the resulting action matches the general ungauged @xmath
supergravity. Although we consider the explicit type IIB example the
generalities of the compactification procedure hold for all the string
theories. We do not concern ourselves with the fermionic sector of the
actions for now. This sector can be deduced by supersymmetry from the
bosonic sector and is non-chiral and so does not form a candidate for
the standard model fermionic sector. The bosonic fields of the theory
are the graviton @xmath , the dilaton @xmath , the Neveu-Schwartz (NS)
two-form @xmath , and the Ramond (R) scalar @xmath , two-form @xmath and
four-form @xmath . The bosonic part of the action (in the String frame)
reads [ 4 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the ten-dimensional Planck constant and the field
strengths are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The self-duality of the five-form @xmath should be imposed at the
equations of motion level since at the action level the corresponding
kinetic term vanishes trivially. In analogy with section 6 we consider a
spontaneous compactification of this action to a vacuum with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with the index ranges @xmath and @xmath . The Einstein equation reads
@xmath which is solved by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we also impose the constraint from supersymmetry of @xmath -structure
we find the internal manifold must be CY.

We now derive the effective four-dimensional action that results from a
compactification of type IIB supergravity on CY manifolds first
considered in [ 30 ] . We follow the discussion outlined in [ 31 , 14 ]
. To derive the four-dimensional field spectrum we consider
perturbations about the vacuum and expand them in terms of the harmonic
forms on the CY. These lead to massless modes in four-dimensions as they
are zero modes of the Laplacian and the higher mass KK states are
truncated as usual. The spectrum of harmonic forms on CY manifolds has
been studied [ 32 ] and is most neatly written in complex co-ordinates
which we define as @xmath , @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-vanishing Hodge numbers @xmath , where @xmath labels the number
of holomorphic indices and @xmath the number of anti-holomorphic, read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The basis of forms then comprises of the @xmath forms @xmath , @xmath
and their Hodge duals @xmath , which we choose to normalise so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have introduced @xmath as some constant CY reference volume
which we generally omit unless required for clarity (it can be replaced
by dimensional analysis). The variable volume depends on the
four-dimensional co-ordinates and is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spectrum of three-forms can be parameterised in two useful ways. The
first is through the set of complex @xmath forms @xmath , @xmath with
the unique holomorphic @xmath form @xmath and their Hodge duals ⁹ ⁹ 9
The superscript on the @xmath denotes the difference from the @xmath
-structure @xmath in section 7.1.1 and from the vector-multiplet @xmath
in section 8 . There are exact, but at times subtle, relations between
the different @xmath s that are discussed in section 9.1 and in chapters
id1 and id1 but at this point we denote them as different quantities. .
The second basis is through the set of real three-forms @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath that can be normalised as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the harmonic basis forms it is simple to write down the massless
bosonic field spectrum of the effective four-dimensional theory that
arises from the decomposition of the ten-dimensional fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The resulting four-dimensional fields are referred to as axions. There
are also four-dimensional fields that arise from deformations of the
metric on the CY that are the analogues of the dilaton in section 6 .
These fields are called moduli. The constraint on such deformations is
that they maintain the CY condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to the Lichnerowicz equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection. This is simply the Laplace
equation for a symmetric two-tensor and so we should expand the metric
deformations again in the basis of harmonic forms. The deformations are
most neatly written using complex co-ordinates. Since for a Kähler
manifold, the Kähler form @xmath , the @xmath variations of the metric
are variations of the Kähler form and are therefore labelled Kähler
moduli. They arise from the expansion in terms of the @xmath forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is also possible to consider @xmath deformations of the metric. Since
the metric on a Kähler manifold must be of a @xmath type these
deformations correspond to deformations of the complex structure of the
manifold and so are termed complex structure moduli. There are no @xmath
forms on a CY with which to expand these deformations but rather they
are expanded using the @xmath form basis as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are now in a position to list the bosonic field content of the
four-dimensional theory. It comprises of scalar fields @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . There are also the gauge fields
@xmath and @xmath as well as the two-forms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The constraint of the self-duality of @xmath eliminates the degrees of
freedom @xmath and @xmath as these are Hodge dual to the fields @xmath
and @xmath respectively. The two-forms @xmath and @xmath are Hodge dual
to scalars which we label @xmath and @xmath respectively. The full field
content is specified in table 1 where the fields have been grouped as
members of @xmath multiplets.

To derive the effective four-dimensional action we substitute the
expansions ( 9.10 ), ( 9.13 ) and ( 9.14 ) into the action ( 9 ) and
integrate over the internal manifold. There are also three field
rescalings that are performed during the calculation in order to bring
the resulting action into a neat format. The first is a Weyl rescaling
of the ten-dimensional metric by a dilaton factor to take us to the
Einstein frame

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then follows a Weyl rescaling of the four-dimensional metric by a factor
of the CY volume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and finally there is a rescaling of the Kähler moduli by a dilaton
factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also define a new field which is the four-dimensional dilaton @xmath
that differs from the ten-dimensional dilaton @xmath by a factor of the
CY volume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the ten-dimensional action only contains kinetic terms the
resulting four-dimensional effective action only contains kinetic terms
for the fields and reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we define the four-dimensional Planck constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The hypermultiplets are denoted collectively by @xmath with @xmath with
kinetic terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced new complex fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the last term of ( 9.22 ) denotes the kinetic terms for the
subscripted fields that are complicated but are not important for the
purposes of this work. The gauge field-strengths are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the form of the gauge kinetic matrix @xmath given in terms of the
basis forms in ( 13.3 ). The metrics on the moduli spaces are read off
from the coefficients of the kinetic terms and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This concludes the review of CY compactifications of type IIB
supergravity. Compactifications of type IIA supergravity are very
similar to the type IIB case with the only differences arising in the
Ramond matter sector since the NS sector is common to both. In
particular the geometrical moduli remain in exactly the same form. In
fact there is an important symmetry between the two resulting
four-dimensional actions called mirror symmetry which states that
compactifying type IIA string theory on a CY is equivalent to
compactifying type IIB on a mirror CY defined by interchanging the two
hodge numbers @xmath . This symmetry is a manifestation of T-duality
which is an exact symmetry of string theory which states that string
theory compactified on a circle of radius @xmath is equivalent to the
theory compactified on a circle with the inverse radius @xmath . This is
an interesting symmetry because it implies that string theory has a
minimum scale that it can probe which is the self-dual scale @xmath .
Mirror symmetry then arises from T-dualising along three directions
within the CY.

#### 9.1 Calabi-Yau compactifications as an @xmath supergravity

Having derived the key features of the effective four-dimensional action
arising from a CY compactification it is informative to see how this
action fits into the mould of general @xmath supergravity. Since the
action ( 9 ) has no scalar potential it should correspond to an ungauged
@xmath supergravity. Comparing ( 9 ) with ( 8.1 ) it is easy to see that
the two actions are identical in form. The only thing to check is that
the geometrical structure discussed in section 8 is present. Consider
the vector multiplet sector first. To show that the scalar components,
that are the complex structure moduli @xmath , span a special Kähler
manifold we need to identify a holomorphic three-form to play the role
of @xmath which is obviously @xmath . Then using Kodaira’s formula [ 33
] for the derivative of the holomorphic CY form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some general function it is simple to show that metric
@xmath is generated by a Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation ( 9.28 ) gives the expression @xmath . An interesting
observation that follows is that the metric ( 9.25 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Kähler covariant derivatives @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have already noted that in @xmath supergravity @xmath is homogeneous
with rescalings of it corresponding to Kähler transformations. We see
that the Kähler covariant derivatives ensure that the metric @xmath is
independent of such rescalings. If we expand @xmath into its periods in
terms of the three-form basis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

we recover the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which matches exactly the supergravity formula. It is worth noting that
in special co-ordinates the periods are given by the complex structure
moduli. Finally it is possible to show that the gauge-kinetic matrix in
( 9 ) @xmath also matches the formula for the period matrix ( 8.10 ) [
14 ] .

The hypermultiplet section is more complicated due to the more
complicated geometry of quaternionic manifolds. Nonetheless it is
possible to show that the hypermultiplets do indeed span a quaternionic
manifold [ 30 ] . There is a further interesting feature to the
hypermultiplet sector that arises because of mirror symmetry. Recall
that mirror symmetry interchanges the hodge numbers @xmath and @xmath .
From the expansions ( 9.13 ) and ( 9.14 ) this can also be viewed as an
interchange of the complex structure moduli @xmath with the complex
Kähler moduli and axions combinations @xmath defined in ( 9.23 ). This
means that, since in the mirror (IIA) picture the @xmath form the scalar
components of the vector multiplets which should span a special Kähler
manifold, the @xmath moduli should also span a special Kähler
submanifold within the overall quaternionic manifold spanned by the full
hypermultiplets. Indeed equation ( 9.22 ) shows that the @xmath moduli
form a separate sub-manifold within the hypermultiplets with a metric
given in ( 9.26 ). This metric arises from a Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is again derived from a prepotential @xmath which in this case can
be evaluated explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define the intersection numbers

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we have introduced the homogeneous co-ordinates @xmath to keep the
analogy with the special Kähler geometry.

In this section we reviewed some of the important aspects encountered
when attempting to recover four-dimensional physics, culminating in the
effective four-dimensional action from CY compactifications of type IIB
supergravity ( 9 ). The resulting action however does not resemble the
standard model of physics and comparing it with observations leads to
many difficulties. The following section reviews some of the major
difficulties facing such an action.

### 10 The vacuum degeneracy problem

The effective four-dimensional action ( 9 ) lacks the key features of
the standard model or of its simplest supersymmetric extensions. The
action preserves @xmath supersymmetry which is non-chiral and so the
fermions can not be the standard model fermions. Since the supergravity
is ungauged neither are they charged under the gauge fields which are
themselves only @xmath abelian fields. These observations, and others
similar in nature, are all features of the theory that are missing. It
is possible to argue that this is not a major problem because string
theory is very rich and the compactification only explores one sector of
the theory and so it could be that the missing features are to be found
in a different sector. This approach has been very successful in recent
years. In type IIB string theory it has been possible to construct a
chiral fermionic spectrum charged under non-abelian gauge fields as
states corresponding to strings stretching between D3 and D7-branes [ 34
] . In type IIA string theory states stretching between intersecting D6
branes can produce sectors that very strongly resemble the standard
model [ 35 ] .

More serious problems arise from features of the theory that are present
but contradict experimental observations. The original 1920s
Kaluza-Klein theory was rejected because it predicted a massless scalar
mode of gravity, the dilaton. This would lead to a new long range force,
mediated by the dilaton, between all matter which in turn predicts
changes to planet orbits that are ruled out by observations [ 36 ] . The
feature of massless scalar modes of gravity are common to all higher
dimensional compactifications and string theory is no exception. For the
case of CY compactifications we have @xmath such scalar fields that are
the complex structure and Kähler moduli. For a typical CY manifold these
can reach the hundreds. The existence of massless moduli in string
compactifications on CY manifolds rules them out as possible models of
the universe. A possible way to get past this problem is modify the
theory in such a way that these fields receive masses and this process
is referred to as moduli stabilisation.

There is a further motivation for moduli stabilisation that stems from
the fact that important quantities of the four-dimensional theory depend
on the values that the moduli take in the vacuum. Since the moduli have
no potential there is no particular value that is predicted and this
problem is referred to as the vacuum degeneracy problem. The features of
the theory that depend on the moduli can be separated into conditions
that are required for the consistency of the theory and quantities that
can be measured experimentally. The first class includes the size of the
extra dimensions and the value of the dilaton. The supergravity
approximation of string theory is the low energy limit or equivalently
the large scale limit. Therefore the size of the cycles on the internal
manifold must be larger than the string scale. This translates into a
condition on the moduli for their values to be large in units of the
inverse string tension @xmath . Another approximation is the use of
perturbative string theory which means that the string self coupling
should be weak. This in turn imposes a condition on the value of the
dilaton. There is also a consistency condition that is imposed on any
possible masses the moduli might obtain due to the truncation we
performed of the higher mass states that arise from string excitations
and from KK modes. In order for the truncation to have been a consistent
one the moduli must have masses much smaller than the scale of these
higher mass states. The second class of moduli dependent quantities that
can be measured experimentally, and therefore are constrained, are more
model dependent. These include the scale of supersymmetry breaking, the
value of the gauge coupling function and the masses of any massive
fields.

The final important problem that is relevant to this work, and which is
similar to the moduli problem discussed in the previous paragraph in
terms of a lack of predictive power, is the topological degeneracy
problem. The problem is that there are many CY manifolds of different
topologies, and so different particle contents in four dimensions, and
the compactification procedure does not differentiate between them. This
means that we can not even predict the number of particles in the
four-dimensional theory. The problem is made more serious by the fact
that, as we show in chapter id1 , it is possible to move from a CY of
one topology to one of a different topology. The problem of the choice
of compactification manifolds becomes even more severe when we consider
that CY manifolds are just a small subset of all the @xmath -structure
manifolds.

The problems highlighted in this section have so far been discussed in
the context of string theory but most of them apply equally to the case
of M-theory, in particular the moduli stabilisation problem. As we have
shown the lack of a potential for the fields in the low energy
four-dimensional effective theory of string and M-theory
compactifications is the reason for the vacuum degeneracy problem. Any
attempt to resolve these problems must include a process by which a
potential is generated for the moduli and in this thesis we study two
situations where such a potential is induced. The first potential is
generated at particular points in the moduli space of CY manifolds
called conifold points . These points are also the points where the
topology changing transition, known as a conifold transition , from one
CY to another occurs. A study of this potential can therefore shed light
on both the moduli stabilisation problem and on the topological
degeneracy problem. In chapter id1 we explore the dynamics associated
with conifold transitions as a cosmology with an emphasis on whether the
transition can be dynamically completed and on the fate of the moduli
involved. We also look at the possibility of experimental signatures for
such a transition through the formation of cosmic strings. The second
way to generate a potential is through the introduction of non-vanishing
vacuum expectation values for the ten or eleven-dimensional
field-strengths of the form fields, known as fluxes . The presence of
the fluxes changes the compactification procedure in a way that
introduces a potential for the moduli. The fluxes also mean that in
order to satisfy the conditions for spontaneous compactification the
internal manifold is no longer a CY manifold but rather a more general
@xmath -structure manifold. In chapter id1 we study compactifications of
type IIA string theory on general manifolds with @xmath -structure with
fluxes present and in particular their potential for moduli
stabilisation. Finally in chapter id1 we perform a similar flux
compactification but for the case of M-theory.

## Chapter \thechapter Moduli Trapping and Conifold Transitions in Type
IIB String Theory

As discussed in chapter id1 , the problem of vacuum degeneracy in string
theory compactifications on CY manifolds splits into two parts, namely
the continuous degeneracy due to moduli fields and the discrete one due
to the large number of different topologies. It is well-known that there
are a number of different topology-changing processes [ 37 , 38 , 39 ]
in string theory that connect the moduli spaces associated with
topologically different CYs. A detailed understanding of these processes
can be considered as a first step towards resolving the topological
degeneracy. In the vicinity of the transition point a potential is
induced for the moduli thereby raising the possibility of a resolution
to the degeneracy of the moduli fields. In this chapter, we study a
certain type of topology-changing process, the conifold transition, as
an explicit time-dependent phenomenon [ 40 , 41 ] .

A milder type of topology changing transition which arises in the
context of CY compactifications is referred to as a flop transition . In
such a transition, a two-cycle within the CY space contracts to a point
and re-expands as another two-cycle, thereby leading to a topologically
distinct CY space with different intersection numbers. However, on
either side of the transition the Hodge numbers are the same and so the
spectrum of massless moduli is unchanged and only their interactions are
affected. Earlier work on black holes where the internal manifold
undergoes a flop as a function of radius is given in [ 42 ] . The study
of five-dimensional cosmology associated with a flop of the internal
space in M-theory was initiated in [ 43 ] and followed up in [ 44 , 45 ]
. There it was found that the tension of any M2-branes wrapping the
collapsing two-cycles caused the cycles to remain small, so the moduli
forced the CY to remain near the flop point. This ruled out a dynamical
realisation of a flop transition.

In the conifold transition, which we study here, a three-cycle on one
side of the transition collapses and then re-expands into a two-cycle,
thus changing the Hodge numbers of the CY. This results in a different
spectrum of massless moduli on either side of the transition [ 39 ] .
The transition proceeds through a space-time singularity termed the
conifold point. At least in the case where the CY manifolds are quintics
in @xmath the generic singularity is a conifold singularity and as such
they form an important part of the geometric structure [ 46 ] .

Although conifold points naively give a singular low energy effective
theory it is a remarkable property of string theory that they can be
understood in a well defined manner [ 47 ] . When calculating the
effective action for the low energy degrees of freedom one integrates
out the heavy modes, replacing their effect by altered couplings between
the light modes. It is only consistent to integrate out the modes which
are heavier than those present in the theory. As explained in [ 47 ] it
is precisely because some unseen light modes are being integrated out
that singularities appear in the effective action for a conifold
transition. These extra modes correspond to D3-branes wrapping the
collapsing three-cycle, as the cycle get smaller so these states become
lighter.

This chapter begins with a review of conifold geometry and the string
theory interpretation of the dynamics involved. In section 13 we
construct the effective theory that describes such a transition as a
gauged supergravity. We then proceed to study the dynamics of this
theory. In section 14 we consider an approximation where the fields are
all homogeneous throughout the three-dimensional space. We study the
possible outcomes of a dynamical conifold transition in terms of the
final state of the moduli as a function of the initial conditions. We
find that it is possible to complete the transition given the
appropriate initial conditions although for general initial conditions
the moduli fields are trapped at the conifold point. We follow this
initial study with a study of the case where the moduli fields may be
inhomogeneous in section 15 . We show that the inhomogeneities may help
or hinder the moduli trapping mechanism depending on their amplitudes.
We also study the possibility of cosmic strings forming after the
transition and find that the cosmic strings, or any other structure, do
not form. We summarise our findings in section 16 .

### 11 Review of conifold geometry

In this section we give a brief introduction to the geometry of conifold
transitions, see [ 48 , 49 , 37 , 38 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 ] for a more
complete discussion. It is possible to specify the geometry of CY
manifolds through vanishing complex polynomials @xmath . For example
consider complex projective four-space @xmath with homogeneous
co-ordinates @xmath . The co-ordinates are homogeneous in the sense that
points labelled by @xmath are identified with points @xmath where @xmath
is any complex number. Therefore a polynomial condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s are complex numbers, defines a three-dimensional
manifold since out of the five complex degrees of freedom one is fixed
by the homogeneity and one is fixed by the polynomial constraint. The
polynomial ( 11.1 ) in fact defines a CY manifold and the @xmath ’s
correspond to complex structure moduli. The manifold associated with
@xmath is not smooth for all values of the complex structure moduli. In
particular the points where @xmath are singular and the set of all
values of the complex structure moduli for which this occurs is known as
the discriminant locus. To see that this is singular at the points
@xmath recall that the vectors @xmath fill the tangent space of the
manifold and if they all vanish the tangent space has collapsed. In the
vicinity of the singularity the manifold is called a node and takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We have fixed the homogeneous co-ordinates by choosing
@xmath so that @xmath . This is the equation for a conifold singularity
[ 48 ] . It is singular at @xmath as @xmath at that point and it
describes a conical shape because if @xmath lies on the conifold ( 11.2
) then so does @xmath . To find the base of the cone we intersect it
with an @xmath of radius @xmath centred at the node, which is specified
by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Writing @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation @xmath defines an @xmath of radius @xmath , and @xmath
combined with @xmath gives an @xmath fibred over the @xmath . So, the
base is @xmath fibred by @xmath . As all such fibrations are trivial the
base of the conifold is the product @xmath . The two distinct ways to
make the conifold regular correspond to blowing up either the @xmath to
give the (small) resolution or by blowing up the @xmath to give the
deformation . The conifold transition then describes a CY going between
these two regular manifolds. We denote the conifold by @xmath , the
deformed manifold by @xmath , and the resolved manifold by @xmath . A
nice picture of the transition was presented in [ 48 ] and is given in
Fig. LABEL:fig:conifold . It shows the finite @xmath of the deformed
conifold shrinking to zero and then being replaced by an expanding
@xmath of the resolved conifold.

The conifold point is the location in the moduli space of CYs where the
manifold acquires a node. In fact, we shall see that for the space to
remain Kähler it must acquire a set of nodes. Consider a CY containing
@xmath such nodes which have been deformed , thereby introducing @xmath
three-cycles. Not all of these need be homologically independent so we
take there to be @xmath homology relations among them, giving @xmath
independent three-cycles. Now we pick the standard homology basis for
the independent three-cycles,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the intersection of two cycles. This introduces the
magnetic cycles @xmath , dual to the electric cycles @xmath . For this
discussion we shall consider the case where the collapsing cycles are
composed solely of electric cycles in which case, because of the @xmath
homology relations, each @xmath intersects more than one collapsing
cycle. Also, each vanishing cycle must be involved in at least one
homology relation if the manifold is to be Kahler, as we now show.

To see the effect of these homology relations consider the relationship
between @xmath and @xmath cycles. Fig. LABEL:fig:conifold shows a
particular @xmath -cycle three-sphere, @xmath , being blown down and
then replaced by a two-sphere. The magnetic dual of this three-cycle is
constructed as follows. The shaded region in @xmath is the “cap” @xmath
, which can be completed into a three-cycle when extended away from the
node. The picture shows that this cycle intersects @xmath and can be
chosen as its magnetic dual, @xmath . Also note that @xmath remains a
three-cycle at the node, but when the node is resolved by a two-sphere
then @xmath takes on the @xmath as a component of its boundary and so
becomes a three-chain. Each @xmath -cycle that @xmath intersects will
provide an @xmath component to the boundary of @xmath and as such these
two-spheres have a homology relation between them. Each of the magnetic
cycles provides a homology relation between the two-spheres and so we
find @xmath relations between the two-spheres of the resolved manifold
@xmath . We arrive at @xmath two-cycles with @xmath homology relations
giving @xmath independent two-cycles. The picture we are left with is
illustrated in Fig. LABEL:fig:cycle-chain where the magnetic cycle
@xmath touches the three-cycles @xmath , @xmath , @xmath which shrink to
zero and then turn into boundary two-spheres thereby converting the
cycle @xmath into a chain. If a @xmath -cycle had intersected only one
@xmath -cycle then in the resolved manifold this @xmath -chain would
have a single @xmath boundary so we would have for the Kähler form
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Which violates the Kähler condition, @xmath , and so the resulting
manifold can not be CY. This is why each vanishing cycle must be
involved in at least one homology relation.

In summary, we have that @xmath independent three-spheres collapse and
then expand as @xmath independent two-spheres. This is a change in the
topology of the CY and so is a change in the topology of space-time. The
interesting thing is that string theory admits a consistent,
non-singular, description of such a transition to which we now turn.

### 12 A stringy description

Singularities in physics usually manifest themselves as the breakdown of
a theory. To understand how string theory resolves the conifold
singularity we must first understand how the singularity manifests
itself. The breakdown occurs in the sigma model of the complex structure
moduli where the metric on the moduli space develops a curvature
singularity. To show this, and for the rest of this section, we consider
for simplicity the case of one degenerating cycle, i.e. a single
conifold point. Consider the case of a CY with a single three cycle
@xmath and its dual @xmath such that @xmath . The cohomology associated
with the cycles @xmath and @xmath is the two real three-forms @xmath and
@xmath respectively. Expanding the holomorphic three-form as in ( 9.31 )
we can define the usual periods in special co-ordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conifold point where the cycle @xmath vanishes corresponds to the
moduli value @xmath . To know the form of the moduli space metric we
need to know the form of the period @xmath . This is in general a
difficult problem, however near the conifold point in moduli space we
can determine an important property. To do this we consider the
monodromy properties of the moduli space around the conifold point.
There is a mathematical fact due to Lefshetz [ 54 ] that states that if
a cycle @xmath is vanishing at the conifold point then another cycle
@xmath undergoes monodromy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

upon transport around this point in moduli space. Consider a
parameterisation @xmath . Then near @xmath the period @xmath must have
the property that under a path in moduli space @xmath it transforms as
@xmath . Therefore @xmath must take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term in ( 12.3 ) is the cause of the metric singularity.
Substituting ( 12.3 ) into the expression for the Kähler potential on
the moduli space ( 9.32 ) we find that the metric takes the form ¹⁰ ¹⁰
10 Note that we have assumed that there are other periods in the CY that
are non-vanishing.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a curvature singularity for @xmath at a finite distance [ 52 ]
and therefore a breakdown of the theory.

Quantum string theory has an explanation for this singularity that also
leads to a resolution [ 47 ] . The idea is that there are states in
string theory that correspond to D3-branes wrapping the degenerating
three-cycle. The mass of these states is proportional to the volume of
the wrapped cycle which is given approximately by @xmath . In section 13
we calculate the mass exactly but for now the scale measure @xmath is
good enough. Near the conifold point these states become very light and
eventually massless at the conifold point itself. This means that it is
inconsistent to not include them in the low-energy effective theory
amounting to integrating out the states incorrectly. The breakdown of
the theory can then be attributed to having integrated out the one-loop
contribution that these states have to the quantum structure of the
complex structure moduli space. To see this recall that in @xmath
supergravity the gauge kinetic matrix, that is the coupling between the
different vector fields, is characterised by the second derivative of
the prepotential on the vector multiplet moduli space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

The monodromy of the period, and therefore the singularity, manifests
itself as a logarithm in the coupling of the gauge fields. Consider the
effect that a hypermultiplet of fields, that we take to be the D3
states, charged under the gauge field associated with the degenerating
cycle, i.e. the superpartner of @xmath , have on the self coupling of
that field @xmath through loop contributions. The @xmath -function for
the coupling is given by [ 55 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the energy scale and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sums are over the @xmath fermions and @xmath scalars in the
loop that are in the representations @xmath such that the generators
@xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

An @xmath hypermultiplet has two fermions and four scalars which for a
@xmath field have @xmath thereby giving @xmath . We can solve the @xmath
-function equation ( 12.6 ) to give the coupling at some energy scale
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now take this energy scale to be set by the energy scale that is the
lower limit of the integrating out of the states. Recall that the states
are a single hypermultiplet of mass scale @xmath thereby giving

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which from ( 12.5 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as required.

We have shown that the breakdown of the theory can be directly
attributed to incorrect integrating out of light states. This means that
all we have to do in order to make the theory non-singular and perfectly
consistent is include these states. The construction of such a theory is
the subject of the next section. Before we proceed with that it is
interesting, although somewhat speculative, to consider the physical
interpretation of the resolution of the conifold singularity by quantum
string theory. A topology change of space-time requires the fabric of
space-time to be somehow ’ripped’ and ’glued’ back together. It seems
that string theory allows such a process without breaking down. A
possible explanation for this might come from the fact that string
theory can only probe scales down to the self-dual scale. What happens
below this scale is as yet not understood, but with the hope that
eventually string theory will be a full theory of gravity and so strings
will form space-time, it is possible that its quantum nature on small
scales allows this kind of behaviour. The necessary presence of the D3
branes which wrap the singularity points to some sort of ’shielding’
mechanism of this process from the outside world.

### 13 The effective theory

In the previous section we showed how, by including D3-brane states,
string theory allows a non-singular description of the conifold
transition. In this section we construct an effective classical
four-dimensional supergravity to describe this transition. Before we
proceed it is important to understand the limitations of the
supergravity description. The string theory picture of the transition is
of a cycle reducing to the string scale before expanding out to a large
size again. The supergravity description of string theory is only
consistent at scales larger than the string scale and so must break down
during the transition near the point @xmath . Therefore it can never
give a complete description of the transition. If we are interested in
the question of whether the transition can be completed or not then the
supergravity description is still a useful tool. By a completed
transition we mean that the cycle has expanded out to a large size and
so the supergravity description is again valid. The picture we should
have then is of a supergravity description of dynamics towards and away
from the string scale with the limitation that at the string scale we
can not say much other than that the cycle is small, and not necessarily
of vanishing volume as the supergravity description naively states.
Another limitation is similar in nature and arises as a limitation of
what the supergravity can tell us regarding the formation of a black
hole from the kinetic energy of the brane states. The picture we have is
of a brane wrapping a cycle that is shrinking in size and therefore the
kinetic energy associated with the brane becomes concentrated in a
shrinking region. If this region is smaller that the Schwartchild radius
associated with the kinetic energy than a black hole will form. A
calculation of whether this process occurs or not is beyond the scope of
this thesis but the possibility of this phenomenon remains. There are
yet more limitations to a classical description of the process as
opposed to a quantum one. In fact it has been argued in [ 56 , 57 ] that
quantum effects play an important part in understanding the dynamics of
a conifold transition. We return to this point in section 14 where we
argue that these effects are mostly negligible with respect to the
conclusions drawn. Having outlined the important shortcomings of the
supergravity description we proceed with the construction of the
effective action whilst keeping in mind the conditions under which it is
valid.

The ten-dimensional actions that form our starting point are those of
type IIB supergravity and of a D3-brane. The type IIB action is reduced
as outlined in section 9 with the resulting four-dimensional action ( 9
). At this point it is interesting to explore the structure of the gauge
fields of the theory. Recall that in the field expansion ( 9.10 ) there
are two types of gauge fields in four dimensions @xmath and @xmath ,
with respective field-strengths @xmath and @xmath , which we stated can
be eliminated using the self-duality of @xmath . Imposing self duality
@xmath on the field expansion gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the action of the Hodge star on the basis forms is most neatly
given in terms of matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath defined as
functions of the gauge-kinetic matrix @xmath [ 14 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Substituting the expression ( 13.1 ) into the action ( 9 ) gives the
gauge field terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows that the field strength @xmath is the magnetic dual of
@xmath . This understanding is important when describing the charges of
the states arising from the D3-branes to which we now turn.

#### 13.1 The light states

The states arising from a D3-brane are a hypermultiplet. This has not
been proved directly but can be inferred from the role they play in the
transition as we now show. First we proceed to calculate the mass and
charge of these states by considering the action of a D3-brane [ 4 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the brane tension is related to the ten-dimensional Planck
constant as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath denotes the pullback of the space-time metric onto the
world-volume of the brane over which the integration is performed. We
now consider the brane to be wrapped on some general three-cycle @xmath
which we can decompose in terms of the basis of three-cycles on the
manifold @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

The D3-brane wraps the cycle in such a way as to minimise its volume
which in mathematical notation means it wraps a supersymmetric special
Lagrangian three-cycle [ 58 , 59 , 60 ] . Such cycles are calibrated by
the form @xmath , for some constant @xmath , and saturate the following
bound on their volume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the expansions for @xmath ( 9.31 ) and @xmath ( 9.10 ) we can
perform the spatial integration in ( 13.5 ) to find that the D3-brane
action becomes, after the Weyl re-scalings of ( 9.16 ) and ( 9.17 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the action for a particle of mass

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

charged under the gauge fields @xmath and @xmath , where we interpret
@xmath as the proper time of the particle. This relation between mass
and charge is what is to be expected for an @xmath extremal black hole [
61 ] . This black hole, or particle, is a dyon , i.e. a particle charged
both electrically and magnetically. Constructing theories with dyons is
a difficult task and so from here on we take the brane to be wrapped on
the purely electric cycles @xmath . In the case of a single cycle the
mass formula degenerates at the conifold point as discussed in section
12 .

#### 13.2 The effective supergravity

In order to construct the effective supergravity description of the
transition we use the constrained geometric structure imposed by the
@xmath supersymmetry reviewed in section 8 . The new states are included
as hypermultiplets and since they are charged under the gauge fields of
the vector multiplets we expect a gauged supergravity. We address the
construction of the supergravity in two parts. The first deals with the
hypermultiplets sector of the theory and the second deals with the
vector multiplet sector.

##### 13.2.1 The quaternionic geometry and the gauging

The brane states should combine with the closed string hypermultiplets
in table 1 to span a quaternionic manifold. The gauging of the brane
states has to be done with respect to the Killing vectors on this
manifold and so a knowledge of the possible Killing vectors is required.
This is a difficult task because we do not know the geometry of the
manifold specified by the brane states nor that of the other
hypermultiplets. A further complication arises due to the fact that a
quaternionic manifold can not be a product of two quaternionic
submanifolds [ 44 ] and so there must be mixing between the brane
hypermultiplets and the string hypermultiplets. The strategy we employ
is a perturbative expansion in powers of the expectation value of the
hypermultiplets in units of the Planck mass. It is possible to think of
this expansion as an expansion in the effects of gravity since for
global @xmath supersymmetry we know that the hypermultiplets span a flat
hyperKähler manifold. To first order in this expansion we therefore
expect that the brane states span a flat submanifold of the total
quaternionic manifold. The constraint which provides a check on this
statement comes from the mass of the states calculated in the previous
section. Since the mass is given purely in terms of the complex
structure moduli, which are vector multiplets, we know that certainly at
that level there is no coupling to the hypermultiplet states. This
allows us to, perturbatively, consistently truncate the string
hypermultiplets and study the subsector of the theory formed by the
brane states and the complex structure moduli. We proceed to show more
precisely that one recovers the correct mass term with this approach
shortly. First it is worth noting that we do not expect the higher order
terms to alter the qualitative behaviour of the dynamics. For
example,the initial study of [ 43 ] on flop transitions made the same
approximation which was amended in [ 45 ] [ 44 ] but lead to the same
structure. More recently, dynamics of conifolds transitions in the
context of M-theory were examined with both a first order approximation
and using an explicit example of a full quaternionic manifold (a Wolf
space) [ 62 ] and the conclusion that the dynamics are unaffected was
reached.

The hypermultiplets manifold of the brane states is spanned by real
scalar fields @xmath . The index @xmath ranges over the number of
different hypermultiplets where each brane state wrapping a cycle
corresponds to a separate hypermultiplet. The index @xmath runs over the
component fields of the hypermultiplet. The flat geometry approximation
then states that each hypermultiplet spans a submanifold with a flat
metric @xmath . Since there are @xmath homology relations among the
@xmath wrapped cycles there are @xmath independent wrapped cycles. Each
independent cycle has associated with it a vector multiplet composed of
a complex structure modulus @xmath and a vector field @xmath with the
index @xmath running over the subset of all the three-cycles formed by
the independent degenerating cycles @xmath . The hypermultiplets may be
charged under any of the electric vector gauge fields @xmath with
charges @xmath where @xmath are integers. To perform the gauging we must
identify the Killing vectors on each hypermultiplet submanifold with
respect to which we can gauge. As our metric is taken to be flat we have
a choice of rotation or translation Killing vectors. The constraint for
the potential to vanish when the @xmath do singles out the rotation
Killing vectors as the relevant choice,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an anti-symmetric matrix which we take to be the same in
each hypermultiplet, i.e. we gauge the same Killing vector within each
hypermultiplet submanifold. It is easy to show that ( 13.11 ) solves the
Killing vector equation for flat space

  -- -- -- ---------
           (13.12)
  -- -- -- ---------

To derive the prepotentials from the Killing vectors we first introduce
the ’t Hooft symbols [ 63 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

that are defined on the hyperKähler submanifold for each hypermultiplet.
Useful relations between the ’t Hooft symbols can be found in the
appendix. We can parametrise the three complex structures on the
manifold as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is straight forward to check that this expression satisfies the
quaternionic algebra ( 8.21 ). The set of hyperKähler forms is therefore
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We wish to use ( 8.28 ) to derive the prepotentials associated with the
Killing vector, for a flat metric this reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first thing to note is that ( 13.17 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is worth looking a little closer at the rotations we are considering.
The rotations are in @xmath which is locally equivalent to @xmath and
the ’t Hooft symbol @xmath is a mapping between a vector in the first
@xmath to self-dual two-tensors in @xmath , with @xmath mapping the
other @xmath to anti self-dual tensors. Then we see that the rotations
are rotations in one of the @xmath s and we can expand them as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a unit vector. Explicitly we can take the matrix @xmath
to be of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with all other components vanishing. Integrating equation ( 13.17 ) we
arrive at the prepotentials

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have set the integration constants to zero as they would lead
to a potential even in the absence of the light states. The relevant
quantities in the potential can be calculated to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13.22)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The mass terms for the hypermultiplet states can be read off ( 8.26 ) to
give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which exactly matches the formula derived from the brane calculation (
13.10 ) for the case of electric cycles only with the identifications

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the wrapping number for the cycle associated with the
hypermultiplet index @xmath . This concludes our analysis of the
hypermultiplet sector of the theory.

##### 13.2.2 The special Kähler geometry

The vector multiplet sector of the theory can be completely determined
in terms of the prepotential @xmath of the special Kähler manifold
spanned by the scalar components that are the complex structure moduli.
The precise details of the prepotential depend on the CY in question and
are difficult to calculate. There are some general facts that apply to
all the prepotentials that can be used to determine important
properties. The knowledge we have of the complex structure moduli
prepotential on CY manifolds comes from mirror symmetry [ 52 ] . The
Kähler moduli are deformations associated with the volume of the cycles
which means that their sigma model Kähler potential is given by the
volume of the CY. This allowed us to write the cubic form ( 9.34 ) for
the prepotential. This prepotential is only accurate in the large
volume, or large Kähler moduli, limit and receives corrections, in type
IIA, from instanton effects that come into effect at small volumes.
Applying mirror symmetry leads to a cubic prepotential for the complex
structure moduli in type IIB which is valid for large complex structure
and receives corrections at small complex structure. One major
correction we have already encountered is the logarithmic term that
arises from the monodromy properties. Having showed that this correction
arises from incorrect integrating out of light states, by including the
light states in the theory this correction is accounted for. The other
corrections take the form of an analytic polynomial going up to cubic
terms [ 52 ] . As we are considering behaviour near the conifold point,
which is at small complex structure, we can consider a perturbative
expansion in the complex structure moduli. We therefore take a
prepotential of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have introduced a constant coupling matrix @xmath and the
indices run over the degenerating cycles plus one @xmath . In the
expansion we dropped the cubic terms through the approximation and the
linear term as a simplifying assumption. We do not expect this
simplification to alter the dynamics of the transition qualitatively as
it doesn’t change the essential features of the action. Constant terms
in the prepotential do not contribute to the action as it only depends
on derivatives of the prepotential and so can be omitted. The
prepotential ( 13.26 ) can also be thought of as specifying the (mirror)
CY manifold through its intersection numbers. Of course it is a
difficult task to prove that a CY exists with these intersection
numbers.

Having specified the prepotential we can use the constraints from
supersymmetry discussed in section 8 to write down the full resulting
supergravity. We truncate the fields that do not feature in the
transition which are all the matter hypermultiplets, the complex
structure moduli that do not degenerate and their associated vector
fields, and also the graviphoton @xmath . In special co-ordinates @xmath
the action reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.28)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we have the gauge covariant derivatives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.29)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One finds that in order to have positive kinetic terms for the scalar
fields while still satisfying ( 8.6 ) the coupling matrix @xmath must
have signature (+,-,-,…) [ 61 , 19 ] .

To summarise, the action ( 13.27 ) describes the effective theory of
@xmath simultaneously degenerating independent cycles, with associated
complex structure moduli @xmath , @xmath , and vector fields @xmath ,
where @xmath is the number of cycles and @xmath is the number of
homology relations between them. The cycles are wrapped by D3 branes
that give rise to light states denoted by @xmath where here the double
index notation denotes the number of cycles @xmath and hypermultiplet
components @xmath . The free parameters of the action are the matrix
components of @xmath . The action ( 13.27 ) is non-singular even at the
conifold point and so we expect the complete transition to be described
by it. So far we have concentrated on the shrinking three-cycles but
that is only half the transition, there are also the expanding
two-cycles on the other side of the transition the dynamics of which
should also be included in this action. The complete model of the
transition in terms of the effective low energy theory is described in
the next section.

#### 13.3 Completing the transition

Consider how the conifold transition described in section 11 should
appear from the point of view of the low energy effective theory. The
relation between the CY topology and the matter spectrum is such that
three-cycles correspond to complex structure moduli, and each
independent three-cycle gives a vector multiplet, while the two-cycles
correspond to Kähler moduli and each generates a hypermultiplet. Recall
that the conifold transition then sees @xmath three-cycles @xmath
degenerate with @xmath homology relations and are resolved to @xmath
independent two-cycles. We therefore have @xmath massless vector
multiplets disappearing and @xmath massless hypermultiplets appearing.
To see the transition explicitly in the field theory it is helpful to
simplify the scenario to the case where there is a single homology
relation between the degenerating cycles @xmath , such that the sum of
the cycles is homologically trivial

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.30)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In terms of the wrapping numbers or the charges with respect to the
gauge fields this reads as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.31)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that the massless field spectrum far from the transition point,
when the light states can be ignored @xmath , consists of @xmath complex
structure moduli. Near the transition point the moduli @xmath and so the
states @xmath become light and now both fields provide an effective mass
for each other. The conifold point is where the moduli degenerate @xmath
and at this point the mass term for the brane states vanishes. The term
that remains in the potential is the one proportional to @xmath .
Inspecting the formula ( 13.22 ) it can be seen that this potential has
a flat direction along

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The flat direction parameters @xmath parametrise a single hypermultiplet
of fields which is then precisely the hypermultiplet we have gained by
the single homology relation. So, as first discussed in [ 53 , 46 ] ,
the brane states combine to form the new hypermultiplet. This is an
interesting phenomenon because the hypermultiplet is interpreted as a
string state while the brane states are extremal black hole states. This
is an example of what is termed a string/black hole transition and hints
at a deep connection between the two. The above argument can be
generalised to the case of @xmath homology relations by counting degrees
of freedom.

So far we have explained how we gain a hypermultiplet but we also should
lose @xmath vector multiplets. It is easy to understand this as a Higgs
transition since the hypermultiplets are charged under the gauge fields
and subsequent to the transition they pick up a vev @xmath . Explicitly
the mass terms arise as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.33)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Given the description of the transition in terms of a field theory
picture we can investigate its dynamics by considering the dynamics of
the action ( 13.27 ). In terms of the geometry the sizes of the cycles
are given by @xmath and @xmath and so a completed transition would take
the form of a configuration with @xmath and @xmath . We can investigate
if this state can be reached from different initial conditions and this
is the topic of the next section.

### 14 Cosmology of conifold transitions: The homogeneous case

In this section we study the dynamics of conifold transitions as a
cosmology. We make the simplifying approximation that all the fields are
homogeneous and isotropic throughout space-time, which means that there
are no gauge fields induced through spatial currents. The more general
case where the fields may be inhomogeneous is discussed in the next
section. We take the space-time metric to be Friedmann-Robertson-Walker
(FRW) with flat spatial sections

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cosmological scale factor. The equations of motion
for the action ( 13.27 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

The connection on the complex structure moduli space is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also recover the two constraint equations of charge and energy
conservation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which provide checks on the accuracy of the simulations. Note that (
14.7 ) is expressing the statement that there are no electric currents
and so no induced gauge fields. Therefore in the simulations we have
zero charge density, which corresponds to no net brane wrapping in the
string theory picture i.e. same number of branes as anti-branes. We
shall perform our simulations in units where @xmath .

The difficulty in studying the equations of motion lies in determining
the initial conditions. The initial conditions for the complex structure
moduli correspond to their initial value in moduli space. At large
complex structure, where we can ignore any brane wrapping effects, they
are flat directions and so no particular value is singled out. In our
scenario we consider the case where they are small @xmath as this is the
situation where the conifold transition dynamics come into play. The
initial value for the brane states is a difficult proposition since we
have little knowledge of the mechanism by which such state are
generated. The vev of the states @xmath can be thought of as a measure
of the number of brane-antibrane pairs wrapping the three-cycle. There
are two main contenders for mechanisms that can generate these states.
The first is a generalisation of the string gas scenario [ 64 , 65 ]
where the idea is that the very early universe realised a ’gas’ of
branes wrapping cycles. In terms of the transition, the initial
conditions that this scenario leads to are non-trivial vevs for the
@xmath states, but not to any prediction as to what this vev might be.
The second mechanism by which such states can be created is through
quantum particle production [ 56 , 57 ] . However, as we show following
the simulations, we expect such quantum effects to be negligible in the
scenario we consider. The ambiguities in the initial conditions suggest
that a study of this system should attempt to classify the regions of
initial conditions for which the different possible final states may
arise and it is this approach that we adopt. The possible classes of
final states for the system can be classified into three cases. Case I
sees @xmath and corresponds to the conifold point never being reached.
Case II is where @xmath and is the case where the CY is exactly at the
conifold point. Case III has @xmath and corresponds to the conifold
transition completing. Our study therefore comprises of determining if
all three cases are realisable, and if so, the initial conditions they
require.

To fix the theory that we explore we consider the case of two
degenerating cycles with one homology relation between them such that
their sum is homologically trivial. This gives a field content of one
complex structure modulus @xmath and two sets of hypermultiplets @xmath
and @xmath with opposite charges @xmath and @xmath . For this case we
take a diagonal coupling matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find that all the three possible outcomes can be realised given the
appropriate initial conditions. Figure LABEL:fig:homI shows the initial
conditions and subsequent evolution of the moduli that leads to a
realisation of case I. Only the first component of the first
hypermultiplet is shown as all the other components followed the same
evolution. We see that initially both @xmath and @xmath are non zero
though the defining character of the initial conditions is that @xmath .
Since the fields provide an effective mass term for each other they are
both driven to zero. In this case @xmath reaches zero first and
oscillates about it. The oscillations are damped by the Hubble expansion
and so decay in amplitude quickly. The rate of decay of the amplitudes,
crucially, is faster than the rate of decay of the @xmath towards zero
which leads to a system that asymptotically tends towards the outcome of
case I. Hubble friction therefore plays an important role in this
scenario as without the damping the oscillations would continue to drive
@xmath towards zero. Therefore we have shown that if there are not
enough brane states excited it is possible that the conifold point is
never reached.

Figure LABEL:fig:homII shows the realisation of case II. The initial
conditions are of the type @xmath . In this case we see the cycle being
driven towards zero volume and then the system sets into oscillations
about the conifold point. The oscillations are very lightly damped, as
the energy is near vanishing, and seem chaotic in nature. This is a
realisation of moduli trapping. The complex structure modulus is trapped
at the conifold point with a mass given by the frequency of oscillations
about the conifold point. This is a strong form of moduli trapping, the
modulus @xmath is never a flat direction. If the system was more heavily
damped, maybe by some outside energy densities, eventually the fields
would settle at zero and the potential would vanish. This would be a
weaker form of moduli trapping since the @xmath would strictly be a flat
direction although it could be argued that because before the potential
vanishes the point @xmath is an attractor, it is a favoured point in
moduli space. In this scenario it is also possible for the @xmath to be
trapped by quantum fluctuations in the fields @xmath giving them a vev
and and creating a potential for @xmath .

Figure LABEL:fig:homIII shows how a conifold transition may be
completed. The initial conditions needed are @xmath and @xmath . The
second condition can be parameterised in terms of a ’Higgsing’ parameter

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (14.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The order of magnitude needed to complete a transition with @xmath is
@xmath . The combination of this tight restriction and the small value
of @xmath can be regarded as a very small region of parameter space. For
such initial conditions we see that the Hubble friction leads to
oscillations that decay sufficiently fast to allow @xmath to reach zero
while @xmath has yet to reach zero. The plot also shows @xmath which
follows @xmath thereby showing explicitly how the Higgs branch is
realised. The asymptotic value that @xmath tends to is the size of the
two-cycle on the other side of the transition @xmath . It is important
to highlight the role Hubble friction plays once more. It is only if
there is enough friction that the oscillations of @xmath decay quickly
enough and therefore we can draw the conclusion that in Minkowski space
it is not possible to complete such a transition. Conversely with some
background energy density, much larger values of @xmath can lead to a
completed transition. In terms of moduli trapping this scenario strongly
traps the complex structure moduli who gain a mass of order @xmath , but
leaves a remaining flat direction that is the value of @xmath or the
size of the two-cycle. We return to this flat direction in section 15
where we show that once inhomogeneities in the fields are included it
too picks up non-trivial dynamics.

The scenario of two degenerating cycles that has been explored can be
extended to a larger number of degenerating cycles and we expect that
the dynamics governing the wrapped cycles would be qualitatively the
same. There is however the non-trivial extension of considering the
dynamics of the cycles that are not participating in the transition. In
the scenario we have considered there is no coupling between these
cycles and the degenerating ones and so the two systems can be
separated. It is possible to induce coupling between the cycles by
considering a non-diagonal coupling matrix @xmath ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 This would
correspond to non-trivial intersection numbers in the mirror picture. .
To see this consider the equation of motion for the complex structure
moduli ( 14.3 ) with a general coupling matrix where we only impose
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (14.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As hypermultiplets are only charged under the gauge fields associated
with the wrapped three-cycles, one finds that those @xmath , where the
index @xmath corresponds to an unwrapped cycle, are flat directions in
the potential @xmath . To see this, note from ( 13.22 ) and ( 13.23 )
that @xmath , @xmath vanish for those indices @xmath not associated to
the charges. However it can also be seen that allowing terms in the
(inverse) coupling matrix that couple the wrapped moduli to the
unwrapped ones leads to a linear forcing term for those moduli or an
effective quadratic potential. For example, consider an unwrapped
modulus @xmath along with the original @xmath , but now we move away
from minimal coupling taking the coupling matrix to be of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (14.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Fig. LABEL:fig:couple shows the evolution of both the complex structure
moduli @xmath , @xmath , along with the representative component for the
hypermultiplets @xmath . We see that the evolution of the wrapped cycle
corresponding to @xmath has created a potential for the unwrapped cycle
given by @xmath . Unlike the case for @xmath , the value around which
@xmath eventually oscillates seems random and again highly dependent on
initial condition. In this particular case it is repelled rather than
attracted to the conifold point. It is therefore difficult to draw any
general conclusions regarding the dynamics of such cycles but rather
state that scenarios exist where they also participate in the
transition.

The study of the moduli dynamics performed was purely classical. There
are also quantum effects that play a role in the vicinity of the
conifold. More specifically it was pointed out in [ 56 , 57 ] that as
@xmath oscillates about the conifold point it produces particles
associated with the brane states that are light in the vicinity of the
conifold point, these in turn drive @xmath further towards the conifold
point thereby trapping it. This is a slightly different scenario to the
one discussed above in that instead of beginning at an initial
configuration of stationary @xmath and some non-zero vev for @xmath the
idea is to start with zero vev for @xmath and a (fine tuned) initial
velocity for @xmath in the direction of the conifold point. If both
@xmath and @xmath are near the conifold point quantum fluctuations
create particle pairs of each type thereby keeping them at the conifold
point even though classically there are flat directions away from the
conifold point. We should therefore consider if these effects modify our
conclusions from the classical study. Case I is the case where @xmath
never reaches the conifold point, this is, almost by definition,
different to the scenario considered above and we therefore do not
expect any modifications. Case II is the case where both fields are
oscillating about the conifold. At this point quantum effects of
particle production do come into play but work both ways @xmath thereby
preserving the oscillations. This therefore does not change the strong
moduli trapping scenario but when eventually the oscillations do decay,
and we reach the weak moduli trapping scenario, it is quantum
fluctuations about the conifold point that would act as the force
trapping the moduli. Case III is the case where the transition is
completed. Quantum particle production in this scenario is only in the
direction @xmath since the particles associated with @xmath are massive
and anyway @xmath is not oscillating. Therefore quantum effects
facilitate the completion of the transition by increasing the
expectation value of @xmath and providing added friction on the
oscillations of @xmath . We conclude from this discussion that a
classical analysis of the transition captures all the essential features
of the dynamics with a possible small effect that helps complete the
transition.

The scenarios explored in this section should be thought of as actual
cosmologies. Unfortunately, cosmologically they are rather
uninteresting, since none of the situations discussed produced cosmic
acceleration. There are no predictions of possible observations that
such a transition could have occurred in the early universe. It is also
unrealistic to consider fields that are homogeneous throughout space on
a cosmological scale. In the next section we consider the more realistic
case where the fields have spatial fluctuations and explore the effects
that this has on the transition and on the possibility of generating a
more interesting cosmology.

### 15 Cosmology of conifold transitions: The inhomogeneous case

In this section we consider the generalisation of the cosmology studied
in the previous section to the case where the fields have spatial
inhomogeneities. The reason for considering such perturbations is that
any realistic system is only correlated up to the correlation length of
the system. There are a number of physical factors that may induce
spatial perturbations in the fields such as quantum fluctuations, finite
temperature fluctuations or inhomogeneous effects in the brane wrapping
mechanism. For the case where they arise from thermal fluctuations we
can get an order of magnitude estimate of @xmath . However, generically
it is difficult to quantify the size and nature of the perturbations and
so as an initial study we parameterise them and study their effects in
terms of those parameters. Three-dimensional cosmological simulations
incorporating these effects are performed in section 15.2 . An important
consequence of the inhomogeneities is that they induce spatial currents
which in turn induce gauge fields. This means that we can explore the
cosmology associated with the gauge field energy density and in
particular look for stable solitonic solutions that could form a
possible cosmological signature of such a transition.

#### 15.1 Cosmic strings from conifold transitions

The possibility of the formation of cosmic strings following a conifold
transition was first raised in [ 53 ] . To see the motivation for this
consider the case of a transition with two degenerating cycles and a
homology relation between them. After the transition is completed there
is a three-chain @xmath connecting the two two-cycles @xmath and @xmath
with the cycles forming its boundary. Now the total space in the CY
compactification is of the form @xmath where @xmath denotes the
uncompactified space and @xmath denotes the CY. Consider two points in
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , separated by a line @xmath . Then it is
possible to form a three-cycle @xmath in the complete space by joining
the four three-chains @xmath , @xmath constructed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the same three-chain with the opposite orientation.
The three-cycle @xmath looks like the line @xmath when projected onto
the uncompactified space. Now the theory has states that correspond to
D3-branes wrapping @xmath which would look like strings in space-time.
Recalling that the three-chain @xmath corresponds to a magnetic
three-cycle before the transition we see that a brane wrapping it should
be identified with a monopole and so the string can be understood to be
confining monopole anti-monopole pairs.

This stringy picture has a realisation in the low energy effective field
theory as cosmic string solutions that arise from the Higgsing of the
gauge fields [ 53 , 66 ] . Consider parameterising the hypermultiplets
as two complex scalar fields @xmath with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The vacuum solution ( 13.32 ) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

There is then a finite energy configuration of the fields given by the
constraint that the total energy should vanish at infinity. More
precisely working in cylindrical coordinates @xmath we look for a
cylindrically symmetric static solution that has the property that as
@xmath the total energy vanishes. The solution takes the asymptotic form
as @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are arbitrary complex numbers and @xmath is real. This is
the string solution and it has quantised flux @xmath .

The existence of the solution should mean that inducing a gauge field
density should lead to stable cosmic strings. However, as was shown in [
66 ] this need not always be the case. Consider the axio-symmetric
solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions. This is the
lowest energy state with respect to the potential and has vanishing
potential energy. The energy per unit length of the string is then
composed of the gradient energy of the fields and the magnetic flux
energy. Now for the family of expanding solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (15.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

the energy per unit length @xmath scales as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (15.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the gradient energy and @xmath denotes the magnetic
flux energy. We can lower the energy by letting @xmath which means that
the core of the strings naturally wants to expand thereby losing its
confining nature.

We have shown that because the potential energy of the strings vanishes
they have an instability towards expanding their core. Such an
instability deforms the string configuration of ( 15.1 ) to more of a
spherical ’blob’ configuration with the length of @xmath being
comparable to the length of @xmath . However, the simulations of section
14 showed that the potential energy does not vanish until the transition
is completed and even then oscillations persist about the zero potential
configurations. There therefore remains the possibility that some
strings (or even blobs) do form and eventually decay. The study of this
process forms part of this section.

#### 15.2 Cosmological simulations

The scenario we consider in this study is the case of two degenerating
cycles with one homology relation. The theory we work with is a gauged
@xmath super Yang-Mills with the action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (15.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (15.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we have renamed @xmath . The charge @xmath is unity in our units but
we leave it in so that we can study the case where the scalars decouple
from the gauge fields by setting it to zero. The action ( 15.8 ) differs
form the one studied in the homogeneous case in that it is not a
supergravity. This is done because the simulations are much more
involved which means we should consider the simplest theory that
captures the relevant physical processes. We now claim that the action
can be supplemented by Hubble friction in the equations of motion such
that it captures all the essential features of the physics involved. The
above action differs from the supergravity we considered in the
homogeneous case in two ways. The first is that the Ricci scalar is
missing. This term would lead to Hubble friction terms @xmath in the
equations of motion, with @xmath given by the Friedman equation. We
therefore include those Hubble friction terms in the numerical equations
of motion. The second is that the metric on the moduli space of @xmath
is taken to be flat while in the full supergravity it is not and would
have to be calculated from the complex structure prepotential. However,
in this thesis we mainly consider the evolution of the light states
@xmath rather than the evolution of @xmath and fix @xmath to be at the
conifold point. In that case the metric on the space does not play a
role. Furthermore the metric is well approximated as flat near the
conifold point with deviations from flatness leaving the behaviour of
@xmath qualitatively unaltered [ 62 ] , and so we may consider this
action to be valid near the conifold point in the moduli space of @xmath
.

The simulations of the transition are full three-dimensional simulations
using techniques from Hamiltonian lattice gauge theories [ 67 ] . The
usual lattice link and plaquette operators are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (15.10)
     @xmath      (15.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively, where @xmath is the lattice spacing, the label @xmath
takes the values @xmath corresponding to the three spatial dimensions,
and @xmath are the gauge fields (the gauge choice @xmath has been made).
By @xmath , we denote the nearest lattice point in the @xmath direction
from @xmath . The plaquette operators are related to the gauge field
strength [ 67 ] , and the lattice link operator is used to define
discrete covariant derivatives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath corresponds to both @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath to
@xmath and @xmath . Using the lattice link and plaquette operators, we
transform ( 15.8 ) into a discretised Hamiltonian and derive the
discretised equations of motion in the standard way. These equations
were solved numerically in a cubic lattice using a staggered leapfrog
method. Several lattice spacings, time steps and cube sizes were used in
order to check the code, and the results were fairly insensitive to
these parameters. The actual plots shown in this work are for a @xmath
cube with a ratio of time step to lattice spacing @xmath . We also
monitored Gauss’s Law throughout the simulations to check the stability
of the code.

There are two main ingredients in the simulations that are not very well
constrained from the model: initial conditions and the damping term. The
approach to the initial conditions is the same as for the homogeneous
case in that we consider the initial conditions that lead to the
possible classes of final states. There is an added input parameter
however which is the inhomogeneities in the fields. The consequences of
starting with inhomogeneities in the fields @xmath or their velocity was
investigated and the most effective way of understanding the effect on
the transition was by starting with zero velocity and inhomogeneities in
the scalar fields @xmath . Starting with zero fields but non-zero
velocities resembles the case studied after a few time steps.
Furthermore, for the study of formation of defects, we rely on previous
works showing that the evolution of related systems is fairly
insensitive to the initial condition in the formation of defects [ 68 ,
69 ] . Therefore the initial condition chosen is given by a homogeneous
value of the scalar fields @xmath that is perturbed by some
inhomogeneities. For the homogeneous case the Hubble damping was an
important ingredient in the evolution of the system. We inherit that
result, and include it in our simulation by adding a damping term
proportional to the square root of the average energy density of the
simulation.

Out of the possible cases of final states discussed in section 14 we are
mainly interested in the possibility of completing the transition. The
case where @xmath never reaches the conifold point is rather trivial and
the case where both @xmath and @xmath are sitting at the conifold point
does not contain any interesting dynamics.

From the homogeneous case we know that there are three important
parameters in the initial conditions of the system that determine
whether the transition is completed. They are the initial vev for @xmath
, @xmath , the initial vev for the @xmath , @xmath (where the subscript
@xmath denotes averaging over space) and the initial value for the
’Higgsing’ parameter @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (15.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to complete a transition we need a configuration of small or
vanishing @xmath , large @xmath and small @xmath . We do not concern
ourselves with the dynamics of @xmath as these are quite simple and
remain unchanged under inhomogeneities. We therefore set @xmath for the
purpose of looking at the possibility of completing a transition whilst
keeping in mind that an initial non-zero value for @xmath would make the
transition less likely to complete.

By introducing spatial inhomogeneities in the values of the fields we
introduce a new important parameter @xmath that measures the effect the
spatial inhomogeneities have on the Higgsing parameter. The initial
configurations we chose to simulate are given by a homogeneous vev for
the @xmath given by @xmath , and superimposed on that, some random
inhomogeneities:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (15.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath measures the size of the inhomogeneities and the unit
vector, @xmath , randomly distributes the inhomogeneities among the
hypermultiplet members. Defining

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (15.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can introduce a total ’Higgsing’ parameter, @xmath , to indicate the
effect of inhomogeneities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (15.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is calculated using the homogeneous part of @xmath . Due to
the uncertainties in the origin of the perturbations, we encode the
effects of inhomogeneities in the parameter @xmath , and study different
ranges for its initial value.

Consider what kind of effects inhomogeneities have on the system. There
is an increase in the Hubble friction due to the increase in the energy
of the system through the contribution of gradient energies. Also
currents induce gauge fields, and finally we see that @xmath contributes
positively to @xmath . The last two effects make it more difficult to
complete the transition, as the gauge fields have an energy density
which is minimised at @xmath and so drive the @xmath towards zero, and a
larger @xmath means it takes longer to reach the Higgs phase. The
increase in damping however helps complete the transition as was
discussed in section 14 . We therefore expect two different regimes to
emerge where one effect dominates over the other. The regimes can be
parameterised as

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      (15.17)
     @xmath      @xmath      (15.18)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

In case I larger perturbations help complete the transition, as
increasing the fluctuations increases the gradient energy and so the
Hubble damping, slowing down the fields and enabling them to settle at a
non zero value. In case II the fluctuations are large to start with,
increasing them further drives the @xmath towards the conifold point. We
can see this behaviour in figure LABEL:fig:inhomdelta . The figures show
the spatial average of the quantity @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (15.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

against time for various sizes of @xmath and @xmath . The vev of @xmath
followed the same type of evolution as @xmath with both oscillating
about each other. Figure LABEL:fig:inhomdelta shows how the possibility
of completing the transition is manifested in the field theory. As
occurred in the homogeneous case, the vev of @xmath tends towards a
non-zero asymptotic value that corresponds to the size of the two-cycle
on the other side. The magnitude of the asymptotic value determines
whether the transition is completed or the moduli are trapped. The two
lines with @xmath ( @xmath ) correspond to case I and we see that
increasing @xmath increases the asymptotic value for @xmath thereby
helping complete the transition with a large two-cycle on the other
side. This behaviour can be expected to continue for the limit @xmath
which is the homogeneous case explored in section 14 . We saw in that
case that the Higgsing parameter needed to complete a transition is many
orders of magnitude smaller than what is needed here. The two lines with
@xmath ( @xmath ) correspond to case II and here we see that larger
@xmath drives the asymptotic value further towards zero and so a small
size for the cycle.

The effect of gauge fields is shown in Figure LABEL:fig:inhomgauge . We
see plots for various perturbation sizes with the charge of the
hypermultiplet fields, @xmath , on and off. We see that coupling the
hypermultiplet to the gauge fields that are naturally induced always
drives their vev towards zero thereby helping to trap them and hindering
the completion of the transition. The plots shown are for the case where
the initial conditions are of no gauge fields and so the gauge fields
present are the ones induced through the currents generated since the
beginning of the simulation. There is of course the possibility of some
initial gauge field density and this would amplify the effects shown in
the simulations.

Having shown that there are two regimes with quite different behaviour
we might speculate on which is the more physical. The first regime is
when @xmath (case I). Physically this situation corresponds to the case
where the spatial averages of the number of branes wrapping each of the
two cycles differ substantially and the spatial perturbations of the
number of wrapping branes are small in comparison to this difference. It
is difficult to think of a scenario in string theory where such an
initial condition could come about. The reason for this is that the two
cycles are homologically related and so both must degenerate
simultaneously. Given that they have an equal size the masses of states
wrapping them are also equal and so it is unlikely that there will be
much more of one than the other. The second regime occurs when @xmath
(case II). Physically this scenario corresponds to the case where the
difference in the number of wrapping branes arises primarily due to
spatial perturbations. This is a more likely scenario and in fact should
be the case generically as it simply corresponds to the finite
correlation length of the system. In this case the inhomogeneities help
to trap the remaining moduli thereby stopping the transition from
completing.

The final issue to address is the possible formation of structure in the
magnetic field. In the simulations magnetic energy density was induced
through the currents. Observing level surfaces of the magnetic energy
density, we aimed at looking for structures within the field. However,
we were unable to find any shell of constant magnetic field. What we
found was that the scalar field would form lumps while the gauge field
flux appeared simply as a white noise background, not following the
scalar field. This is likely to be a result of the damping in the
system. Due to Hubble damping the magnetic energy density is rapidly
decaying and also any movement of magnetic flux is slow. The formation
of magnetic structures, by following the scalar field zero lines, relays
upon the dynamical fact that the magnetic flux is driven quickly enough
towards the scalar field structure. In all the simulations studied the
magnetic field decayed too quickly for this to happen. This could be a
result of not being able to find a configuration in which the induced
magnetic field lived long enough so as to be able to follow the scalar
field. In any case, the simulations give very strong evidence that there
are simply no vestiges of the unstable vortices.

### 16 Summary

In this chapter we studied the dynamics of conifold transitions. The
motivation for studying these transitions is the vacuum degeneracy
problem. The topological degeneracy problem arises from the absence of
any principle by which a particular CY manifold is singled out. An
aspect of CYs that made this degeneracy more troubling is the fact that
CYs of different topology could transform into each other through a
conifold transition. We aimed to address this issue by studying whether
it is possible for a conifold transition to dynamically complete. The
moduli degeneracy problem arises because the moduli fields in CY
compactifications have no classical potential which leads to a lack of
prediction power and to unobserved massless modes of gravity. We
considered this issue by studying the dynamics of the moduli near the
conifold point where a potential is generated. Finally we studied the
possibility of a cosmological signature for a conifold transition
through the formation of defects.

Through an understanding of the geometry of conifold transitions and of
the D3-brane states we were able to use the constrained structure of
@xmath supergravities to derive an effective action valid near the
conifold point. We used this action to study the dynamics of the fields
involved within a cosmological context. We began by studying the
simplified case of spatially homogeneous moduli fields and no gauge
fields. We showed that the three possible outcomes of not reaching the
conifold point, being held at the conifold point and completing the
transition are all dynamically possible with Hubble friction playing a
crucial role. We classified the initial conditions that lead to a
realisation of each scenario. One conclusion drawn is that the
completion of the transition required an initial condition where the
brane states were strongly excited and argued that a possible mechanism
for this is the early universe brane gas. This possibly sheds some light
on the topological degeneracy problem in that as the brane anti-brane
pairs in the universe annihilate eventually there will not be enough
left to power such transitions. A further restriction on the initial
conditions leading to a complete transition was that the initial values
for the two hypermultiplets had to be very similar to a level that could
be viewed as tuning. The study also had implications for the moduli
degeneracy problem. We showed that generically the complex structure
moduli were trapped at the conifold point both strongly, where the
moduli still have classical masses through oscillations, and weakly,
where the classical mass vanishes but there is an increased likelihood
of finding the moduli at the conifold point. The weak form of trapping
could also be combined with quantum effects to form a stronger trapping
mechanism. Following the classical trapping of the moduli at the
conifold point quantum fluctuations in the fields induce an effective
mass thereby keeping the moduli at the conifold point.

We have also seen how the structure of the CY, through its coupling
matrix, can create a potential even for those cycles which are not being
wrapped. Depending on the form of this matrix then, it is possible for
these other complex structure moduli to be involved in the evolution.

Following the study of the homogeneous case we generalised to the case
where the moduli fields have spatial inhomogeneities thereby inducing
gauge fields. By performing three dimensional simulations of the
transition we showed that inhomogeneities in the fields can either help
or hinder the completion of a transition. We found two regimes,
parameterised by the relative magnitude of the inhomogeneities @xmath
and the ’Higgsing’ parameter @xmath . The first regime is when local
fluctuations are small @xmath and in this case the inhomogeneities help
the transition complete. The second case is where the local fluctuations
dominate, @xmath and for this case we found that increasing the
inhomogeneity tends to trap the moduli at the conifold point. We argued
that the latter case is the more physically sensible thereby
strengthening the conclusion drawn from the homogeneous case that the
vast majority of the initial conditions parameter space leads to trapped
moduli and a failure to complete the transition.

A second issue in the inhomogeneous model is that of cosmic strings.
Following a review of the motivation for looking for cosmic strings we
studied the formation of structure subsequent to a transition. Although
there was structure formed by the scalar fields we did not find any
trace of structure formation in the magnetic field. This gives strong
evidence that there is no structure formed by the magnetic field.

## Chapter \thechapter Compactification of Type IIA String Theory on
Manifolds with @xmath-Structure

This chapter addresses two important features of string theory
compactifications to four dimensions that were discussed in chapter id1
. The first is the issue of the type of manifolds that preserve the
minimum amount of supersymmetry in four dimensions. These were shown to
be the general class of manifolds with @xmath -structure. Section 9
outlined a compactification of string theory on a particular subset of
these manifolds that are the CY manifolds. This chapter extends this
procedure to a general @xmath -structure manifold for the case of type
IIA string theory [ 70 ] . Similar work was done in [ 71 , 72 , 73 , 74
, 75 ] and also for the case of the Heterotic string [ 76 , 77 , 78 , 79
, 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 ] and type IIB [ 84 , 85 ] . These type of
compactifications are motivated by more than just their generality and
to understand this we discuss the second issue addressed in this chapter
that is moduli stabilisation.

The absence of a potential for the four-dimensional scalar fields in CY
compactifications leads to many problems as reviewed is section 10 . One
way to obtain a potential for some of the moduli in CY compactifications
was studied in chapter id1 . Another way is through the introduction of
non-vanishing field-strengths in the vacuum for the form fields known as
fluxes. The theory we consider in this chapter is type IIA string theory
which has the form fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . A flux for say
@xmath corresponds to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (16.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the CY case where we have a basis of three-cycles @xmath and
@xmath defined on the manifold in terms of which we can decompose the
flux

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (16.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constants @xmath and @xmath are termed electric and magnetic
flux parameters respectively. We note here that they are Dirac quantised
in units of @xmath [ 4 ] . For non-zero flux parameters a scalar
potential is induced in four dimensions. To illustrate this we consider
a particular term in the type IIA action ( 17.1 ) and for simplicity
turn on electric fluxes only

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (16.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the matrix @xmath is defined in ( 13.3 ). Since the matrix @xmath
is a function of the complex structure moduli they develop a potential
(as does the dilaton in this case). The Kähler moduli however do not
feature in this potential and so remain as flat directions. The
requirement for a flux compactification that successfully stabilises the
moduli is that all the moduli fields feature in the potential and that
this potential is one where a minimum exists, i.e. not of a run-away
behaviour. If this is the case then we have no massless scalar modes of
gravity and have gained a prediction for the values of the moduli in the
vacuum.

The approach taken to find potentials with minima for all the moduli is
to turn on all the possible fluxes in the theory and calculate the
resulting scalar potential. Before discussing the case of type IIA
string theory it is worth reviewing the case of type IIB. In type IIB
turning on all the fluxes induces a potential for the complex structure
moduli @xmath , the dilaton @xmath and the scalar @xmath ¹² ¹² 12 There
is also a dependence on the Kähler moduli @xmath but it is a ’trivial’
one in the sense that it appears as an inverse of the overall CY volume
which is runaway to large volume. [ 86 ] . The reason that a potential
is only induced for the complex structure moduli can be seen through the
fact that in type IIB string theory only three-form fluxes exist which
give a potential only to the fields corresponding to three-cycles. The
potential does have a minimum for the complex structure moduli, the
scalar @xmath , and the dilaton and so they are stabilised [ 87 ] . It
is also possible to stabilise the remaining fields @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by first performing an orientifold
projection which projects out all the fields apart from @xmath and
@xmath [ 88 ] and then inducing a potential with a minimum for those
remaining fields through non-perturbative effects such as gaugino
condensation or instanton corrections [ 89 , 90 ] . This procedure was
the first case of a string compactification where all the moduli were
stabilised.

We now turn to the case of type IIA string theory. We have the fields
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath which means that it is possible to turn on
both two-form, four-form and three-form fluxes and so we expect a
non-trivial potential to be induced for all the fields. There is,
however, a subtlety that makes turning on both RR and NS fluxes a
difficult proposition. To understand this consider integrating the flux
@xmath over a three-cycle @xmath which is the dual to the three-form
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (16.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the background value for the field @xmath which
gives rise to the flux. By Stokes’ theorem the last term in ( 16.4 )
implies that, since the cycle @xmath has no boundary, @xmath can not be
globally well defined. Generally integrals involving ’naked’ @xmath ,
i.e. without a covering derivative, can not be performed in practice
because of the patch dependence. The problem that arises in type IIA
flux compactifications is that if both three-form and two-form (or
four-form) fluxes are turned on precisely such naked terms appear. This
problem means that such compactifications are a difficult proposition
and has meant type IIA flux compactifications have been less popular
than their type IIB counterparts. A breakthrough was made in [ 91 ]
where a solution was proposed to the problem where the action is
modified so that naked terms do not appear. The modified action however
has no covariant uplift to M-theory. With a modified action it is
possible to turn on both types of fluxes in IIA and indeed a potential
is induced for all the fields [ 91 ] .

In summary fluxes induce a potential for the moduli fields in four
dimensions. We have also argued that CY compactifications only form a
small subset of the more general @xmath -structure compactifications.
The connection between flux compactifications and @xmath -structure
compactifications lies in the spontaneous compactification constraint.
Recall that in order to perform a spontaneous compactification the
internal manifold should be a solution of the ten-dimensional equations
of motion. However when flux is present a CY manifold is no longer a
solution ¹³ ¹³ 13 In type IIB string theory the solution to the
equations of motion is a manifold that is conformally CY. [ 92 , 93 , 94
] . This can be viewed as the energy density of the flux back-reacting
on the geometry of the internal manifold so that it is no longer
Ricci-flat. Therefore the flux back-reaction implies that the
compactification manifold should not be a CY but rather a more general
manifold of @xmath -structure. The particular type of flux present
determines which torsion classes are non-vanishing and so which type of
@xmath -structure manifold forms the appropriate solution.

This chapter addresses flux compactifications of type IIA string theory
on general manifolds with @xmath -structure and their implications for
moduli stabilisation. We begin by reviewing the most general solution of
type IIA string theory with fluxes that preserves the minimum amount of
supersymmetry thereby quantifying the flux back-reaction on the
geometry. In section 18 we derive the effective @xmath four-dimensional
action following a compactification on a general @xmath -structure
manifold. In section 19 we restrict the study to a sub-class of @xmath
-structure manifolds and show that for those cases the theory exhibits
spontaneous partial supersymmetry breaking to @xmath . We go on to
derive the effective @xmath theory and discuss its potential for moduli
stabilisation. In section 20 we consider an example of an @xmath
-structure manifold that shows how the more general results of the
previous sections are explicitly realised. We summarise in section 21 .

### 17 Spontaneous compactification of massive type IIA supergravity

The ten-dimensional action that we consider is that of massive type IIA
supergravity [ 95 ] which reads, up to two fermion terms,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (17.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The indices @xmath run from 0 to 9, and the ten-dimensional coordinates
are @xmath . In the NS-NS sector the action contains the bosonic fields
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which are the ten-dimensional dilaton, a
massive two-form and the metric, together with the fermionic fields
@xmath and @xmath , which are the gravitino and dilatino. The RR sector
contains the three-form @xmath . We have fixed our units by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

This action differs from the ’massless’ type IIA supergravity that is
the low energy limit of type IIA string theory in two important ways.
The first is the presence of a mass term for the NS two-form @xmath and
the second is the absence of the RR one-form @xmath . The explanation
for this is that the original action has a gauge symmetry under @xmath .
@xmath is therefore a Stucklberg field which can be gauged away breaking
the gauge invariance and leaving the two-form @xmath with a mass in a
Higgs-type mechanism. The action ( 17.1 ) can also be interpreted as the
low energy limit of type IIA string theory in the background of D8-brane
flux. A D8-brane couples to a ten-form flux which is dual to a constant
@xmath . Therefore in the string embedding of the supergravity the
parameter @xmath is also quantised in units of @xmath .

We now turn to the spontaneous compactification solution. Because fluxes
are now present the vacuum configuration is not as simple as the CY case
( 9.3 ). The most general solution that preserves @xmath supersymmetry
was found in [ 96 , 92 , 93 , 94 ] and takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

All the quantities correspond to their vacuum expectation values. The
internal manifold is an @xmath -structure manifold with metric @xmath
and the usual forms @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath denoting the real
part of @xmath and @xmath denoting the imaginary part. The parameter
@xmath is the purely external part of the vacuum expectation value of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two form @xmath is the traceless part of @xmath (the @xmath ) and so
satisfies @xmath . The internal manifold is constrained to have all the
torsion classes ( 7.16 ) vanishing in the vacuum apart from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Within the classification of section 7.1 the manifold is a subset of
half-flat manifolds with @xmath . A property of the solution which we
use in section 19.1 is that the gravitino mass takes the form ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14
This can be deduced from the fact that in a supersymmetric vacuum the
scalar potential is given by @xmath which can be compared with the
quantity @xmath in [ 94 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution ( 17.6 ) constrains the fluxes that are allowed to be
present. To see this we can decompose the internal fluxes in terms of
@xmath -structure modules using ( 7.7 ). The flux modules for @xmath are
a complex singlet @xmath , a complex vector @xmath and a @xmath which we
denote @xmath . The internal part of the four-form flux @xmath
decomposes into a real singlet @xmath , a complex vector @xmath and an
@xmath which we denote @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are singlets, we
see that the solution only has @xmath and @xmath present and so the
fluxes are not the most general type possible.

The solution ( 17.6 ) can form the basis for a spontaneous
compactification and indeed we use the information on the torsion
classes ( 17.8 ) in section 19 where we look for @xmath supersymmetric
vacua. However, the conclusions that we can draw from the solution are
more general. Consider a vacuum with fluxes which preserves no
supersymmetry. This vacuum is not included in the solution and so the
compactification manifold need not take the form ( 17.8 ) but can take
some other form. However, we would still expect the manifold to be of a
general @xmath -structure with torsion since the @xmath solution has
taught us that fluxes induce torsion on the manifold. The same reasoning
can be applied to all the different possible vacuum solutions and also
to the action away from the vacuum. The conclusion is that flux
compactifications of type IIA string theory should be considered on a
general @xmath -structure manifold.

### 18 The four-dimensional action

In this section we dimensionally reduce the action ( 17.1 ) to four
dimensions on a product manifold @xmath using a metric ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we take the internal manifold to be a general @xmath -structure
manifold. The metric ansatz now includes the perturbations of the metric
as opposed to ( 17.5 ) which is the vacuum expectation value. The metric
ansatz ( 18.1 ) is not the most general type as we have not included a
possible warp-factor as in ( 7.1 ). Warping may be induced by flux in
the same way that torsion is. The ansatz we consider therefore requires
that the flux present does not induce warping. An example of fluxes that
do not induce warping are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , since we know
they correspond to an unwarped solution. Some flux modules may induce
warping and the main contenders are the vector flux modules since they
could take the form @xmath . It is therefore tempting to conclude,
although is not yet proved, that in the absence of vector flux modules
there is no warping induced and the ansatz ( 18.1 ) is valid. A final
comment regarding warping is that even if warping is induced it may be
possible to consistently neglect it as is the case in type IIB for large
CY volume.

As was the case for CY compactifications the resulting effective
four-dimensional action should be an @xmath supergravity. However since
fluxes are present we expect a potential to be induced and therefore the
supergravity should be a gauged supergravity. In the upcoming sections
we keep the analogy with @xmath supergravity as explicit as possible. In
this compactification we are primarily concerned with the scalar sector
of the theory, however as shown in section 8 , once the geometry of the
scalar sector is specified it is possible to deduce also the gauge field
sector and then also the fermionic sector by supersymmetry.

The derivation of the action follows two steps. We first derive the
relevant terms in the action without assuming anything other than @xmath
-structure. In sections 18.1 and 18.2 we derive the kinetic terms of the
action. Section 18.3 discusses the possible flux that can be present in
the theory and in section 18.4 we derive the four-dimensional gravitini
mass matrix from which it is possible to deduce the scalar potential.
The next step is to assume there exists a basis of forms on the manifold
in which we can expand the ten-dimensional fields into four-dimensional
components. The justifications for assuming such a basis and a summary
of its properties are given in section 18.5 . Finally we write down the
complete action and show its @xmath structure in section 18.6 .

#### 18.1 The Ricci scalar

In section 9 we outlined how the kinetic terms for the geometrical
moduli are derived from the Ricci scalar for CY manifolds. In summary,
there were two types of metric variations, the @xmath variations which
we termed Kähler moduli and the @xmath variations that are the complex
structure moduli. The variations were shown to be harmonic and so could
be decomposed in terms of the harmonic bases on the CY. Substitution of
these decompositions into the Ricci scalar lead to the kinetic terms for
the moduli which were subsequently shown to match the geometric form
expected from @xmath supergravity.

The approach we take to finding the geometric moduli for a general
@xmath -structure manifold is different. The reason is that we have much
less information about the geometry of the internal manifold. In general
it need not be Kähler or even complex. It does not have to be Ricci-flat
and so the metric variations need not be harmonic, further we do not
even know what the harmonic forms on the manifold are or if any exist at
all. The only information we have is the existence of the @xmath
-structure forms and the fact that the resulting four-dimensional action
should be an @xmath supergravity. The first step in the method we adopt
is to relate the possible internal metric deformations to the @xmath
-structure on the manifold and this is the topic of this section.

Having @xmath -structure on a manifold is a stronger condition than
having a metric. In fact the forms @xmath and @xmath induce a metric on
the space via the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of @xmath . This relation was derived by
writing down the combination of structure forms with the correct
symmetry properties and then using the @xmath -structure identities in
the appendix to evaluate the right-hand-side of ( 18.2 ). Taking
variations of ( 18.2 ) we reach

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.3)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Equation ( 18.3 ) expresses variations of the metric in terms of
variations of the structure forms. The possible variations are not
arbitrary but rather we require that the varied structure forms
themselves define an @xmath -structure. This is part of the assumptions
that form the idea of compactifying on manifolds with @xmath -structure
and is analogous to the condition ( 9.11 ) where we required variations
of the metric to keep the manifold CY. The variations of the metric can
be classified into variations induced through variations of @xmath and
variations induced through @xmath . In analogy with the CY case we call
the variations induced through @xmath Kähler moduli and the variations
induced through @xmath complex structure moduli. It is important to
remember that @xmath is not necessarily the Kähler form nor is there a
complex structure defined on the manifold. Note that we have not
introduced complex co-ordinates.

The separation of the metric variations into Kähler and complex
structure moduli is the first step towards classifying the relevant low
energy fields. This separation should done be done carefully however and
in particular we should make sure that the two types of variations are
distinct. The @xmath -structure relations ( 7.8 ) show that in fact this
is not the case since a rescaling of @xmath is equivalent to an
appropriate rescaling of @xmath . In order not to count the same degrees
of freedom twice we introduce a new three-form @xmath which we define as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have also introduced the Kähler potential @xmath defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (18.5)
  -- -- -- --------

and the volume of the internal manifold @xmath is given by integrating
the unique volume form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definition ( 18.4 ) means that under a rescaling of @xmath the
left-hand-side remains invariant and so these rescalings are now
parameterised only in @xmath and are not present in @xmath . The extra
factor of @xmath is introduced in anticipation of the @xmath geometric
structure that the complex structure moduli span. At this point it
appears somewhat arbitrary but it turns out to be the correct Kähler
potential on the complex structure moduli space.

As the metric is determined uniquely in terms of the structure forms,
all the metric variations can be treated as variations of the structure
forms. The converse however is not true as it is possible that different
structure forms give rise to the same or equivalent metrics. Therefore,
when expressing the metric variations in terms of changes in the
structure forms we must take care not to include the spurious variations
as well. In particular the expression ( 18.2 ) shows that the metric is
invariant under an arbitrary phase rotation of @xmath . We can
understand this phase freedom by noting that under a rescaling @xmath
where @xmath is a function holomorphic in the complex structure moduli
we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

which through ( 18.4 ) precisely corresponds to a phase rotation of
@xmath . We have come across this structure in section 8 where we
calculated the covariant derivative on @xmath by identifying a
correspondence with a section of a @xmath bundle, which in this case is
played by @xmath . The spurious variations therefore correspond to the
Kähler transformations which are gauged by the Kähler covariant
derivative as given in ( 8.14 ).

Having identified the appropriate metric variations we can go on to
calculate how such variations appear in the action and replace them with
variations of the structure forms. The full calculation is given in the
appendix and here just outline how it proceeds. Consider the metric
ansatz ( 18.1 ) with four-dimensional metric fluctuations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 18.8 ) into the ten-dimensional Ricci scalar and only
keeping terms to order @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we define the four-dimensional dilaton as in the CY case ( 9.19 ).
We have also performed the Weyl rescalings

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We now use the expressions for the metric variations ( 18.3 ) to arrive
at the terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we dropped the @xmath term in ( 18.1 ) to leave the kinetic terms.
The action ( 18.1 ) contains the kinetic terms for the dilaton, the
complex structure moduli and the Kähler moduli. @xmath is the Kähler
covariant derivative ( 8.17 ). The important result is that the kinetic
terms for each sector have decoupled from the others. In section 18.6 we
show that these terms have the structure expected from @xmath
supergravity.

#### 18.2 The form fields

The reduction of the kinetic terms for the form fields in the action is
a much simpler task than the Ricci scalar. The relevant terms in the
ten-dimensional action read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These terms give after the appropriate Weyl rescalings

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

There is not much to say except that already at this stage the Kähler
moduli and the @xmath fields pair up into the complex combination @xmath
.

#### 18.3 Flux

In this section we summarise the fluxes that could be present in the
theory. The flux parameter @xmath already appears in the ten-dimensional
action and we have argued that it can be interpreted as D8-brane flux.
It takes integer values quantised in units of @xmath [ 97 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From the form fields the internal background fluxes that preserve
Lorentz invariance are ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Note that any two-form RR flux in the
massless formulation of IIA string theory can be absorbed into the vev
of @xmath in the massive formulation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We have decomposed the fluxes into a exact and a non-exact parts. The
non-exact parts, @xmath and @xmath , are the usual fluxes, as discussed
at the beginning of this chapter, that arise from the forms @xmath and
@xmath which are not globally well defined. These fluxes are similar to
@xmath in that they come from branes and are quantised. There are also
exact parts of the fluxes @xmath and @xmath which arise from the vacuum
expectation values of the scalar fields coming from @xmath and @xmath
which we denote collectively as @xmath and @xmath to distinguish them
from the parts that are not globally well defined. See ( 18.43 ) and (
18.44 ) for the explicit decomposition. This second type of flux can not
arise in CY compactifications since the basis of forms in which we
decompose @xmath and @xmath is closed. For a general @xmath -structure
manifold this need not be the case and so we must allow for such a
possibility.

We also have the purely external flux ( 17.7 ) which is termed
’Freud-Rubin’ flux in analogy with a similar flux that occurs in
M-theory. The Freud-Rubin flux, @xmath , is not the true free parameter
but also depends on the internal value of the form fields. To see this
and to determine the true free parameter of the theory we must dualise
the purely external part of the three-form @xmath which we write as
@xmath . Reducing the relevant terms in ( 17.1 ) gives the
four-dimensional action for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The field @xmath is the purely external part of @xmath . To dualise
@xmath we eliminate it using its equation of motion from ( 18.17 ) which
gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an integration constant which is now the true free
parameter of the theory ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Note that the two terms @xmath and
@xmath can be absorbed into @xmath but we choose to keep them separate
so that @xmath and @xmath remain on the same footing as @xmath and
@xmath . .

#### 18.4 The gravitini mass matrix

As mentioned before, the effect of the fluxes is to gauge the @xmath
supergravity theory and induce a potential for the scalar fields. These
effects can be best studied in the gravitini mass matrix to which we now
turn. In an @xmath supersymmetric theory, the gravitino mass is given by
the Kähler potential and superpotential ( 8.40 ), while in an @xmath
theory we have a mass matrix which is constructed out of the Killing
prepotentials of the hypermultiplet sector ( 8.36 ). The mass matrix
therefore determines the prepotentials and in turn most of the scalar
potential. The exact procedure for calculating these quantities is
discussed in section 18.6 .

The gravitini mass matrix appears in the supersymmetry transformations
of the four-dimensional gravitini

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the supersymmetry parameters given in ( 7.3 ) and
@xmath is the mass matrix. Therefore its value in the vacuum gives
information about the amount of supersymmetry which is preserved. In
particular an unbroken supersymmetry requires a vanishing physical mass
for the gravitino associated with it. The emphasis of physical mass
arises because in anti-de Sitter (AdS) backgrounds physically massless
particles can have non-zero mass parameters in the Lagrangian [ 98 , 99
, 29 ] . If we consider the mass parameter of the gravitino in an @xmath
theory, @xmath , then the physical mass in AdS is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the AdS inverse radius and is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath the corresponding Ricci scalar. In an @xmath theory it is
the eigenvalues of the mass matrix that are required to be physically
massless. This is the case here and so although the masses @xmath and
@xmath in ( 18.29 ) are non-zero for non vanishing fluxes one of them
may still be physically massless. Non-vanishing physical mass
eigenvalues of the gravitini mass matrix in the vacuum imply partial or
complete spontaneous supersymmetry breaking. In the case of partial
supersymmetry breaking of an @xmath theory, the superpotential and
D-terms of the resulting @xmath theory are completely determined by the
@xmath mass matrix. In a compactification from a higher-dimensional
theory there are several ways to determine the gravitini mass matrix in
the four-dimensional theory. If we have explicit knowledge of the
four-dimensional degrees of freedom we can derive the complete bosonic
action and from the potential and gaugings derive the @xmath Killing
prepotentials. Alternatively we can perform a computation in the
fermionic sector and directly derive the gravitino mass matrix. The
advantage of the latter method is that we can obtain a generic formula
for the mass matrix in terms of integrals over the internal manifold
without explicit knowledge of the four-dimensional fields. This is
essential to keep things as general as possible. Once these fields are
identified in some expansion of the higher-dimensional fields one can
obtain an explicit formula for the mass matrix which should also be
identical to the one obtained from a purely bosonic computation.

In the following we determine the gravitino mass matrix by directly
identifying all the possible contributions to the gravitino mass from
ten dimensions. For this we first identify the four-dimensional
gravitini. For conventions and notations regarding spinors in various
dimensions the reader is referred to the appendix. As discussed in
section 7.1 the internal manifold with @xmath -structure supports a
single globally defined, positive-chirality Weyl spinor @xmath and its
complex conjugate @xmath , which has negative chirality. To decompose
the ten-dimensional gravitino, which for @xmath supersymmetry is
parameterised by a single Majorana spinor, we consider two
four-dimensional Majorana gravitini @xmath with @xmath which give the
@xmath supersymmetry in four dimensions. Since in both ten and four
dimensions Majorana spinors are real we can construct the
ten-dimensional gravitino by taking the two independent real
combinations of @xmath and @xmath giving the decomposition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are real parameters which have yet to be
determined. The four-dimensional gravitini are the components where
@xmath . There are also four-dimensional spin- @xmath fields @xmath . In
the reduction, in order not have cross terms between the gravitini and
the spin- @xmath fields the gravitini need to be redefined with some
combination of the spin- @xmath fields. This does not affect the mass of
the gravitini however, and so is not performed here. It is more
conventional to work with four-dimensional Weyl gravitini and so we
further decompose the four dimensional Majorana gravitini into Weyl
gravitini

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the chiral components of four-dimensional gravitini
satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can constrain the ansatz further by requiring that it should yield
canonical kinetic terms when reduced, which for the case of @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions are given in ( 8.29 ). The kinetic term
for the ten-dimensional gravitino reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substituting ( 18.23 ) into ( 18.26 ) and performing the Weyl rescalings
we arrive at the result that the four-dimensional gravitini kinetic
terms are of the form ( 8.29 ) if the ansatz ( 18.23 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The terms in the ten-dimensional action ( 17.1 ) that contribute to the
gravitino masses in four dimensions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The derivation of the four-dimensional mass matrix proceeds by
substituting the ansatz ( 18.27 ) into the terms and using the
definition of the structure forms in terms of the internal spinors ( 7.5
) to write the result as integrals over the structure forms. The full
calculation is given in the appendix and here we quote the result. After
performing the Weyl rescalings ( 18.10 ) the mass matrix @xmath ,
defined in ( 8.29 ), reads ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 This expression corrects a factor of
@xmath in the equivalent expression in [ 70 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We note here that in a generic vacuum the off diagonal components of the
mass matrix are non-vanishing and therefore the gravitini as defined in
equation ( 18.23 ) are not mass eigenstates. The masses of the two
gravitini are then given by the eigenvalues of the mass matrix evaluated
in the vacuum. If these masses are equal and the two gravitini are
physically massless then the full @xmath supersymmetry is preserved in
the vacuum. However this is not the case in general and then one
encounters partial (when one gravitino is physically massless) or total
spontaneous supersymmetry breaking. We shall come back to this issue in
section 19 .

#### 18.5 The Kaluza-Klein basis

So far in this chapter we have derived the important quantities of the
effective four-dimensional supergravity without assuming anything
regarding the spectrum of forms that exist on the internal manifold.
This has meant that we were unable to evaluate any of the internal
integrals that feature in the four-dimensional action. To proceed with
the compactification we must specify a basis of forms in which we expand
the ten-dimensional fields to arrive at the four-dimensional spectrum.
For the case of the CY compactification this basis was formed by the set
of harmonic two-forms and three-forms on the manifold, which implied
massless modes in four-dimensions. Forms that were not harmonic
corresponded to the next level KK massive modes which were truncated
leading to an effective theory below the KK scale. The generalisation of
this procedure is such that we should consider the basis of forms that
are the lowest mass states of the Laplacian and truncate the higher mass
modes. The difference lies in the fact that the lowest mass modes need
not necessarily be massless, or in terms of the cohomology, the form
basis need not be harmonic. There also exists the possibility that some
of the forms are still harmonic and the rest are not harmonic but still
of a lower mass than the next KK level. The construction, or even proof
of existence, of such a lowest mass basis for general @xmath -structure
manifolds has yet to be developed. However we proceed to define such a
basis and then argue, using supersymmetry and examples of manifolds,
that such a basis is generic to six-dimensional @xmath -structure
manifolds.

The lowest mass basis ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 We henceforth use the notation of
referring to the mass of the internal forms by which we mean the mass of
the four-dimensional modes that come from the expansion of the
ten-dimensional fields in those forms. is composed of a finite set of
two-forms @xmath where the index range of @xmath is as yet unknown. The
definition of the Laplacian ( B.19 ) shows that their four-form Hodge
duals @xmath have the same mass and so are also part of the basis. We
also include a finite symplectic set of three-forms and their Hodge
duals @xmath . There is also the unique six-form that is the volume
form. However we retain no one-forms or their five-form duals. The forms
therefore satisfy the following basis relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The truncation to this basis of forms also means that their possible
differential relations are limited and the most general construction
takes the form [ 100 , 74 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The matrices @xmath and @xmath are symplectic matrices that are for now
arbitrary.

Having defined the lowest mass basis we turn to its justification. The
first motivation arises from the expectation of an @xmath supergravity
in four dimensions. This means that the field spectrum should come in a
similar form to that of CY compactifications. In particular the fact
that we do not expect any spin- @xmath multiplets was shown [ 74 ] to
imply that there should be no one-forms. The argument relies on the
observation that the four-dimensional part of the ten-dimensional
gravitino decomposes under @xmath into two types of spin- @xmath fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.38)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The singlet gives the four-dimensional gravitini and the triplet spinors
give spin- @xmath fields that sit in their own multiplet. Therefore in
order to avoid these we require that no triplets, which are one-forms,
be present in the basis. By Hodge duality this rules out the presence of
five-forms as well.

The second type of motivation are examples of @xmath -structure
manifolds that are not CY. In particular it was shown in [ 101 ] that
the mirror manifolds to CY with NS flux are half-flat manifolds. Their
basis forms could then be derived through mirror symmetry and were shown
to have the expected structure. Explicit examples of such manifolds are
twisted-tori which were studied in [ 73 ] . In section 20 we give an
example of a @xmath -structure manifold where again it is possible to
calculate the lowest mass forms explicitly.

Finally, a comment is in order regarding the index ranges of the forms.
In the CY case the forms were harmonic and so their number was specified
by the topological Hodge numbers. For the case of general @xmath
-structure it was shown in [ 100 ] that basis forms do not carry
topological information. This means that we do not expect the index
range to be given by some topological quantity like the Hodge numbers.
In the CY case the forms could be thought of as the forms that calibrate
independent special Lagrangian submanifolds. This means that they were
the forms that, when integrated over the cycle, formed the lowest bound
on its volume. It is possible to think of them as the forms that
minimise the brane action of a brane wrapping those cycles since the
brane tension is proportional to the volume of the cycle. When flux is
present the brane action is no longer minimised by a minimum volume
cycle but rather by a balance between the increase in energy of the flux
for small cycles and increase in tension for large cycles. The forms
that form the lowest bound on the energy now are called generalised
calibrating forms [ 102 ] . Since it is the flux back-reaction which
induces the departure from CY manifolds it is tempting to conclude that
the basis forms are now the forms that generalised calibrate independent
sub-manifolds. This has yet to be shown however and so for now the form
indices ranges should be taken as arbitrary.

#### 18.6 The action as a gauged @xmath supergravity

The field content in four dimensions is given by the KK expansion of the
ten-dimensional fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the scalar field components of the matter fields are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The periods of @xmath are homogeneous functions of the complex structure
moduli @xmath . The three-form field @xmath carries no degrees of
freedom and is dual to the constant @xmath . The rest of the fields form
@xmath multiplets as shown in table 2 .

Note the presence of a tensor multiplet which can not be dualised to a
hypermultiplet since the field @xmath is massive. Its mass term is
directly inherited from mass term of the ten-dimensional field @xmath .
It is sometimes useful to distinguish the four-dimensional fields that
come from the ten-dimensional form-fields from the metric fields. We
refer to @xmath as axions and to @xmath as moduli. The axionic label is
inherited from CY compactifications and is slightly misleading since if
the basis form from which the four-dimensional field arises is not a
cycle the field does not have axionic symmetries.

The complex structure moduli kinetic term reads ( 18.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The complex structure moduli manifold is therefore a special Kähler
manifold with the Kähler potential ( 18.5 ). The Kähler moduli @xmath
pair up with the axions @xmath to form the complex fields @xmath . Their
kinetic terms read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Therefore the Kähler moduli sector also spans a special Kähler manifold
with Kähler potential as in ( 9.33 ).

Having shown that the moduli fields follow the geometry expected from
@xmath supergravity we turn to the potential. The two expressions for
the mass matrix ( 18.29 ) and ( 8.36 ) can be compared by going to
special co-ordinates where the periods @xmath . The prepotential of the
vector multiplets special Kähler manifolds can be deduced from the form
of the Kähler potential ( 18.46 ) and takes the form ( 9.34 ). From this
we can calculate the form of the period @xmath which reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.47)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We are now in a position to determine the quaternionic electric and
magnetic prepotentials. To do this we restrict to the case where the ill
defined field @xmath is vanishing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.48)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This only leaves integrals that can be evaluated explicitly. The
non-vanishing prepotentials for that case read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the real and imaginary parts of @xmath .
It can be explicitly seen from the kinetic terms ( 18.1 ) and ( 18.13 )
that there is no coupling between the vector multiplet scalars and the
gauge fields and so the vector multiplets Killing vectors always vanish.
We have therefore completely specified the four-dimensional @xmath
theory resulting from compactifications of type IIA string theory on
manifolds with @xmath -structure where the non-exact part of the NS flux
@xmath is vanishing.

### 19 The @xmath theory

Compactifying on manifolds with @xmath -structure leads to an @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions. The vacuum of the theory however need
not preserve the full supersymmetry. In this section we show that,
depending on the type of manifold and the fluxes present, the full
supersymmetry can be spontaneously broken to either @xmath or no
supersymmetry. We go on to examine a particular case of manifold where
the supersymmetry is broken to @xmath . For that case we derive the
effective @xmath theory about the @xmath preserving vacuum and argue
that generically all the moduli fields are stabilised for such
manifolds. We go on to consider an explicit example of such a manifold
and recover the expected properties.

#### 19.1 Spontaneous partial supersymmetry breaking

The gravitini mass matrix is a useful object for studying the
supersymmetry of a theory. The number of supersymmetries that the theory
preserves is given by the number of massless gravitini. This follows
directly from the supersymmetric variations of the gravitini which must
vanish to preserve supersymmetry. We can use this constraint to study
how much supersymmetry is preserved by the class of @xmath -structure
manifolds we are compactifying on. Consider the case where we have the
following vanishing torsion classes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (19.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

These type of manifolds are a subset of half-flat manifolds where also
@xmath and the solution in section ( 17 ) showed that they form the most
general @xmath vacuum. However it is important to note that this only
tells us about the vacuum, in general away from the vacuum more torsion
classes may be non-vanishing. Our choice of manifold constrains these
torsion classes to also vanish away from the vacuum and so the manifold
is not the most general one that could preserve @xmath supersymmetry in
the vacuum. Nonetheless they still form a wide range of possible
manifolds with nearly-Kähler manifolds being an important subset. The
non-exact NS flux @xmath is turned off as it is inconsistent with the
induced torsion classes. This can be verified by noticing that, with the
present torsion classes, the NS flux in the solution ( 17.6 ) is exact.

The @xmath terms in the mass matrix ( 18.29 ) vanish for all manifolds
that satisfy ( 19.1 ) and the mass matrix diagonalises. The gravitini
are then mass eigenstates and we can evaluate the mass gap @xmath
between the two gravitini which is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (19.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where all the quantities are evaluated in the vacuum. For general
fluxes, the masses of the gravitini are non-degenerate. This implies
that we no longer have @xmath supersymmetry. Indeed such a mass gap
corresponds to partial supersymmetry breaking with @xmath for a
physically massless lighter gravitino or full supersymmetry breaking
with @xmath for a physically massive lighter gravitino. We have already
encountered a flux configuration that gives a solution preserving @xmath
supersymmetry in section 17 . We can see how this is realised in terms
of gravitino masses and partial supersymmetry breaking by studying the
mass matrix for the solution.

We can check that one of our gravitini is indeed physically massless by
substituting the solution ( 17.6 ) into our mass matrix ( 18.29 ) and
checking that one of the gravitini has a mass corresponding to the
gravitino mass found in the solution. Putting the solution ( 17.6 ) into
the gravitino mass matrix and performing the rescalings ( 18.10 ), we
find firstly that @xmath . This means that @xmath are both mass
eigenstates, with eigenvalues given by ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 In order to compare this
to the expression ( 17.9 ), we have evaluated the mass in the
conventions of [ 94 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Comparison with ( 17.9 ) gives that @xmath . We therefore see that for
the background solution we have considered, a mass gap opens up for the
two gravitini such that the @xmath is physically massless and @xmath is
physically massive. With a slight abuse of terminology we shall
therefore refer to the lower mass gravitino as massless and the higher
mass one as massive.

Before concluding this section we mention some subtle issues related to
the spontaneous @xmath breaking. It has been shown [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 28 ,
29 ] that in Minkowski space spontaneous partial supersymmetry breaking
can only occur if the symplectic basis in the vector-multiplet sector is
such that no prepotential exists. However these results do not apply to
the cases we discuss in this paper for the following reasons. First of
all, the no-go result above has been obtained for purely electric
gaugings of the @xmath supergravity. Here we have magnetic gaugings as
well and going to purely electric gaugings requires performing some
electric-magnetic rotation which, in special cases, can take us to a
symplectic basis where no prepotential exists. The second argument is
that we encounter the phenomenon of spontaneous partial supersymmetry
breaking in AdS space and in such a case it is not clear how to extend
the no-go arguments of [ 23 ] .

#### 19.2 The superpotential and Kähler potential

For the cases where there is a mass gap between the two gravitini it is
possible to consider an effective theory below the mass scale of the
higher mass gravitino. This effective theory may be an @xmath
supergravity, if the other gravitino is massless, or not supersymmetric
if it is massive. The former case is easier to analyse because of the
supersymmetry and we have already discussed a scenario where the partial
supersymmetry breaking is realised. We therefore consider this case and
proceed to derive the effective @xmath theory about the vacuum.

We begin by calculating the @xmath superpotential and Kähler potential.
In the effective @xmath theory the remaining gravitino mass is given by
( 8.40 ). It is only this Kähler-invariant combination of @xmath and
@xmath that has any physical significance, although it is still natural
to decompose ( 8.40 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that, as discussed in section 19.1 , to retain consistency with the
torsion classes we have set @xmath . This gives a general form for the
superpotential and Kähler potential coming from the @xmath effective
action following spontaneous breaking of the @xmath . The theory may
also have D-terms corresponding to the off-diagonal elements of the
@xmath gravitini mass matrix, @xmath in ( 18.29 ), which vanish for type
of manifolds we are considering ( 19.1 ). Note that we have taken @xmath
to be the lower mass gravitino, the case where @xmath has the lower mass
corresponds to complex conjugation of @xmath .

To determine the theory fully we have to identify the correct degrees of
freedom to truncate. This amounts to identifying the massive @xmath
superfields that arise from the @xmath multiplets. Useful constraints
are imposed by the requirements for a consistent truncation of @xmath to
@xmath discussed in section 8 . These constraints are however not enough
to determine the truncation completely for the case of a general @xmath
-structure manifold. However we now argue that for the class of
manifolds we are considering ( 19.1 ), this is possible.

For the choice of manifold ( 19.1 ) the basis form differential
relations ( 18.37 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Applying ( 19.6 ) to ( 7.16 ) we arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 19.7 ) is the motivation that lies behind this choice of
manifold. We see that @xmath only has one component, which is @xmath .
This means that @xmath only has non-vanishing periods @xmath and @xmath
. The homogeneity of @xmath means that the two periods are not physical
and so we reach the conclusion that for the type of manifolds we are
considering @xmath carries no degrees of freedom or, in terms of the
field content, there are no complex structure moduli. There are
therefore no hypermultiplets present in the theory and just a single
tensor multiplet. The truncation of the @xmath hypermultiplet sector to
@xmath superfields is trivial and this is precisely the difficult sector
to truncate. With this simplification we are able to perform the
truncation.

From the constraints in section 8.3 we know that in order to have
partial supersymmetry breaking we need at least two massive vectors
@xmath and @xmath to form the massive spin- @xmath multiplet. The
vectors should become massive by eating two Goldstone bosons from the
hypermultiplet or tensor multiplet sector. In the scenario at hand this
is realised by one massive vector @xmath arising as the dual of the
massive two-form @xmath , and the other @xmath becoming massive by
eating one of the scalar components of the tensor multiplet. In the
model at hand we have two possible Pecci-Quinn shift symmetries which
can be gauged in this way. They correspond to the two scalar fields
which arise from the expansion of the three-form @xmath in the basis of
three-forms @xmath given in ( 18.44 ). In order to gauge one of these
two directions, or a combination thereof, we need that the corresponding
combination of the forms @xmath and @xmath is exact. Without loss of
generality we will assume that @xmath is exact. Consistency with ( 18.31
) implies then that @xmath is not closed. We therefore see that the
scalar field which comes from the expansion in the form @xmath , which
is @xmath , is a Goldstone boson and is eaten by one (or a combination)
of the vector fields which come from the expansion of @xmath . Therefore
we learn that the fields which survive the truncation in the @xmath
theory are the dilaton and the second scalar field from the expansion of
@xmath which is @xmath . Together they form the scalar components of an
@xmath chiral superfield. The final thing which we need to do is to
identify the correct complex combination of these two fields which
defines the correct coordinate on the corresponding Kähler submanifold.
Knowing that the @xmath gravitini mass matrix entries become the
superpotential in the @xmath theory, which has to be holomorphic in the
chiral fields, we are essentially led to the unique possibility

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (19.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity @xmath is a positive real number as in the particular
choice of symplectic basis we have made ( @xmath is exact) @xmath is
purely imaginary.

To check that this is indeed the correct superfield we should make sure
we recover the moduli space metric from the Kähler potential in the
gravitino mass. Inserting ( 18.42 ) into ( 17.1 ) we get the kinetic
term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that taking the second derivatives,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and so ( 19.4 ) is indeed the correct Kähler potential and ( 19.9 ) is
the correct superfield. Determining the superfields arising from the
@xmath vector multiplets is a much easier task as they are just the
natural pairing found in ( 22.16 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the index @xmath now runs over the lower mass fields.

Having identified the @xmath superfields we can write the superpotential
for those fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have decomposed the RR flux

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this flux becomes exact if

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any constant @xmath . In that case it simply corresponds to a
rescaling of the superfield @xmath and can be dropped. The Kähler
potential follows simply from ( 19.4 ). The superpotential is
particularly interesting since all the fields feature in it
non-trivially. This raises the possibility that all the moduli fields
are stabilised and indeed this is generally the case. To show this, and
to make explicit the whole construction discussed in this chapter we
consider an example manifold.

### 20 The coset @xmath

Having derived in section 19.2 the form of the @xmath effective theory
on a general manifold with torsion classes ( 19.1 ), in this section we
study an explicit example of such a manifold. Denoting the internal
manifold by @xmath we consider the coset space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

Cosets are particularly useful as examples of structure manifolds
because the spectrum of forms that respect the coset symmetries is
highly constrained. This allows us to calculate the structure forms, the
expansion basis and their differential relations. The particular case
@xmath was first considered in [ 103 ] , and there are more details
about cosets in general and about this coset in the appendix. As well as
forming an example of a manifold that leads to an @xmath theory the
coset makes the whole construction of manifolds with @xmath -structure
explicit and so serves to clarify the ideas presented in this chapter
and in section 7.1 .

The derivation of the form spectrum on the coset is given in the
appendix and here we summarise the results. The metric on the coset is
derived by calculating the most general symmetric two-tensor that
respects the coset symmetries which for this case is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all the parameters are real. The parameters of the metric are the
geometric moduli and we see that we have three real moduli fields. Note
that the volume of the coset is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

There exists a basis two-forms on the coset @xmath and their Hodge
duals. There are also two independent three-forms @xmath . The form
bases satisfies the algebraic relations ( 18.30 ) and have the only
non-vanishing intersection number

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

To find the structure forms @xmath and @xmath we impose the @xmath
-structure conditions ( 7.8 ) on the most general two-form and
three-form that respect the coset symmetries. This uniquely determines
their structure in terms of the metric parameters and the basis forms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of the moduli classification we see that the coset has three
Kähler moduli and no complex structure moduli.

The coset also restricts how the differential operator acts on forms and
using this we can determine the differential relations of the basis
forms which read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that these are of the form ( 19.6 ) where the free parameters
@xmath have been fixed by the geometry. With these relations the
structure forms satisfy the differential relations ( 7.16 ) with torsion
classes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The expression for the torsion classes 20.7 shows the explicit
dependence of the torsion on the moduli. An important feature is that
for particular values of the moduli some torsion classes vanish which
for general values are not zero. This makes explicit the point made in
section 19.2 that the torsion classes in the vacuum are a subset of the
torsion classes of the action.

#### 20.1 @xmath supersymmetric minima

The structure of the coset exactly matches the requirements of section
19.2 and so the results derived in the section apply for this case. We
can therefore go on to derive the effective @xmath theory on the coset.
We begin by identifying the fields of the theory. Comparing ( 18.39 )
with ( 20.5 ) we are able to relate the Kähler moduli to the metric
parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are no geometric moduli associated with complex structure
deformations. In the effective theory we therefore have three
superfields @xmath from the Kähler sector and the superfield @xmath
coming from the tensor multiplet. Using the decomposition of @xmath in (
18.40 ), together with ( F.6 ) and ( 20.5 ), gives @xmath , and so the
superfields are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of the superfields the superpotential ( 19.13 ) and Kähler
potential ( 19.4 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (20.10)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (20.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This completely specifies the @xmath low energy effective theory.

We are now in a position to consider moduli stabilisation. This amounts
to finding minima of the scalar potential with respect to all the
fields. Finding all the minima of the scalar potential is a difficult
task, however we can look for particular minima for which the analysis
is simplified. It is a well known result that supersymmetric minima are
stable vacua which are determined by the solutions to the F-term
equations for the superpotential ( 20.10 ), which read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the Kähler covariant derivative is given by @xmath . We arrive at
four independent complex equations which serve to fix the four complex
scalar fields present. To show that this is the case we solve them
explicitly for a simplifying choice of parameters. We choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (20.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means that the flux @xmath becomes exact and so can be absorbed
into the definition of @xmath . In effect this is equivalent to setting
@xmath . We can then look for a solution where the Kähler superfields
are equal @xmath . In this case the equations simplify to the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The unique solution for @xmath has @xmath and the vacuum expectation
values for the superfield components are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This forms an explicit example of a minimum where all the moduli are
stabilised thereby solving the difficult vacuum degeneracy problems
outlined in section 10 . The vacuum forms the first and, so far, only
example of a purely perturbative vacuum in string theory where all the
fields (moduli and axions) are stabilised. Non-perturbative effects are
not expected to play a role here since all the fields appear at
tree-level in the superpotential. It does not require the use of
orientifolds and the supersymmetry breaking occurs spontaneously rather
than through an orientifold projection. The absence of non-perturbative
effects means that the four-dimensional vacuum can be uplifted to the
full ten-dimensional solution and it can be checked that the vacuum (
20.16 ) satisfies the ten-dimensional constraints ( 17.6 ). This is a
non-trivial result and forms an independent check on the procedure of
supersymmetry breaking and, more importantly, on the basis of forms used
in the compactification.

Substituting the vacuum ( 20.16 ) into the expression for the torsion
class @xmath ( 20.7 ) we find that in the vacuum @xmath vanishes. This
makes explicit the difference between the torsion classes in the vacuum
and in the action. The vanishing of @xmath can be directly attributed to
the simplification we made in turning off the non-exact flux @xmath .
This in turn allowed a solution where the @xmath superfields took the
same values. In the presence of @xmath flux the superfields would take
differing values in the vacuum and the torsion class @xmath would be
non-zero.

We now turn to some brief phenomenological properties of the vacuum (
20.16 ). The first thing to check is the consistency of the solution in
terms of large volume and weak coupling. Substituting the vacuum
solution into the expressions for the volume ( 20.3 ) and the string
coupling, @xmath , gives that we can go to arbitrary large volume and
weak-coupling by taking @xmath . Although the vacuum is consistent it
lacks a number of key phenomenological features. In terms of the matter
fields the fact that there are only two three-cycles means that it is
not possible to embed a realistic intersecting @xmath -branes model.
Also all the axionic fields are massive which rules them out as
candidates for the QCD axion.

The most serious problem is that the vacuum is anti deSitter (AdS) which
can be seen from the value of the scalar potential in the vacuum

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (20.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Although the limit @xmath leads to Minkowski, the cosmological constant
is generally negative. This of course is a problem that plagues most of
the vacua found in supergravities. One possible resolution to this
problem is the introduction of new effects into the potential such as
anti- @xmath -branes which could uplift the potential to a positive or
zero value. Such a mechanism has yet to be constructed in type IIA
string theory but does exist in the type IIB case [ 89 ] . The
possibility of such an uplift motivates studying the local form of the
potential near the minimum. The fact that the vacuum is a supersymmetric
AdS vacuum means that it is stable even if it is a saddle point [ 98 ,
99 ] . However following a possible uplift to Minkowski or deSitter
space saddle points become unstable vacua. We can construct a Hermitian
block matrix from the second derivatives of the potential with respect
to the superfields evaluated at the solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then for the solution to be a local minimum in all the directions
associated with the components of the superfields the matrix @xmath must
be positive definite. Inserting the solution ( 20.16 ) into ( 20.20 ) we
find that out of the eight real eigenvalues only six are positive. This
means that there are two real directions for which the potential is at a
maximum. The vacuum is therefore unstable under a direct uplift to
Minkowski or deSitter space. It is possible however that since an uplift
requires new terms in the potential the local structure may be modified
by these new terms so that it is stable. The tachyonic directions are in
the Kähler superfields sector as can be seen by directly plotting the
potential in the axio-dilaton direction as in figure
LABEL:fig:dilatonpot .

Therefore it is that sector that would have to be modified to solve the
uplift problem.

### 21 Summary

In this chapter we studied compactifications of type IIA string theory
on manifolds with @xmath -structure. The presence of fluxes was shown to
generate a potential for the moduli fields in four dimensions. It was
then argued, using ten-dimensional solutions, that the flux energy
density back-reacts on the geometry of the manifold inducing torsion so
that the manifold is no longer CY. This formed the motivation for
considering compactifications on manifolds with general @xmath
-structure. We proceeded to derive the four-dimensional action and its
interpretation as a gauged @xmath supergravity with electric and
magnetic gauging. Through the form of the four-dimensional gravitini
mass matrix we were able to study the phenomenon of spontaneous partial
supersymmetry breaking and, by restricting the present torsion classes,
derive the resulting effective @xmath supergravity. We showed that this
supergravity has a stable vacuum where all the moduli are stabilised in
a perturbative manner thereby solving the vacuum degeneracy problem.

## Chapter \thechapter Compactification of M-theory on Manifolds with
SU(3)-Structure

In this chapter we study compactifications of M-theory on
seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure [ 104 ] . Similar
work can be found in [ 76 , 78 , 83 , 105 ] . Unlike the type IIA case
studied in chapter id1 these manifolds are not the type that preserve
the minimum amount of supersymmetry in four-dimensions, these are the
manifolds with @xmath -structure, for which compactifications have been
studied in [ 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 ] . However, as we saw in chapter id1
, the supersymmetry of the action need not be fully preserved by the
vacuum. Eleven-dimensional solutions that explore the structure of the
vacuum have been studied for the cases of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
-structure in [ 110 , 12 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 114 , 115 , 13 ] . An
interesting point to come out of these studies is that compactifications
on manifolds with @xmath -structure have a much richer vacuum spectrum
than manifolds with @xmath -structure. Indeed there are solutions that
preserve only @xmath supersymmetry in the vacuum putting them on an
equal phenomenological grounding with @xmath compactifications in that
respect. There are however many phenomenologically appealing features
that are not present in the @xmath compactifications such as warped
anti-deSitter solutions and solutions with non-vanishing internal flux.
Therefore manifolds with @xmath -structure form an important set of
compactifications to consider.

As was the case in type IIA, the presence of fluxes induces torsion on
the manifold and therefore the manifolds do not preserve @xmath
-holonomy but are of a more general @xmath -structure. This is important
since, as discussed in section 7.1 , compactifications of M-theory on
manifolds with @xmath -holonomy are equivalent to compactifications of
type IIA string theory on CY manifolds. In this chapter we show that
because the @xmath -structure naturally picks out a vector on the
internal manifold these compactifications can be cast into a form that
is similar to the type IIA compactifications on @xmath -structure
manifolds considered in chapter id1 . Indeed the structure of this
chapter is very similar in nature to chapter id1 and many of the
arguments used there apply for this case. For this reason the issues
that arise in this chapter which have a parallel in the IIA case are not
discussed extensively and the reader is referred to chapter id1 for more
detail.

We begin this chapter with a reduction of eleven-dimensional
supergravity on a general manifold with @xmath -structure deriving the
resulting @xmath theory in four dimensions. The four-dimensional
gravitini mass matrix is then used to explore the amount of
supersymmetry preserved by various manifolds. We begin by looking at
vacua that preserve @xmath supersymmetry in section 23 . We derive the
most general @xmath solution and use it as a check on the mass matrix.
We then show how this solution can be used to find explicit vacua of an
example manifold. In section 24 we move on to the more
phenomenologically interesting @xmath vacua and show that some classes
of @xmath -structure manifolds induce spontaneous partial supersymmetry
breaking that leads to an @xmath effective theory. We derive this theory
and go through an explicit example of moduli stabilisation.

### 22 Reduction of eleven-dimensional supergravity

The theory that we consider is the low energy limit of M-theory that is
eleven-dimensional supergravity. The action of the theory is given by [
7 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The field spectrum of the theory contains the eleven-dimensional
graviton @xmath , the three-form @xmath and the gravitino, @xmath . The
indices run over eleven dimensions @xmath . For @xmath matrix and @xmath
tensor conventions see the Appendix. @xmath denotes the
eleven-dimensional Planck constant which we shall set to unity
henceforth thereby fixing our units.

In this section we consider this theory on a space which is a direct
product @xmath with the metric ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes co-ordinates in four dimensions and @xmath are the
co-ordinates on the internal compact manifold. This ansatz is not the
most general ansatz possible for the metric as we have not included a
possible warp factor. As discussed in chapter id1 there are many
compactifications that can consistently neglect such a warp factor
because either a warp factor is not induced by the flux or it can be
perturbatively ignored if the internal volume is large enough. For now
we proceed with an unwarped ansatz bearing in mind that this is only
consistent for certain compactifications.

The four-dimensional effective theory is an @xmath gauged supergravity.
In the upcoming sections we derive the quantities necessary to specify
this theory. The kinetic terms for the low energy fields are derived
from the Ricci scalar and the kinetic term for the three-form. The
prepotentials are derived from the four-dimensional gravitini mass
matrix and the vector multiplet Killing vectors are calculated through
explicit dimensional reduction.

#### 22.1 The Ricci scalar

The reduction of the Ricci scalar follows the same methodology as in
chapter id1 . We begin by writing the metric variations in terms of the
structure forms and then decompose the Ricci scalar appropriately. In
fact we now show that the presence of the vector @xmath allows us to
cast the metric deformations into a form very similar to the IIA case
considered in chapter id1 . However, it is important to remember that a
decomposition of the seven-dimensional manifold into a six-dimensional
sub-manifold and a circle is never assumed and is not generally the
case. The analogy with IIA is done at the ’four-dimensional’ level while
all internal forms have a general dependence on all the seven internal
co-ordinates.

The @xmath -structure induces a metric on the manifold that we can write
in terms of the invariant forms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (22.3)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

This expression for the metric can be checked by performing the
contractions on the right-hand-side using the appropriate @xmath
-structure identities. Varying the formula above we can write the metric
deformations as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (22.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is very similar to CY compactifications where the metric variations
were expressed in terms of Kähler class and complex structure
deformations. Keeping the terminology we refer to the scalar fields
associated with @xmath and @xmath as Kähler moduli and complex structure
moduli respectively. Furthermore we denote the scalar associated to
@xmath as the dilaton in complete analogy to the type IIA
compactifications.

Before starting the derivation of the kinetic terms associated to the
metric deformations discussed above we mention that the metric
variations can be dealt with more easily in terms of the variations of
either of the two @xmath -structures which can be defined on
seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure ( 7.36 ). The
expression ( 22.4 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is interesting since it shows that the complete metric variations
can be parameterised in terms of either of the @xmath -structures and
the full @xmath -structure is not required. For each of the @xmath
-structures the formula coincides with the metric variations on a
manifold with @xmath -structure [ 107 ] .

We now proceed with the compactification of the Ricci scalar. Initially,
we do not decompose @xmath and @xmath into their four-dimensional scalar
components but with the vector @xmath we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the single vector we have on the internal manifold from
the @xmath -structure requirements. Note that it is still @xmath and not
@xmath that features in the @xmath relations ( 7.28 ). The difference
between @xmath and @xmath can be understood as @xmath is the @xmath
vector which also encodes the possible deformations of the manifold,
while @xmath is only a basis vector in which we expand @xmath .
Therefore, the factor @xmath encodes information about the deformations
associated to the vector @xmath . This is completely analogous to the
compactification of eleven-dimensional supergravity on a circle to type
IIA theory and in order to continue this analogy we call the modulus in
equation ( 22.6 ) the dilaton. We further define a quantity which, in
the case where the compactification manifold becomes a direct product of
a six-dimensional manifold and a circle, plays the role of the volume of
the six-dimensional space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the volume of the full seven-dimensional space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this quantity we can construct the same structure for the complex
structure moduli as in chapter id1 . We define the true holomorphic
three-form @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have also introduced the Kähler potential for the complex
structure deformations, @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The analogy with the IIA case of chapter id1 holds for the spurious
variations of @xmath so that the physical variations of @xmath
correspond to the Kähler covariant derivative.

Using the expression for the metric fluctuations ( 22.4 ) we derive the
variation of the eleven-dimensional Ricci scalar. The calculation is
presented in the appendix and here we recall the final result

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have dropped the @xmath term. We define the four-dimensional
dilaton as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally we note that in order to arrive at the four-dimensional Einstein
frame we performed the Weyl rescalings

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (22.13)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The important thing to notice in this result is that the metric
fluctuations have naturally split into the dilaton, the @xmath and
@xmath variations with separate kinetic terms. Moreover, due to the
dependence of @xmath on the dilaton, it can be seen that the all the
dilaton factors drop out from the kinetic terms of the Kähler and
complex structure moduli.

#### 22.2 The form fields

As we have seen in the previous subsection, the compactification of the
gravitational sector of M-theory on seven-dimensional manifolds with
@xmath -structure closely resembles the corresponding compactifications
of type IIA theory. Therefore we find it useful to continue this analogy
at the level of the matter fields and so we decompose the three-form
@xmath along the vector direction which is featured in the
seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure under consideration.
Consequently we write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is assumed to have no component along @xmath , i.e. @xmath
. As expected, in the type IIA picture @xmath corresponds to the RR
three-form, while @xmath represents the NS-NS two-form field. Then
compactifying the eleven-dimensional kinetic term, taking care to
perform the appropriate Weyl rescalings ( 22.13 ), we arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.15)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

One immediately notices that the kinetic term for fluctuations of the
@xmath -field along the internal manifold is the same as the kinetic
term for the fluctuations of the fundamental form @xmath . Therefore we
see that these fluctuations pair up into the complex field

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 22.3 Flux

The only background fluxes that can be turned on in M-theory
compactifications and which are compatible with four-dimensional Lorentz
invariance are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have decomposed the internal parts of the fluxes into an exact and a
non-exact part. The non-exact part is the usual flux, as discussed in
chapter id1 , that arises from the form @xmath which is not globally
well defined. This flux arises from the membrane and is quantised. There
is also an exact part of the flux which arises from the vacuum
expectation value of the field coming from @xmath which we denote @xmath
to distinguish it from the part that is not globally well defined. See (
22.35 ) for the explicit definition.

The external part of the flux @xmath is called the Freund-Rubin flux. As
observed in the literature [ 106 , 107 , 116 ] , the Freund-Rubin flux
is not the true constant parameter describing this degree of freedom.
Rather one has to consider the flux of the dual seven-form field
strength @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which should now be the true dual of the Freund-Rubin flux. As can be
seen the @xmath flux also receives a contribution from the ordinary
@xmath flux. Therefore, in general, the Freund-Rubin flux parameter is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant which parameterises the seven-form flux.

#### 22.4 The gravitini mass matrix

Recall from section 7.1 that on a seven-dimensional manifold with @xmath
-structure one can define two independent (Majorana) spinors which we
have denoted @xmath . We therefore consider the ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the four-dimensional gravitini which are Majorana
spinors and the overall normalisation factor is chosen in order to reach
canonical kinetic terms in four-dimensions. It is more customary to work
with gravitini which are Weyl spinors in four dimensions and therefore
we decompose @xmath above as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the chiral components of four-dimensional gravitini
satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then compactifying the eleven-dimensional gravitino terms in ( 22 ) and
performing the appropriate Weyl rescalings ( 22.13 ) we arrive at the
four-dimensional action ( 8.29 ). The main steps in deriving the mass
matrix are presented in appendix id1 . The result reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath               (22.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath denotes the internal non-exact part of the background flux
which was defined in equation ( 22.17 ), @xmath is the Freund-Rubin
constant and we have further introduced

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The eigenvalues of the gravitini mass matrix determine the amount of
supersymmetry in the vacuum. As we did in chapter id1 we use them to
study partial supersymmetry breaking in section 24 . An important
concept, that is not present in the six-dimensional case of chapter id1
, is the notion of an effective @xmath -structure. Consider a manifold
where the gravitini @xmath in ( 22.21 ) are mass eigenstates. This
corresponds to the case where the off-diagonal terms in the mass matrix
vanish. Then a mass gap between the gravitini also implies a mass gap
between the two internal spinors @xmath . This, in turn, through the
definitions of the two @xmath -structures ( 7.35 ) means that one @xmath
form becomes heavier than the other. In that sense performing the
truncation of the higher mass gravitini and its associated matter
spectrum corresponds to a truncation of one of the @xmath -structures.
The effective @xmath theory after the truncation is equivalent to a
compactification on a manifold with @xmath -structure where the @xmath
-structure is the lowest mass one, even though the full manifold has
@xmath -structure. The manifold can be said to have an effective @xmath
-structure. We study an explicit example of this phenomenon in section
25.1 . It is important to note however that not all truncations of the
@xmath -structure @xmath theory to an effective @xmath theory correspond
to an effective @xmath compactification. It is only the case when the
gravitino mass eigenstates correspond to the internal spinors from which
the two @xmath -structures are constructed. The notion of an effective
@xmath -structure is particularly important in M-theory
compactifications since all manifolds with @xmath -structure are known
to have @xmath -structure [ 13 ] and so lead to a @xmath
four-dimensional theory. An @xmath -structure contains two @xmath
-structures and so in this chapter we actually study compactifications
on an effective @xmath -structure where we assume the other @xmath
-structure is massive and can be truncated. This is not as strong an
assumption as it appears. In fact in this chapter we give two explicit
manifolds where such a mass hierarchy appears. These are the cosets of
section 23.2 and section 25 . Both of the cosets are such that only an
@xmath -structure is compatible with the coset symmetries. On coset
manifolds the forms that satisfy the symmetries are precisely the lowest
mass forms and so we recover an effective @xmath -structure.

#### 22.5 The Kaluza-Klein basis

As was the case for six-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure,
specifying the basis of lowest mass forms on the internal manifold is a
difficult task. Given the absence of such a classification in the
literature we propose a set of forms motivated through supersymmetry and
explicit examples. We first specify the forms and then motivate the
choice. The basis includes a single one-form @xmath . There are also a
set of two-forms @xmath , and four-forms @xmath ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Note that these
are not the Hodge duals of the two-forms since those are five-forms.
Rather the correspondence between the four-forms and the two-forms is of
the nature @xmath . , and set of three-forms @xmath which satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The forms satisfy the following relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (22.29)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

These forms can in general depend on all seven internal coordinates and
not be closed. We do not specify the differential relations in general
but calculate them explicitly for the examples considered.

The strongest motivation for this choice of basis is the analogy with
type IIA compactifications. We saw in chapter id1 how the basis of forms
lead to an @xmath supergravity and since we should recover an @xmath
supergravity also in this case the basis should follow a similar
structure. The major difference is the addition of a single one-form
@xmath which is obviously motivated through the extra vector @xmath in
the seven-dimensional @xmath -structure. Since there is only one
independent singlet vector we expect only one one-form. The other
possible one-forms are triplets and are therefore ruled out by the same
considerations as the six-dimensional case. The relations between the
forms ( 22.29 ) are motivated by the anticipation that the @xmath
-structure forms should be decomposed in terms of the basis. The
constraints then follow from the @xmath -structure relations ( 7.28 ).
As in the six-dimensional case the index range of the forms is not
topological.

#### 22.6 The action as a gauged @xmath supergravity

The eleven-dimensional forms are expanded in the basis ( 22.26 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that the @xmath -structure relations ( 7.28 ) rule out any
component along @xmath in the expansions of @xmath and @xmath .
Similarly @xmath can not be expanded along the @xmath direction as it
already comes from a three-form with one leg along @xmath , while @xmath
was assumed not to have any component along @xmath ( 22.14 ). As was the
case in IIA the two-form field @xmath can be massive and so is not
dualised to a scalar. The field content in four-dimensions is then
identical to the IIA case as given in table 2 .

We also find it useful to introduce at this level one more notation. As
we are mostly interested in the scalar fields in the theory we denote
all the fluctuations of @xmath which give rise to scalar fields in four
dimensions by @xmath . Just from its definition we can see that this is
a three-form on the internal manifold. In terms of the expansions above
it takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.35)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The geometry of the scalar manifold follows in the same was as the IIA
case from the Kähler potentials

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Since the two-form @xmath is massive the supergravity is electrically
and magnetically gauged. To derive the prepotentials we work with
special co-ordinates in the vector multiplet fields @xmath , and
decompose @xmath into

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.38)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where now @xmath is a function of only the hypermultiplet fields. The
prepotentials read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the parameters @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.40)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When @xmath is closed the magnetic gaugings vanish and the two-form
field @xmath becomes massless. To completely determine the supergravity
we need to specify the Killing vectors which are used in gauging the
vector multiplet scalars. These are not fixed by the gravitini mass
matrix and so we calculate them by explicit dimensional reduction of the
relevant terms. The @xmath action ( 8.1 ), after the gauging ( 8.25 ),
contains the term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.41)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have taken the Killing vectors @xmath to be real anticipating
the result. Note that since the Killing vectors should be holomorphic
this is only possible if they are constant with respect to the vector
scalars. Dimensionally reducing the third term in ( 22 ) we find the
term in the four-dimensional action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.42)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from which we determine the Killing vectors

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.43)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This completely determines the four-dimensional @xmath gauged
supergravity that results from compactifications of M-theory on
manifolds with @xmath -structure. The theory is quite rich with charged
vector multiplets and hypermultiplets as well as massive tensor fields.
Having specified the theory we move on to considering the vacuum
structure.

### 23 Preserving @xmath supersymmetry

In this section we consider the case where the @xmath -structure
manifolds are such that the vacuum preserves the full @xmath
supersymmetry. The case where the vacuum only preserves @xmath
supersymmetry is studied in section 24 . We begin by finding the most
general solution of eleven-dimensional supergravity on manifolds with
@xmath -structure that preserves @xmath supersymmetry. We use the
results to check the form of the gravitini mass matrix ( 22.4 ). We then
study an explicit example of a manifold that satisfies the solution and
show how the torsion classes can be combined with the eleven-dimensional
solution to determine the value of the moduli in the vacuum.

#### 23.1 @xmath solution

In this section we classify the most general manifolds with @xmath
-structure that are solutions to M-theory that preserve @xmath
supersymmetry with four-dimensional space-time being Einstein and
admitting two Killing spinors. In order to study such solutions in full
generality we allow for a warped product metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

but it turns out that the warp factor, @xmath , actually vanishes. This
class of solutions has also been recently discussed in [ 13 ] . We look
for solutions to the eleven-dimensional Killing spinor equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the background field strength @xmath above we consider the most
general ansatz compatible with four-dimensional Lorentz invariance.
Therefore, the only non-vanishing components of @xmath are @xmath and
@xmath .

Given that the internal manifold has @xmath -structure we know that
there exist at least two globally defined Majorana spinors and so we
take a Killing spinor ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are looking for a @xmath solution we treat @xmath and @xmath as
independent. This leads to more stringent constraints than the @xmath
case, where they may be related, which makes finding the most general
solution straightforward. As we are looking for four-dimensional
maximally symmetric spaces, the Killing spinors @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index @xmath labels the two spinors. The integrability
condition reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so one immediately sees that not all @xmath are independent, but
have to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

Decomposing the Killing spinor equation into its external and internal
parts we arrive at the following equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In order to classify this solution from the point of view of the @xmath
-structure we find the corresponding non-vanishing torsion classes by
computing the exterior derivatives of the structure forms. Using their
definition in terms of the spinors ( 7.1.3 ) and applying the results
above we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first thing to note is that the warp factor @xmath is constant in
this vacuum and therefore can be set to zero by a constant rescaling of
the metric. The second thing to observe, comparing with equation ( 7.34
), is that only the singlet classes @xmath and @xmath are non-vanishing.
Moreover, they are not independent, but proportional to each other as
they can both be expressed in terms of the Freund-Rubin parameter @xmath
.

From equations ( 23.7 ) we can also determine the parameters @xmath ,
which give the value of the cosmological constant, and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (23.12)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The Killing spinor equations ( 23.7 ) also give constraints on the
internal flux that imply it should vanish. However an easier way to see
this is to consider the integral of the external part of the
eleven-dimensional Einstein equation which reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that using ( 23.12 ) and ( 23.5 ) we indeed recover @xmath .
Since @xmath is a constant, this means that the Bianchi identity @xmath
is indeed satisfied and so follow all the equations of motion.

Finally we note that in terms of the two @xmath -structures @xmath ,
equations ( 23.1 ) can be recast into a simple form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows that both @xmath -structures are in fact weak- @xmath .

##### 23.1.1 The mass of the gravitini

We can now use this solution to illustrate the discussion on the
relation between the gravitini masses and supersymmetry and to check our
form of the mass matrix. Inserting the solution just derived into the
mass matrix we should find that the masses of the two gravitini
degenerate and that they are both physically massless. Taking the
solution ( 23.1 ) from the previous section the mass matrix ( 22.4 )
reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (23.15)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which indeed shows that the masses of the two gravitini are the same. To
show that the two gravitini are physically massless we recall that in
AdS space the physical mass of the gravitino is given by ( 18.21 ). In
order to obtain the AdS radius, @xmath in ( 18.21 ), correctly
normalised we recall that the mass matrix ( 23.15 ) was obtained in the
Einstein frame which differs from the frame used in the previous section
by the Weyl rescaling ( 22.13 ). Inserting this into ( 23.5 ) we obtain
the properly normalised AdS inverse radius

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that here, as well as in equation ( 23.15 ), the fields @xmath and
@xmath should be replaced with their particular values which they have
for this solution. Equation ( 23.16 ), together with ( 23.15 ), shows
that the physical mass of the gravitini ( 18.21 ) vanishes confirming
our expectations that the vacuum determined in the previous section does
indeed preserve @xmath supersymmetry.

#### 23.2 The coset @xmath

In order to see the above considerations at work we go through an
explicit example of a manifold that satisfies the @xmath solution
discussed in the previous sections. The manifold we consider is the
coset space @xmath . Cosets are particularly useful as examples of
structure manifolds because the spectrum of forms that respect the coset
symmetries is highly constrained. There are more details about cosets in
general and about this particular coset in the appendix. In this section
we summarise the results and construct a basis of forms with which we
can perform the compactification.

We begin by finding the most general symmetric two-tensor that respects
the coset symmetries, this is the metric on the coset and is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where all the parameters are real. The parameters of the metric are the
geometrical moduli and we see that we have four real moduli on this
coset. Note that there is a positivity domain @xmath . Having
established the metric on the coset we can move on to find the structure
forms. The strategy here is to find the most general one, two and
three-forms and then impose the @xmath -structure relations on them. It
is at this stage that we really see what the @xmath -structure of the
coset is. This analysis is performed in the appendix and we find that
the structure forms are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the relations between the @xmath s and the metric moduli are given
in the appendix. The basis forms satisfy the algebraic relations ( 22.26
) and the differential relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The structure forms ( 23.18 ) show that indeed the coset has @xmath
-structure. In terms of the moduli classification we have been using it
has a dilaton, one Kähler modulus and one complex structure modulus ²¹
²¹ 21 As is expected form @xmath supergravity the parameters @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath describe only two real degrees of freedom.
thus making up the four degrees of freedom in the metric. We also show
in appendix id1 that scalar functions are in general not compatible with
coset symmetries and therefore we conclude that for such
compactifications no warp factor can appear.

##### 23.2.1 Finding @xmath minima

In this section we consider if the potential which arises from the
compactification on the coset above has a minimum where the moduli are
stabilised. In particular we wish to look for minima that preserve
@xmath supersymmetry and correspond to the solution discussed in section
23.1 . As usual, in a bosonic background, the condition for
supersymmetry is the vanishing of the supersymmetry variations of the
fermions. This is precisely what we used in the previous section and
thus a supersymmetric solution should satisfy all the conditions derived
there, and in particular ( 23.1 ). Using ( 23.2 ) we see that the forms
( 23.18 ) obey

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Therefore these forms in general do not satisfy the solution constraints
( 23.1 ). Requiring them to match the solution gives a set of equations
for the moduli that exactly determine the value of the moduli in the
vacuum. For the coset at hand the solution is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have replaced the Freund-Rubin flux @xmath by the true flux
parameter @xmath from equation ( 22.20 ). Note that @xmath are not the
true complex structure moduli, but are related to them through ( 22.9 ).
However, the complex structure moduli defined in ( 22.32 ), which can be
most easily read off in special coordinates, do not depend on the
rescalings of @xmath and therefore, in our case the value of the single
modulus is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It can also be shown that the axionic scalar fields, which come from the
expansion of the three-form @xmath in the forms ( 23.2 ) are also
stabilised. A simple argument to support this statement is that
non-vanishing values of the axions leads to a non-zero internal @xmath
flux at this vacuum solution due to the non-trivial derivative algebra
that the basis forms satisfy ( 23.2 ), which in turn is ruled out by the
supersymmetry conditions found in section 23.1 . Hence, these scalar
fields are forced by supersymmetry to stay at zero vacuum expectation
value and therefore are fixed.

It is also worth observing one more thing regarding this solution. If we
think in terms of the type IIA quantities we see that the Kähler modulus
@xmath and the dilaton @xmath are not independent and choosing to stay
in the supergravity approximation on type IIA side, ie take @xmath ,
drives the theory to the strong coupling regime which explains why such
solutions can not be seen in the perturbative type IIA approach.

Finally we note that as the solution above is supersymmetric, the
four-dimensional space-time is AdS with the AdS curvature which scales
with @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, in the large volume limit, given by @xmath , the four-dimensional
space-time approaches flat space.

### 24 The @xmath theory

In this section we analyse the case where the vacuum only preserves
@xmath supersymmetry. We show that this occurs due to spontaneous
partial supersymmetry breaking and that it is possible to write an
effective @xmath theory about this vacuum. We derive the Kähler
potential and superpotential for this theory and go through an explicit
example of a manifold that leads to this phenomenon.

The partial supersymmetry breaking follows in exactly the same way as
the IIA case. In order to derive the low energy superfield spectrum we
need to restrict to the case where there are no complex structure
moduli. In the case of @xmath -structure in six dimensions this
corresponded to the subset of half-flat manifolds specified by ( 19.1 ).
The equivalent restriction for the seven-dimensional case in terms of
the torsion classes ( 7.34 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (24.1)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Under these conditions the three-form @xmath is exact and so the absence
of complex structure moduli follows from the same arguments as in
chapter id1 . The condition ( 24.1 ) appears to be quite strong and we
have already come across an example where this is violated in section
23.2 . On the other hand it was shown in [ 13 ] that an @xmath
anti-deSitter vacuum, which is required for all the moduli to be
stabilised, necessarily means that @xmath is not closed. Hence we always
expect at least one of the torsion classes in ( 24.1 ) to be
non-vanishing. Other than this we must take the condition as a
limitation of this work.

We further have to determine the gravitino mass matrix for this
situation. Using ( 22.4 ), ( 22.12 ), ( 22.7 ) we find that in the
particular case considered above, ( 24.1 ), the gravitino mass matrix
diagonalises.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (24.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we used the fact that the internal flux @xmath must be closed to
satisfy the Bianchi identity.

The low energy superfields follow in the same way as chapter id1 and we
recover a single chiral superfield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sign @xmath is determined by which of the gravitini is
massless and we drop the index unless required for clarity. Recall that
the quantity @xmath is a positive real number.

To check that this is indeed the correct superfield we should make sure
we recover the moduli space metric from the Kähler potential in the
gravitino mass. The appropriate kinetic terms in ( 22.15 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can use ( 24 ) to read off the Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is then easily shown that indeed the superfield and Kähler potential
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence we have identified the correct superfield in the truncated
spectrum. The superfields arising from the @xmath vector multiplets are
the usual

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index @xmath now runs over the lower mass fields.

The superpotential for the @xmath theory can be read off from the
gravitino mass to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this expression for the superpotential we can see that we should
generically expect a constant term @xmath , linear terms in @xmath ,
quadratic terms @xmath , @xmath as well as mixed terms @xmath . These
type of potentials will, in general, stabilise all the moduli and we go
through an example in the next section.

It is instructive to note that finding a supersymmetric solution for
this superpotential automatically solves the equations which are
required for a solution of the full @xmath theory to preserve some
supersymmetry. Therefore, for such a solution, it would be enough to
show, using the mass matrix ( 24 ), that a mass gap between the two
gravitini forms in order to prove that partial supersymmetry breaking
does indeed occur.

### 25 The coset @xmath

In this section we study an explicit example of a manifold that
preserves @xmath supersymmetry in the vacuum. The manifold we consider
is the coset @xmath . Details of the structure of the coset can be found
in the appendix and in this section we summarise the relevant parts. The
coset is specified by three integers @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath that
determine the embeddings of the @xmath in @xmath , where the integers
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

with all other choices corresponding to different parameterisations of
the @xmath . As with the previous coset example we can use the coset
symmetries to derive the invariant @xmath -structure forms and the
metric. The metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameters @xmath are all real. We can write the invariant
forms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This basis can be shown to satisfy the following differential relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced two vectors @xmath , and @xmath which encode
the information about the metric fluxes. The quantities @xmath and
@xmath are not independent, but satisfy @xmath and in terms of the
integers @xmath and @xmath take the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This ends our summary of the relevant features of the coset. We see that
this manifold indeed has the required torsion classes ( 24.1 ) and, as
expected, has no complex structure moduli and three Kähler moduli.

#### 25.1 @xmath supersymmetric minima

As explained in [ 117 ] , M-theory compactifications on the coset
manifold presented above are expected to preserve @xmath supersymmetry
in the vacuum. Therefore we can use the machinery developed at the
beginning of this section and derive the @xmath theory in the vacuum.
For simplicity we turn off the four-form flux @xmath and so, using
equations ( 24.5 ) and ( 24.8 ) we find the superpotential and Kähler
potential to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.6)
     @xmath   @xmath               (25.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the superfields @xmath were defined in ( 24.7 ) while for @xmath
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

as ( 25 ) gives @xmath . We can look for supersymmetric vacua to this
action by solving the F-term equations. For convenience we restrict to
the family of cosets with @xmath though the results can be reproduced
for more general choices of embeddings. We find the solution to the
F-term equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point we can go back to check which of the gravitini is more
massive. Inserting the solution ( 25.9 ) into the expression of the mass
matrix ( 24 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (25.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means @xmath is the lighter gravitino and the one that should be
kept in the truncated theory. This gravitino is physically massless as
expected. This also fixes the @xmath sign ambiguity in the superfield
and superpotential so that we have @xmath . Finally we note that as this
solution is a supersymmetric solution of the truncated @xmath theory and
that according to ( 25.10 ) the gravitino masses are not degenerate we
have indeed encountered the phenomenon of partial supersymmetry
breaking.

We have therefore obtained an explicit model where all the
four-dimensional fields are stabilised. It forms an example of an @xmath
-structure compactification that stabilises all the moduli. We expect
the moduli stabilisation property to be generic to @xmath -structure
compactifications since all the fields appear non-trivially in the mass
matrix ( 22.4 ) and we have already come across a different type of
manifold where the moduli are stabilised in section 23.2 .

##### 25.1.1 The structure in the vacuum

It is informative to look at the form of the G-structure of the coset in
the vacuum in terms of the @xmath -structures. The two @xmath forms (
7.36 ) satisfy the vacuum differential and algebraic relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is clear to see that only @xmath is weak- @xmath , and this is indeed
the @xmath -structure that features in the superpotential and is
associated with the lower mass gravitino. This shows an explicit mass
gap appearing between the two @xmath -structures which is the same mass
gap that corresponds to the partial supersymmetry breaking which we have
used to write an effective @xmath theory. Hence we have shown an example
of the idea of an effective G structure where we could have arrived at
this truncated @xmath theory through a @xmath -structure
compactification even though the manifold actually has @xmath
-structure. Finally we should note that we could have used the condition
that the manifold should be weak- @xmath in the vacuum to solve for the
values of the moduli as we did in section 23.2.1 instead of solving the
F-term equations.

### 26 Summary

In this chapter we studied compactifications of eleven-dimensional
supergravity on seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure. We
argued that these theories can be naturally cast into a form very
similar to type IIA compactifications on six-dimensional manifolds with
@xmath -structure as studied in chapter id1 . We then derived the
resulting four dimensional @xmath supergravity. We studied stable vacua
of the supergravity that preserve the full @xmath supersymmetry by
finding the most general solution to M-theory on manifolds with @xmath
-structure that preserves @xmath supersymmetry which, when combined with
an explicit manifold, lead to a successful moduli stabilisation
mechanism. We then used the gravitini mass matrix to study partial
supersymmetry breaking and derived the resulting effective @xmath theory
for a certain class of manifolds. By studying an explicit example of
such a manifold the @xmath theory was shown to have stable
supersymmetric vacua.

## Chapter \thechapter Mathematical Tools

In this appendix we review some of the mathematics used in this thesis
which also serves to fix the notation and conventions. It is not meant
as an introduction to the mathematics involved but rather as a
collection of the relevant ideas and definitions. For a more thorough
treatment of the subjects covered we refer the reader to [ 118 , 119 ] .

Throughout this work we use a bracket notation for symmetrising and
anti-symmetrising indices. The anti-symmetric bracket notation @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.1)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the sum is performed over the permutations group @xmath with
@xmath being a particular permutation and sgn @xmath being its
corresponding sign. The symmetric bracket notation @xmath is defined in
the same way but without the sgn @xmath factor. The notation @xmath is
used to omit an index range from the symmetry properties. Products of
@xmath matrices or basis forms are taken to be anti-symmetrised

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.2)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since we are interested in both Euclidean and Minkowski signature
manifolds a useful quantity to define is @xmath which takes the value of
@xmath for a Euclidean signature metric and @xmath for a Minkowski
signature.

The index notation in this work is such that in Minkoswki spaces indices
range from @xmath while for Euclidean spaces they start from @xmath . In
the case where an index is split into two ranges @xmath we generally
restart the second index from @xmath again unless otherwise specified.

The convention adopted regarding flat @xmath and curved @xmath indices
related by the vielbeins @xmath defined so that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.3)
  -- -------- -- ------

is that they are both denoted by @xmath to save clattered index
expressions. The appropriate indices to use should be apparent from the
particular expression but a general rule is that they are always curved
with the two exceptions being the @xmath matrices in section E and the
last two indices on the spin connection ( E.15 ).

## Appendix A Riemannian geometry

A Riemannian manifold is a differentiable manifold endowed with a metric
that is a symmetric two-tensor @xmath where the indices run over the
number of dimensions. In this thesis the metric signature is taken to be
of the Minkowski form @xmath in four, ten and eleven dimensions and of
the Euclidean form @xmath in six and seven dimensions. We define
connection components on the manifold @xmath that describe how the basis
vectors change throughout the manifold so that a connection @xmath
acting on a general vector @xmath and one-form @xmath (see section B )
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The torsion @xmath on the manifold is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also construct measures of the curvature of the manifold that are
the Riemann tensor, the Ricci tensor and the Ricci scalar which are
related by contraction of indices and given respectively by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

A connection @xmath is said to be metric compatible if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a metric compatible connection we can decompose the connection
coefficients as

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.5)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath are called Christoffel symbols and are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is called the contorsion and is given in terms of the torsion by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The connection where the contorsion vanishes is called the Levi-Civita
connection. The determinant of the metric @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

A useful identity involving the metric determinant is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is often important to consider small variations of the metric of the
form @xmath . Under such variations the relevant quantities vary as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Rescalings of the metric by a conformal factor are called Weyl
rescalings. Under a Weyl rescaling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the following quantities transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the number of dimensions. Finally a useful quantity
is the Levi-Civita tensor (density) @xmath defined in @xmath -dimensions
as purely anti-symmetric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices are raised and lowered by the flat metric @xmath and
in our conventions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Levi-Civita symbol satisfies the following useful identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is sometimes useful to define the quantity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is now raised and lowered by the full metric and in terms of which
the volume form (see section B ) @xmath , which measures the volume of a
space, is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Fibre bundles and differential forms

A fibre bundle is a manifold @xmath that specified in terms of a base
manifold @xmath and a typical fibre manifold @xmath through a projection
@xmath such that for each point @xmath there exists a neighbourhood
@xmath and a diffeomorphism @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the inverse of the projection

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The map @xmath is called the local trivialisation since
it maps locally the fibre bundle to the direct product of the base and
fibre. The structure of the bundle comes from the relation between maps
on different patches. Consider two overlapping sets on @xmath , @xmath ,
then we require that the transition functions @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

are smooth and form a group @xmath which is called the structure group
of the bundle. The example where the transition functions are all unity
is the trivial bundle which is just a direct product of the base and the
fibre. A section of the fibre bundle @xmath is a smooth map which
satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the identity element on @xmath .

Consider a fibre bundle @xmath where we choose local sections @xmath ,
@xmath that are linearly independent for all @xmath . Such sections are
said to define a frame. Consider another frame @xmath defined on the
patch @xmath where @xmath . Then then two frames are related by the
transition functions as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore the structure group is the group that transforms between the
possible frames.

A vector bundle is a fibre bundle where the typical fibre is a vector
space. The tangent bundle @xmath over a manifold @xmath is a vector
bundle with fibre @xmath for @xmath with the typical fibre @xmath (or
@xmath ) where @xmath . For a co-ordinate basis @xmath on a patch @xmath
we have the frame given by @xmath . The co-tangent bundle @xmath is the
bundle dual to the tangent bundle which is spanned by co-tangent vectors
or one-forms @xmath such that @xmath . In terms of co-ordinates the
one-forms are given by @xmath . We continue to use this coordinate basis
for clarity when dealing with components but the relations derived
henceforth hold for general forms in a basis independent way. The wedge
product @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the wedge product we can construct higher order forms with a
@xmath -form @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have adopted the notation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that through its definition a form as anti-symmetric components
only. The space of @xmath -forms on a manifold @xmath is denoted @xmath
. The Hodge star @xmath is a map @xmath which takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gives the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The inner product of two forms @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The external derivative @xmath is a map @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is nilpotent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and operates on products as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conjugate of the exterior derivative @xmath is a map @xmath defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which acts on forms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Laplacian @xmath takes @xmath and is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which operates on forms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Forms that satisfy @xmath and @xmath are called closed and co-closed
respectively. Forms that satisfy @xmath and are called harmonic.
Harmonic forms are closed and co-closed and vice-versa. A form that can
be written as an exterior derivative of another form @xmath is called
exact. Hodge’s decomposition theorem states that every form can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are forms that are uniquely specified
for every @xmath and @xmath is harmonic.

The Lie derivative @xmath of a general tensor @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath denote the number of components in the tangent and co-tangent
bundles respectively, is done with respect to a vector @xmath and is a
map @xmath that takes the following forms. For the case where the tensor
is a function @xmath ( @xmath ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For a vector @xmath ( @xmath ) it reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second term defines the Lie bracket of two vectors. For a
general @xmath -form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the interior product between a vector and a form defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that sometimes the notation @xmath is used in analogy with the
inner product of forms. A Killing vector is a vector whose Lie
derivative of the metric vanishes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix C Homology and co-homology

A @xmath -chain @xmath on a manifold @xmath is a formal sum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are p-dimensional submanifolds of @xmath and @xmath . The
boundary operator @xmath maps a @xmath -chain to a @xmath chain that is
its geometrical boundary. The sets of cycles @xmath and boundaries
@xmath on a manifold @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some @xmath chain. The homology group @xmath is defined
as the set of @xmath -cycles that do not differ by a boundary

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the modding out is done through the equivalence relation between
two cycles @xmath if @xmath . The dimension of @xmath is called the
Betti number @xmath . The Euler number @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and can be thought of as a measure of the number of holes in the
manifold.

A relation between a @xmath -form @xmath and a @xmath -chain @xmath can
be induced through the inner product

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Stokes’s theorem states that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and can be used to define a correspondence between the homology of the
manifold and its co-homology @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where forms are split into equivalence classes through @xmath if @xmath
. Hodge’s theorem ( B.21 ) states that each equivalence class in @xmath
has a unique harmonic representative and so @xmath measures the number
of harmonic forms. We can then identify representative cycles in the
homology for the harmonic forms through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is analogous to the basis forms and cycles used in CY
compactifications.

## Appendix D Complex and almost complex manifolds

Any even-dimensional real manifold @xmath admits locally, for a point
@xmath , a two-tensor @xmath of type @xmath , i.e. @xmath , which
satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the tensor @xmath is also globally well defined it is called an
almost complex structure and the manifold @xmath is called an almost
complex manifold. In that case it is possible to define projection
operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

that split the tangent and cotangent spaces into @xmath , @xmath .
Tensors that are in @xmath and @xmath are called holomorphic and tensors
that are in @xmath and @xmath are called anti-holomorphic.

The relation between a complex manifold and an almost complex manifold
arises from global properties. Consider a vector field @xmath that is a
set of smoothly connected vectors assigned to each point on @xmath . If
at some point @xmath this vector field is holomorphic @xmath it need not
be so in some other point @xmath since the transition functions may not
be holomorphic themselves. The condition that the transition functions
are holomorphic is the condition for an almost complex manifold to be a
complex manifold and is equivalent to the requirement that the Lie
bracket of two holomorphic vector fields remains holomorphic. In that
case the almost complex structure is said to be integrable and the
Nijenhuis tensor @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

vanishes. Correspondingly if @xmath the manifold is said to be complex.
This condition can be thought of as a restriction on the torsion on the
manifold. For example using the decomposition of torsion for
six-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure ( 7.16 ), a complex
manifold satisfies @xmath .

For a complex manifold it is possible to define complex co-ordinates
@xmath where @xmath runs over half the real dimension of the manifold.
In terms of these co-ordinates the complex structure takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is always possible to find an Hermitian metric @xmath on the manifold
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Forms and vectors can be decomposed in terms of the bases @xmath and
@xmath respectively. A form with @xmath holomorphic and @xmath
anti-holomorphic components is classified as a @xmath form. The
construction of homology and cohomology can be extended to the case of
complex manifold where now the number of harmonic forms (or cycles) of
type @xmath is given by the Hodge number @xmath which is the dimension
of @xmath .

An important @xmath form is the Kähler form @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the Kähler form is closed, @xmath , the manifold is called a Kähler
manifold and such manifolds have the property that the metric is given
in terms of a real function @xmath , termed the Kähler potential, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The only non-vanishing Levi-Civita connections on a Kähler manifold are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and its conjugate.

## Appendix E Spinors

In this section we consider spin representations of @xmath and @xmath
corresponding to rotations in @xmath -dimensional Minkowski and
Euclidean spaces respectively. For simplicity of notation we denote both
Minkowski and Euclidean metrics as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Clifford algebra is generated by @xmath , @xmath matrices @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the rank of the Cartan sub-algebra which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrices defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

span a representation of the Lie algebra of the @xmath groups. A set of
matrices satisfying ( E.2 ) can always be constructed as follows. We
consider first the Euclidean case and define the Pauli @xmath matrices
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is possible to construct @xmath matrices as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.7)
              @xmath   @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

To generalise this construction to the Minkowski case we set @xmath . At
this point the reader is reminded of the index conventions as set out in
the beginning of this appendix under which for Minkowski space we would
begin the index ranges from @xmath . In even dimensions a complete set
of @xmath matrices @xmath , where @xmath , is provided by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the last matrix we write as ²² ²² 22 In Minkowski space this reads
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath anti-commutes with all the other @xmath s and so can be used as
@xmath in the next odd dimension. The matrices defined in ( E.9 )
satisfy the Clifford algebra of ( E.2 ) and also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Products of @xmath matrices are often encountered and the following
formulae are useful for manipulating them. The identities can be derived
by writing down all the terms with the correct symmetry properties
(numerical coefficients are determined by the symmetries) and
determining the signs by substituting in explicit values for the
indices. The expressions are valid for all dimensions compatible with
the index ranges

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Dirac spinors @xmath have @xmath real components and transform under
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so form a representation of @xmath . The covariant derivative of a
spinor is taken with respect to the spin connection @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most convenient way to discuss different types spinors is for each
particular case of dimensions and metric signature. This is because the
different types of spinors can only exist in particular dimensions and
take particular forms for certain signatures. In general a charge
conjugation matrix @xmath can always be introduced so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath signs are fixed for particular dimensions and
signatures. If the number of dimensions also allows a consistent ²³ ²³
23 The consistency here is that for a spinor @xmath we can define a
complex conjugation operator @xmath such that @xmath . introduction of a
complex conjugation @xmath for (Dirac) spinors @xmath then we can define
the Dirac conjugate @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can also define the Majorana conjugate @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

A Majorana spinor is then one whose Majorana conjugate is equal to its
Dirac conjugate @xmath . In practice this translates to a reality
condition and halves the degrees of freedom in the spinor.

If the number of dimensions is even then a @xmath exists and we can
define Weyl (chiral) spinors by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which again have half the number of degrees of freedom. Left handed Weyl
spinors have negative chirality and right handed spinors have positive
chirality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### e.0.1 Spinors in four Minkowski dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . The general
relations ( E.10 ) and ( E.11 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The definition of @xmath can be used to derive useful relations of the
type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The form of these relations is obvious up to an overall complex factor
in front that can be deduced by putting in particular values for the
indices and multiplying both sides by the appropriate @xmath matrices.

We can choose a representation where the @xmath matrices are all real (
@xmath imaginary). In this representation @xmath and the Majorana
condition becomes a reality condition. Both Majorana and Weyl spinors in
four dimensions have four real components. Weyl spinors in
four-dimensions satisfy the useful relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes @xmath @xmath matrices.

The number of supersymmetry generators (charges) in four dimensions is
given by @xmath so that @xmath supersymmetry in four dimensions is
parameterised in terms of one Weyl spinor, @xmath using two Weyl spinors
and so on.

##### e.0.2 Spinors in six Euclidean dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . They satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are imaginary which
means Majorana spinors are real and have eight components. Weyl spinors
in six-dimensions satisfy the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### e.0.3 Spinors in seven Euclidean dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . They satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are imaginary which
means Majorana spinors are real and have eight components. Note that we
can not define Weyl spinors in seven dimensions.

##### e.0.4 Spinors in ten Minkowski dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . They satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are real which means
Majorana spinors are real and have 32 components. In ten dimensions it
also possible to define Majorana-Weyl spinors which are real Weyl
spinors with 16 components.

The number of supercharges is given by @xmath which means @xmath
-supersymmetry is parameterised in terms of @xmath Majorana-Weyl
spinors.

In a compactification the full ten-dimensional manifold @xmath is
decomposed into the product of four-dimensional space-time, with
co-ordinates @xmath , and some internal manifold @xmath with
co-ordinates @xmath . Under this decomposition the ten-dimensional
@xmath matrices decompose as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that this decomposition is consistent with the reality conditions
on the matrices in various dimensions.

##### e.0.5 Spinors is eleven Minkowski dimensions

We denote the @xmath matrices @xmath with @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are real which means
Majorana spinors are real and have 32 components.

There can only be 32 supercharges in eleven dimensions which means
supersymmetry is parameterised in terms of a single Majorana spinor.

The decomposition under compactification is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix F Useful identities

#### f.1 Six-dimensional @xmath-structure identities

The procedure for calculating the identities presented in this section
is to use the fact that we can always go to an orthonormal real frame
@xmath where the @xmath -structure forms take the explicit form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We can calculate relations explicitly using these forms and since they
are tensor relations they will hold in all frames. A more formal way to
derive the following is by using Fierz identities on the spinor
bilinears used to define the forms. Some of the relations are most
neatly written using projectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of which @xmath is holomorphic

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Some useful @xmath -structure identities read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is informative to go through an example derivation of the expressions
that relate derivatives of the forms to the torsion ( 7.28 ). Acting
with the Levi-Civita connection @xmath on the spinor bi-linear for
@xmath is evaluated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now using the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

we recover

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same method can be applied to derive all such relations.

#### f.2 Seven-dimensional @xmath-structure identities

In seven dimensions the @xmath -structure takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can define projectors that can be thought of as projections along and
perpendicular to the direction of the vector

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of @xmath , @xmath is holomorphic. The set of objects @xmath
satisfy the same subset of relations as in six dimensions. Some useful
relations involving also @xmath read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### f.3 @xmath-structure identities

@xmath -structure in seven dimensions can be mapped to the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it is possible to derive the following identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### f.4 ’t Hooft symbols identities

The ’t Hooft symbols [ 63 ] @xmath have index ranges @xmath and @xmath .
They are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Some useful relations that can be derived from their definition read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Chapter \thechapter Reduction of the Ricci Scalar in String and
M-theory

In this appendix we derive the kinetic terms for the geometric moduli in
both type IIA and eleven-dimensional supergravity by reducing the Ricci
scalar on a manifold of the product type. We begin by deriving the
kinetic terms for metric variations of seven-dimensional manifolds with
@xmath -structure in eleven-dimensional supergravity. The result are
cast into a form from which it is very easy to extract the kinetic terms
for type IIA theory on six-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure
by integrating out the extra dimension. During the derivation we only
assume the @xmath -structure relations ( 7.8 ) and ( 7.28 ) which, since
the set of forms @xmath follow the same algebraic relations in both
cases, allows us to simply integrate out @xmath from the
eleven-dimensional expression to reach the IIA case.

We consider the eleven-dimensional manifold @xmath to take an unwarped
product form @xmath . The eleven-dimensional metric, including the
fluctuations, takes the following form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Direct computation of the eleven-dimensional Ricci scalar gives

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where in the last equation we have performed a partial integration with
respect to the four-dimensional integral using ( A.9 ). At this point we
replace the metric variations with variations of the structure forms.
Although eventually we wish to parameterise the variations in terms of
the @xmath -structure forms at this point it is easier to work with the
@xmath -forms. Using equation ( 22.5 ) we arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To reach this expression we used the @xmath -identities ( F.32 ) and (
F.35 ) as well as the expression for the variations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also used the fact that only the symmetric part of @xmath contributes
to the gauge independent metric variations. Here @xmath is the volume of
the internal manifold as measured with the metric @xmath which thus
contains the metric fluctuations. Note that because we only consider the
lowest KK states, @xmath is independent of the internal coordinates and
thus its integration produces a factor of the seven-dimensional volume
@xmath . In order to put the four-dimensional action in the standard
form we further need to rescale the four dimensional metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Apart from normalising the Einstein-Hilbert term correctly this
rescaling also produces a term which precisely cancels the last term of
( F.45 ). The compactified eleven-dimensional Ricci scalar takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this stage we move back to using the @xmath -structure forms using
the translation equation ( 7.36 ). We also move to the string frame by
rescaling the internal metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dilaton is defined as in equation ( 22.6 ). Defining the
@xmath -structure forms with respect to the metric @xmath the
decomposition ( 7.36 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before identifying the correct degrees of freedom in four dimensions, as
discussed in section 18.1 , we need to take out the Kähler moduli
dependence from @xmath and we do this by defining a ’six-dimensional’
volume @xmath and the true ’holomorphic’ three-form @xmath as in
equations ( 22.7 ) and ( 18.5 ). With these definitions we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the four-dimensional dilaton

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be checked that the following condition holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so when we square the expression ( F.51 ) there is no mixing between
the various terms. Substituting ( F.51 ) into ( F.48 ) and using the
fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have replaced the variations of @xmath with the Kähler covariant
derivative as discussed in section 18.1 .

To reach the IIA expression we simply take the forms @xmath and @xmath
to only have six-dimensional dependence and components and use @xmath to
integrate out the unit vector @xmath . This directly gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It can be easily checked that the Weyl rescalings ( F.47 ) and ( F.49 )
are equivalent to the Weyl rescaling to reach the ten-dimensional Ricci
scalar first, and then performing the Weyl rescalings ( 18.10 ).

## Chapter \thechapter The IIA Gravitini Mass Matrix

In this appendix we derive the four-dimensional gravitini mass matrix
through dimensional reduction of the appropriate terms in the
ten-dimensional action of massive type IIA supergravity ( 17.1 ). We
consider the ten-dimensional gravitino decomposition ( 18.27 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We proceed to go through each term in ( 18.28 ).
The kinetic term
The ten-dimensional kinetic term for the gravitino induces a
four-dimensional mass for the particular index ranges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

This term is only non-vanishing when the internal spinors are not
covariantly constant and so corresponds to the potential induced by the
torsion on the manifold. To dimensionally reduce this term we substitute
the gravitino ansatz and decompose the @xmath matrices as in ( E.32 ).
This gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have acted on the spinors with the derivative and replaced the
resulting spinor bi-linears with the corresponding structure forms. We
can now use the relations ( 7.13 ) to eliminate the contorsion for
differential relations of the structure forms which gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.60)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This concludes the reduction of the kinetic term and we now move on to
the flux terms.
The flux terms
We begin by reducing the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Simple substitution of the gravitino ansatz yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rest of the flux terms follow again by simple substitution and
@xmath matrix algebra. They read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

After performing the Weyl rescalings ( 18.10 ), under which @xmath and
@xmath , the contributions computed above yield the mass matrix ( 18.29
).

## Chapter \thechapter The M-theory Gravitini Mass Matrix

In this appendix we derive the four-dimensional gravitini mass matrix
through dimensional reduction of the appropriate terms in the
eleven-dimensional action. We work in terms of the @xmath -structure
quantities as defined in section 7.1 . We begin by writing the
eleven-dimensional gravitino ansatz ( 22.21 ) in terms of the
four-dimensional chiral gravitini ( 22.21 ) and the complex internal
spinors ( 7.25 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now go through each term in ( 22 ) that contributes to the
four-dimensional mass matrix.
The kinetic term
We begin with the eleven-dimensional kinetic term which produces a mass
term in four dimensions for the particular index range choices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

To calculate this we use the relation for the covariant derivative
acting on the spinors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the contorsion on the internal manifold which is
anti-symmetric in its last two indices. Inserting ( F.67 ) into ( F.68 )
and using ( F.69 ) to evaluate the derivative on the spinors as well as
( 7.1.3 ) to replace the spinor bi-linears with the @xmath forms we
arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now using the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can see that actually the first terms in the third and fourth lines
cancel. This can be reasoned from the fact that the mass matrix should
be symmetric. Using ( 7.29 ) we eliminate the contorsion from ( A6.Ex29
) in favour of differential relations of the structure forms and thus
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.72)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This concludes the reduction of the kinetic term and we now move on to
the flux terms.
The flux terms
We begin be reducing the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

This term arises from the purely external Freud-Rubin flux which we
write as in ( 22.20 ). Substituting ( F.67 ) into ( F.73 ) and after
some gamma matrix algebra we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second flux term reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the term from the purely internal flux. Again the reduction is
simple and gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally we recall that the purely internal flux has a contribution from
the the background flux @xmath , and one which is due to the torsion of
the internal manifold @xmath , which combine into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

After performing the Weyl rescalings ( 22.13 ), under which @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , the contributions computed above yield the following
mass terms for the gravitini in four dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.79)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This action can be written in the form ( 22.4 ) using ( 22.25 ).

## Chapter \thechapter Coset Manifolds

In this appendix we briefly describe the procedure through which we can
derive explicit information on the coset such as the metric, the @xmath
-structure forms and the basis forms and their differential relations.

Consider a compact group @xmath with some subgroup @xmath then we can
decompose the Lie algebra as @xmath . So the Lie manifold @xmath is a
fibration of the Lie manifold @xmath over the base @xmath . The base
manifold @xmath is the coset manifold @xmath . We now follow the
discussion in [ 103 ] and construct a set of Lie valued one-forms from
elements on the fibre @xmath at a point @xmath on the coset manifold,
which we then expand in terms of the generators of the groups @xmath and
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices run over the number of generators of the subgroup. The
forms @xmath form the basis forms on the coset manifold and we take them
to be orthonormal so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of the coset. The expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives that the basis forms satisfy the differential relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.83)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath are the structure constants of the group @xmath . These
expressions allow us to calculate the differential relations on the
coset. The useful property of the coset is that requiring @xmath
-invariance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , we recover the transformation rules for a
basis forms on the coset

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now @xmath is the (inverse) adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath , so we
can consider the adjoint representation of @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then a general @xmath -tensor on the coset transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the elements @xmath in the generators, which in the adjoint
are the structure constants

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that for the tensor to remain invariant under the group action
it must satisfy the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

and should have constant co-efficients @xmath . This is the expression
that restricts the possible forms that respect the coset symmetries
which we can use to solve for the most general one, two or three-forms
on the coset and also the metric. Having quickly derived the relevant
expressions ( F.83 ) and ( F.89 ) we can move on to consider the
particular examples used in this paper. One immediate conclusion we can
draw is that scalar functions must be constant. This is the general
result that cosets can not support warping.

## Appendix G @xmath

This coset was first studied in [ 103 ] . The group @xmath is
represented in terms of the Gell-Mann matrices @xmath with @xmath which
satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It has two @xmath sub-groups generated by @xmath and @xmath . In terms
of the quantities of the previous section @xmath is spanned by @xmath
and @xmath is spanned by @xmath . Applying the constraint ( F.89 ) we
find that the most general symmetric two-tensor, which we interpret as
the metric, on the coset must take the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real parameters which are the
metric degrees of freedom or the geometrical moduli. Similarly the most
general two and three-forms read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where all the parameters are complex. There are no consistent one-forms
present. Imposing the six-dimensional @xmath -structure relations ( 7.8
), we arrive at the expressions ( 20.5 ) where the basis forms
explicitly read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The differential relations on these basis forms are derived from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These then give the differential relations ( 25 ).

## Appendix H @xmath

This coset was first studied in [ 120 ] . The group @xmath has two
commuting @xmath subgroups. Hence there are a number of ways to mod out
the @xmath and we consider the case where the subgroup @xmath is taken
to be a linear combination of the two @xmath s ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 For more details
on this process see [ 121 ] where the case we study is denoted @xmath .
. Then by calculating the structure constants and imposing ( F.89 ) we
find that the most general symmetric two tensor on the coset must take
the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (H.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where all the parameters are real. Similarly, the most general one, two
and three-forms are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where all the parameters can be complex. The structure forms @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath must fall within the restrictions of ( H ) and they
can be uniquely determined by imposing the algebraic @xmath -structure
relations on the forms in ( 7.28 ). This leads to equations relating the
complex parameters to the real metric moduli, if we identify @xmath with
@xmath , @xmath with @xmath , @xmath with @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Equations ( H ) give the form of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and we see
that the natural basis of forms on the manifold is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

in terms of which we can write the forms as given in equation ( 23.18 ).
The differential relations on the coset basis forms can be calculated
using ( F.83 ) and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From these expressions it is easy to calculate the basis form
differential relations ( 23.2 ).

## Appendix I @xmath

This coset was first studied in [ 117 ] . In this case we have @xmath .
Now @xmath so once we modded out by the @xmath we will be left with a
single @xmath that is in general a linear combination of the three
@xmath s in @xmath which we parameterise by three integers @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 The case where @xmath is the trivial
fibration case where the coset becomes @xmath . In that case this is the
same as compactifying type IIA supergravity on the manifold @xmath . .
We can repeat the analysis in the previous section and we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Imposing the @xmath relations we arrive at equation ( 25 ) where the
basis forms explicitly read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The differential relations on these basis forms are derived from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These then give the differential relations ( 25 ) where we have defined
the structure constants

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
