# Acknowledgements

I thank my advisor Prof. Alex Kehagias for his guidance during my Ph.D.
years. I would also like to thank the members of my advisory committee
Profs. Elias Kiritsis and George Zoupanos and the members of my
evaluation committee Profs. K. Anagnostopoulos, A.B. Lahanas, E.
Papantonopoulos and N.D. Tracas. I am also grateful to all my teachers
during my M.Sc. and Ph.D. time.

I thank Prof. Seif Randjbar-Daemi for sharing with me his expertise on
six-dimensional supergravity, for inviting me to ICTP, and for a very
interesting collaboration.

I thank the Theory Division of CERN, the High Energy, Cosmology and
Astroparticle Physics Section of ICTP and the Centre de Physique
Théorique of the École Polytechnique for hospitality during various
stages of this work.

I thank my colleague Constantina Mattheopoulou for our various
discussions, for help with bibliography and for proofreading my thesis.
I also thank my colleague and collaborator Dimitrios Zoakos for useful
discussions.

This thesis was financially supported from the “Heraclitus” program
cofunded by the Greek State and the European Union.

Finally, I have to thank my parents Dimitrios and Olympia and my brother
Alexandros for their constant support throughout these years.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 String Theory and Supergravity
    -    1.2 Six-dimensional Supergravity
    -    1.3 Anomaly Cancellation
    -    1.4 Outline of the Thesis
-    2 Supersymmetry and Supergravity
    -    2.1 Supersymmetry
        -    2.1.1 The supersymmetry algebra
        -    2.1.2 Massless representations
    -    2.2 Supergravity
        -    2.2.1 Gauge theory of the super-Poincaré group
        -    2.2.2 Pure gravity
        -    2.2.3 Simple supergravity
    -    2.3 Scalar Coset Manifolds
        -    2.3.1 Coset spaces and their geometry
        -    2.3.2 Nonlinear sigma models and gauging
    -    2.4 Supergravities in @xmath and in @xmath
        -    2.4.1 Eleven-dimensional supergravity
        -    2.4.2 Ten-dimensional @xmath supergravity
-    3 Anomalies
    -    3.1 Introduction to Anomalies
        -    3.1.1 Singlet anomalies
        -    3.1.2 Nonabelian anomalies
        -    3.1.3 Physical aspects of anomalies
    -    3.2 Calculation of Singlet Anomalies
        -    3.2.1 The spin– @xmath anomaly
        -    3.2.2 The spin– @xmath anomaly
        -    3.2.3 The self-dual @xmath –form anomaly
    -    3.3 Calculation of Nonabelian Anomalies
        -    3.3.1 The spin– @xmath anomaly
        -    3.3.2 The spin– @xmath anomaly
        -    3.3.3 The self-dual @xmath –form anomaly
        -    3.3.4 The consistent anomaly from the descent equations
    -    3.4 The Anomaly Polynomials
    -    3.5 Anomaly Cancellation
        -    3.5.1 The Green-Schwarz mechanism
    -    3.6 Global anomalies
        -    3.6.1 Witten’s @xmath anomaly
        -    3.6.2 Generalizations
-    4 Anomaly Cancellation in Superstring Theory and M-Theory
    -    4.1 Anomaly Cancellation in Superstring Theory
        -    4.1.1 Anomaly cancellation in Type IIB supergravity
        -    4.1.2 Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation in heterotic/Type
            I theory
    -    4.2 Anomaly Cancellation in Heterotic M-theory
        -    4.2.1 11–dimensional supergravity on @xmath
        -    4.2.2 Anomaly analysis
        -    4.2.3 The boundary action
        -    4.2.4 Anomaly cancellation
-    5 Anomaly-Free Supergravities in Six Dimensions
    -    5.1 @xmath , @xmath Supergravity
        -    5.1.1 A quick survey of @xmath supergravities
        -    5.1.2 General facts about @xmath , @xmath supergravity
        -    5.1.3 Gravity and tensor multiplets
        -    5.1.4 Vector multiplets
        -    5.1.5 Hypermultiplets
        -    5.1.6 The complete Lagrangian
    -    5.2 Anomaly Cancellation in @xmath , @xmath Supergravity
        -    5.2.1 Local anomalies
        -    5.2.2 Global anomalies
    -    5.3 Known Anomaly-Free Models
        -    5.3.1 Ungauged theories: Heterotic string theory on @xmath
        -    5.3.2 Gauged theories: The @xmath model
    -    5.4 Searching for Anomaly-Free Theories
    -    5.5 Anomaly-free Ungauged Supergravities
        -    5.5.1 Simple groups
        -    5.5.2 Products of two simple groups
    -    5.6 Anomaly-free Gauged Supergravities
    -    5.7 Anomaly Cancellation in @xmath , @xmath Supergravity on
        @xmath
        -    5.7.1 Basics of @xmath , @xmath supergravity
        -    5.7.2 Compactification on @xmath and anomalies
        -    5.7.3 Anomaly cancellation
    -    5.8 Discussion
-    6 Magnetic Compactifications
    -    6.1 Equations of Motion, Supersymmetry and the Scalar Potential
    -    6.2 Ungauged Theories: Compactification on a Magnetized Torus
    -    6.3 Gauged Theories: Compactification on a Magnetized Sphere
        -    6.3.1 The Salam-Sezgin model
        -    6.3.2 General embeddings
        -    6.3.3 The @xmath model
        -    6.3.4 The @xmath model
-    A Notation and conventions
-    B Gamma Matrices and Spinors in Diverse Dimensions
    -    B.1 Gamma Matrices in Diverse Dimensions
        -    B.1.1 The Clifford algebra
        -    B.1.2 Gamma matrix identities
    -    B.2 Representations of the Clifford Algebra
        -    B.2.1 Spinors of @xmath
        -    B.2.2 The Weyl and Majorana conditions
    -    B.3 Six-Dimensional Spinors
-    C Characteristic Classes and Index Theorems
    -    C.1 Characteristic Classes
        -    C.1.1 Generalities
        -    C.1.2 Characteristic classes of complex vector bundles
        -    C.1.3 Characteristic classes of real vector bundles
    -    C.2 The Descent Equations
    -    C.3 Index Theorems
-    D Anomaly Coefficients
    -    D.1 Second and Fourth Indices
    -    D.2 Anomaly Coefficients

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 String Theory and Supergravity

Despite the impressive successes of the Standard Model of elementary
particle physics, there still remain many fundamental problems
unanswered up to date. The most important such problem is finding an
appropriate quantum-mechanical formulation of gravity since, from the
usual viewpoint of quantum field theory, the gravitational interaction
is non-renormalizable. Another problem, of more theoretical interest, is
finding a unified description of all forces in Nature. Up to now, the
most successful attempts to solve these problems have been made within
the framework of string theory [ Green:1987sp , Green:1987mn ,
Polchinski:1998rq , Polchinski:1998rr ] .

String theory was initially developed with the hope that it would
explain certain properties of the strong interactions. Namely, the soft
behavior of high-energy hadronic scattering amplitudes in the Regge
limit could be approximated by a sum over an infinity of resonant states
whose spectrum closely resembles that of a vibrating string. This
picture turned out to be problematic, mainly because string theory (i)
contains a massless spin–2 state that does not appear in the hadronic
spectrum and (ii) cannot properly account for the pointlike structure of
hadrons discovered in deep inelastic scattering experiments, and was
abandoned after the discovery of QCD. However, motivated by the
existence of the massless spin–2 state, Scherk and Schwarz proposed a
drastic reinterpretation of string theory as a candidate for a unified
theory of all interactions, including gravity. The striking property of
this interpretation was that, due to the soft behavior of string
amplitudes, the ultraviolet behavior of the theory was well under
control, unlike ordinary quantum gravity. Moreover, there are also
massless string excitations that correspond to other field theory
particles, including spin 1/2 fermions and spin-1 gauge bosons with
Standard-Model–like gauge symmetries. From the above, it appeared that
string theory has the potential to resolve both problems mentioned in
the first paragraph, a viewpoint that is pursued up to now.

One key concept in the development of string theory is the notion of
supersymmetry, a non-trivial extension of the Poincaré spacetime
symmetry that mixes bosonic and fermionic fields. Field theories with
global supersymmetry are Standard-Model extensions involving extra
fields accompanying the Standard-Model ones. Field theories with local
supersymmetry are furthermore required to incorporate gravity and are
known as supergravity theories; despite their improved ultraviolet
properties, they are still non-renormalizable. With regard to string
theory, the prevailing view is that supersymmetry is actually required
in order for string theories to be consistent; string theories with
supersymmetry are called superstring theories.

The interactions of superstring theories in the low-energy regime where
the massive modes decouple are described by effective field theories
containing supergravity and, in the heterotic and Type I cases, super
Yang-Mills theories. In this context, the problem of
non-renormalizability of these theories is automatically resolved by the
ultraviolet completion provided by string theory.

A feature of string theory is that its internal consistency requires the
presence of extra spacetime dimensions in addition to the observed four;
in particular, superstring theory requires 10 spacetime dimensions. In
order for the theory to make sense, the extra dimensions must be
unobservable for some reason. For example, the extra dimensions may form
a compact manifold whose size is small enough so that it cannot be
probed at present-day energies; this is called compactification and has
the important feature that it gives rise to extra gauge symmetries
arising from the components of the gravitational field along the extra
dimensions. Compactification can also be described in the
effective-field-theory viewpoint of supergravity, in which case it leads
to lower-dimensional supergravity theories. One of the most known
examples is the compactification of @xmath supergravity on Calabi-Yau
3–folds (six-dimensional Kähler manifolds of @xmath holonomy), which
leads to @xmath supergravities in four dimensions. More involved
examples are based on compactifications of the ten-dimenwsional theories
on internal product manifolds; the theories resulting from the first
steps of the compactification are then described by supergravity
theories in intermediate dimensions, @xmath and many of the features of
the underlying theory can be studied in the framework of these
lower-dimensional theories. This thesis will be concerned with a class
of theories of this type, namely @xmath supergravities in six
dimensions.

### 1.2 Six-dimensional Supergravity

Six-dimensional supergravity theories have been attracted a lot of
interest over the years and have been studied in a variety of
phenomenological contexts. Some physically interesting setups motivating
the study of such theories are the following.

1.  Self-tuning of the cosmological constant . A major and long-standing
    problem in theoretical physics is the search for an explanation of
    the extremely small positive value of the cosmological constant that
    does not rely on fine tuning. In the context of theories with extra
    dimensions, one is thus instructed to search for classical solutions
    of the higher-dimensional theory that force a 4D Minkowski space
    upon us. Ten-dimensional superstring theories and eleven-dimensional
    supergravity admit solutions of this kind, the internal spaces being
    Calabi-Yau 3–folds and @xmath –holonomy manifolds respectively.
    However, the choice of the internal manifold in these solutions is
    far from being unique and, moreover, there also exist other types of
    solutions of these theories that also contain 4D spacetime as a
    factor. On the other hand, there is a special class of
    six-dimensional theories, namely @xmath gauged supergravities, that
    admit a unique solution of the required type. These theories are
    severely constrained by supersymmetry, which forbids a bare 6D
    cosmological constant but requires a potential for the scalars of
    the theory. This potential is positive-definite and has a unique
    minimum, in which it reduces to a positive effective 6D cosmological
    constant. Introducing the most general ansatz for the metric and the
    other background fields that is compatible with a maximally
    symmetric 4D spacetime and a compact regular 2D internal space, it
    has been shown that the unique solution of the equations of motion
    is given by 4D Minkowski space times an internal @xmath . Since the
    vanishing of the 4D cosmological constant is imposed by the
    equations of motion, this is referred to as self-tuning, in contrast
    to fine tuning. Relaxing the requirement for a regular internal
    space opens up other possibilities that include brane solutions with
    internal singularities of the conical type.

2.  Flat codimension–2 branes . Another motivation for six-dimensional
    theories comes from the fact that, in a bulk-brane theory with
    vanishing bulk cosmological constant, a codimension–2 @xmath –brane
    is always Ricci-flat, regardless of its tension. This is most easily
    seen by considering the trace-reversed Einstein equations in the
    @xmath –dimensional bulk,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the @xmath –dimensional Planck mass. Noting that the
    stress tensor for a @xmath –brane is given by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath denote the directions tangent to the brane and @xmath
    denote the transverse directions, we immediately find

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    This means that, independent of any effects giving rise to a vacuum
    energy on the brane, the brane worldvolume is always Ricci-flat and
    thus the brane cosmological constant vanishes; all vacuum-energy
    effects are absorbed into the internal geometry. Although for a
    compact internal space this latter fact reintroduces fine-tuning in
    the guise of requiring a special value for the brane energy density,
    this can be remedied by considering non-compact internal spaces of
    finite volume, both singular and non-singular. For the physically
    interesting case of a 3–brane, the above scenario requires a
    six-dimensional bulk.

3.  The hierarchy problem and sub-millimeter extra dimensions . An
    attractive scenario in theories with extra dimensions is the
    possibility of the resolution of the hierarchy problem resulting
    from the discrepancy between the Planck and the TeV scale through
    the introduction of large extra dimensions. Considering a @xmath
    –dimensional gravitational theory compactified down to 4 dimensions,
    the 4–dimensional Planck mass @xmath is derived from the @xmath
    –dimensional Planck mass @xmath by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the average size of the internal dimensions. To
    remove the hierarchy problem, one can set the fundamental scale
    @xmath to be of the order of @xmath . Then, the fact that @xmath
    implies that the size of the compact manifold equals @xmath for
    @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and so on. We see
    that the six-dimensional case ( @xmath ) is quite special in that it
    requires the internal dimensions to be in the sub-millimeter range.
    Moreover, the mass scale set by the internal dimensions is in this
    case @xmath , which is close to the expected scale of the neutrino
    masses and to the mass scale set by the observed cosmological
    constant.

On the more theoretical side, further motivation for studying
six-dimensional supergravities is provided by (i) their relation to
ten-dimensional @xmath supergravities, (ii) their connection, in the
gravity-decoupling limit, to the much-studied @xmath supersymmetric
gauge theories in four dimensions, (iii) the existence of self-dual
strings in six dimensions and (iv) the anomaly constraints that appear
in six-dimensional theories. This latter aspect will be elucidated in
the following section.

### 1.3 Anomaly Cancellation

If any of the scenarios mentioned above is to be realized in the context
of a six-dimensional supergravity theory, the theory must be consistent
quantum-mechanically. Consistency of these theories at the quantum level
is threatened by non-renormalizability and anomalies. Although the
problem of non-renormalizability in such contexts is always assumed to
be resolved by an appropriate ultraviolet completion of the theory, the
problem of anomalies is an infrared problem which must be resolved
within the low-energy effective theory. So, a fundamental problem is to
examine the conditions for anomaly freedom and to identify the
anomaly-free theories among the available possibilities.

Again, the case of six dimensions is quite special in that gravitational
and mixed nonabelian anomalies are present on top of the usual gauge and
mixed abelian anomalies that appear in any even number of dimensions. As
a result, the requirement of anomaly cancellation leads to quite
stringent constraints that single out a relatively small number of
consistent models. This is in sharp contrast to the case of the Standard
Model/MSSM where the anomaly cancellation conditions are weak and can be
satisfied by a vast number of models. Moreover, adopting the viewpoint
that the theories under consideration are effective theories arising as
long-wavelength limits of fundamental theories, identifying the possible
anomaly-free models can potentially enable us to infer information about
the high-energy aspects of the underlying theory through low-energy
considerations.

In this respect, it is instructive to recall the basic facts in the case
of 10D supergravity. The string-derived chiral 10D supergravities known
before the explicit calculation of higher-dimensional anomalies were
Type IIB @xmath supergravity (realized in terms of closed strings) and
@xmath supergravity coupled to @xmath Yang-Mills (realized in terms of
Type I strings). At the time, it was believed that these theories were
anomalous, signaling an internal inconsistency of string theory. This
issue was partially settled when the calculation of 10D gravitational
anomalies led to the striking result that the anomalies of the Type IIB
theory completely cancel; on the other hand, @xmath supergravity was
found to be anomalous. However, Green and Schwarz discovered that @xmath
theory can also be made anomaly-free through a coupling of the 2–form of
the supergravity multiplet to a certain 8–form constructed out of
curvature invariants. The necessary and sufficient condition for anomaly
cancellation was that the anomaly polynomial must factorize. This can
happen only for a gauge group of dimension 496 with no sixth-order
Casimirs, in which case the factorization coefficients are uniquely
determined and result in a further constraint on certain
group-theoretical coefficients. The obvious candidate was @xmath which
indeed satisfied all the above requirements and the corresponding string
theory was subsequently shown to also satisfy the RR tadpole
cancellation condition. However, surprisingly enough, these requirements
were also satisfied by the @xmath group which at that time lacked a
string-theoretical interpretation, as well as by the physically
uninteresting @xmath and @xmath groups; the above four groups exhaust
all possibilities. The discovery of the heterotic string provided a
string realization of the @xmath model which turned out to be the most
phenomenologically relevant string unification model at the time. These
developments made clear that anomaly cancellation not only seriously
constrains the particle spectrum of a theory but can also point, from
the effective-field-theory point of view, to new consistent models that
may be realized through a more fundamental theory.

Anomaly cancellation via the Green-Schwarz mechanism carries over to
lower-dimensional chiral theories like the minimal 6D supergravities.
Here, however, things are more complicated mainly due to the existence
of the massless hypermultiplets that may transform in arbitrary
representations of the gauge group. A consequence of this is that the
anomaly cancellation conditions are somewhat weaker than those in the
10D case. First, the condition for the cancellation of irreducible
gravitational anomalies does not uniquely fix the dimension of the gauge
group but, instead, it simply sets an upper bound on the number of
non-singlet hypermultiplets. Second, in the case that the gauge group
has fourth-order Casimirs, cancellation of the corresponding irreducible
gauge anomaly leads to an equality constraint for the numbers of
hypermultiplets. Finally, the factorization condition does not determine
how the highest-order traces in the gauge anomaly must factorize but
instead leads to two weaker constraints. The conditions mentioned above
admit a large number of solutions for the gauge group and the possible
hypermultiplet representations and, in fact, a complete classification
is a very complicated task.

### 1.4 Outline of the Thesis

The objective of this thesis is the study of anomaly cancellation in
minimal @xmath chiral supergravities in six dimensions and the search
for more anomaly-free models than those already known. In the main part
of the thesis, we examine the relevant anomaly cancellation conditions
in detail and we conduct an exhaustive search for anomaly-free ungauged
and gauged models under some restrictions on the allowed gauge groups
and representations.

This thesis is structured as follows. Chapters 2, 3 and 4 contain review
material, included to make the discussion as self-contained as possible.
In Chapter 2, we discuss the general structure and features of
supergravity theories. In Chapter 3, we do a detailed study of anomalies
and their cancellation in gauge and gravitational theories. Finally, in
Chapter 4 we discuss anomaly cancellation in the context of superstring
theories as well as in the context of the heterotic M-theory of Hořava
and Witten. Chapters 5 and 6 contain the main part of this thesis and
are organized as follows. In Chapter 5, we present a detailed review of
anomaly cancellation in six dimensions and we present the results of a
detailed search of anomaly-free models of this type. We also examine
anomaly cancellation in the context of Hořava-Witten–type
compactifications of minimal seven-dimensional supergravity on the
@xmath orbifold. Finally, in Chapter 6 we do a brief study of
four-dimensional compactifications of the 6D supergravities under
consideration. Our conventions and many useful results needed in this
thesis are summarized in four appendices.

The original material contained in this thesis is presented in Chapters
5 and 6. In Sections 5.4 to 5.8 , we present the results of a search for
anomaly-free @xmath , @xmath supergravities initiated in [
Avramis:2005qt ] (in collaboration with A. Kehagias and S.
Randjbar-Daemi) and completed in [ Avramis:2005hc ] (in collaboration
with A. Kehagias). In Section 5.7 , we examine anomaly cancellation on
the six-dimensional fixed points of @xmath , @xmath supergravity on
@xmath , as in [ Avramis:2004cn ] (in collaboration with A. Kehagias).
Finally, Section 6.3 includes discussions about the 4D compactifications
of the new gauged models found here, as in [ Avramis:2005qt ] .

## Chapter 2 Supersymmetry and Supergravity

### 2.1 Supersymmetry

Supersymmetry is an extension of the Poincaré spacetime symmetry of
physical theories which involves fermionic generators that mix boson and
fermion fields. Since its discovery, it has played a prominent role both
in 4–dimensional particle physics as well as in higher-dimensional
unified theories of particle physics and gravity, namely string theories
and their effective supergravities.

The history of supersymmetry can be traced back to 1969, where Coleman
and Mandula [ Coleman:1967ad ] proved a no-go theorem stating that,
under a set of assumptions, the spacetime and internal parts of the
symmetries of the S-matrix of a field theory do not mix. The strongest
assumption underlying the theorem was that the S-matrix symmetries are
described by ordinary Lie algebras involving bosonic generators. During
the development of string theory in the early seventies, it was
recognized that the two-dimensional worldsheet theory of strings with
fermionic degrees of freedom possess a supersymmetry relating bosons and
fermions. Although this was not of direct relevance to the
four-dimensional problem earlier posed, soon after that Haag,
Lopuszànski and Sohnius [ Haag:1975qh ] evaded the Coleman-Mandula
result by relaxing the restriction to bosonic generators and constructed
the most general form of the symmetry group. It was shown that, in such
a case, there exists indeed the possibility of spacetime supersymmetry,
which is an extension of the bosonic Poincaré symmetry of field theories
involving fermionic generators that mix non-trivially with the Poincaré
group. Subsequently, supersymmetry emerged also as a spacetime symmetry
of string theory, and one that is crucial for its self-consistency. Due
to its attractive properties, both in the context of particle physics
and string theory, supersymmetry has evolved into a field of intense
study despite the fact that it still awaits experimental verification.

In this section, we will describe some elementary aspects of
supersymmetry relevant to the supergravity theories under consideration.
Specifically, we will review the supersymmetry algebras in diverse
dimensions and the construction of their massless representations, which
are the building blocks of supergravity theories.

#### 2.1.1 The supersymmetry algebra

To develop the basic principles of supersymmetry, our starting point is
the Coleman-Mandula theorem stated earlier on. To be more specific, this
theorem states that, for a four-dimensional field theory where (i) there
exists a non-trivial S-matrix, (ii) the vacuum is non-degenerate, (iii)
there are no massless particles and (iv) the continuous symmetries are
described by Lie algebras, the symmetry group of the S-matrix is
necessarily given by the direct product of the spacetime Poincaré group
with commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with an internal symmetry group with commutation relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

By “direct”, we mean that the Poincaré and internal symmetries commute,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Coleman-Mandula theorem has a simple intuitive explanation.
Considering a general two-body scattering process in field theory, we
know that Lorentz invariance fixes the incoming and outgoing
trajectories to lie all on the same plane and translation invariance
fixes the energies of the outgoing particles. So, the only unknown in
this process is the scattering angle. Allowing for an internal symmetry
that mixes with the Poincaré symmetry would further constrain the
kinematics of the process and would result in a quantization of the
scattering angle. Analyticity of the S-matrix would then imply that the
transition element is independent of the angle, i.e. that the theory is
trivial.

To evade the Coleman-Mandula theorem and the restrictions it imposes on
the symmetries of a theory, one may relax the assumption that these
symmetries are described by ordinary Lie algebras, allowing for the
possibility of graded Lie algebras or superalgebras [ Kac:1977em ,
Frappat:1996pb ] . This was recognized by Golf’and and Likhtman [
Golfand:1971iw ] as early as 1971 and the most general form of such an
algebra was constructed by Haag, Lopuszànski and Sohnius [ Haag:1975qh ]
in 1975 for the four-dimensional case. In what follows, we will sketch
the construction of such a superalgebra in four dimensions.

We start by introducing a @xmath grading that divides the algebra
elements into two classes, even and odd. The structure of the
superalgebra is such that two even elements close on an even element by
commutation, one even and one odd element close on an odd element by
commutation and two odd elements close on an even element by
anticommutation. The Jacobi identities are modified in a fairly obvious
way. The even generators are assumed to be @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
while the odd generators are called supercharges and are written as
@xmath where @xmath is a Lorentz index and @xmath is an internal index
labelling the different supercharges. The commutation relations ( 2.1.1
)-( 2.3 ) of the even generators must remain intact due to the
Coleman-Mandula theorem. The remaining (anti)commutation relations
involving the odd generators are determined by writing down their most
general form and invoking the Jacobi identities. Starting from the
@xmath commutator, it must have the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the @xmath Jacobi identity requires that the matrices @xmath satisfy
the commutation relations of the Lorentz algebra, i.e. that @xmath form
a representation of this algebra. Due to the anticommuting property of
@xmath ’s, this representation must be fermionic, and the simplest
choice is the spinor representation; actually, it can be shown that this
is the only possible representation. So, the @xmath ’s transform as a
Lorentz spinor and, since we are in four dimensions, we can impose the
Majorana condition to simplify things. The @xmath commutator is thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Turning to the @xmath commutator, its general form is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the @xmath Jacobi identity, combined with the Majorana condition
fixes @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the @xmath anticommutator, we first impose for simplicity the
condition that it does not involve any new bosonic generators (this
excludes the possibility of central charges ). Then, the requirement for
symmetry under simultaneous interchange of @xmath with @xmath , the
symmetry property ( B.26 ) of the @xmath products and the @xmath Jacobi
identity fix its form to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a symmetric matrix. By a suitable rotation of the
supercharges, one may set @xmath while preserving the Majorana
condition. Doing so and invoking the @xmath Jacobi identity fixes @xmath
, while @xmath can be fixed by a choice of scale. Setting @xmath , we
write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, turning to the @xmath commutator, one can switch from a
Majorana to a Weyl basis and write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are complex matrices. Then, the @xmath Jacobi identity
implies that these matrices are antihermitian and hence the @xmath (
@xmath ) transform in the @xmath ( @xmath ) of @xmath . This type of
symmetry is called R-symmetry.

We will now discuss the generalization of the above results to other
dimensions [ Nahm:1977tg ] , where the available spinors are of
different types. First of all, Eqs. ( 2.1.1 ), ( 2.5 ) and ( 2.7 ) hold
for all types of spinors and so the supersymmetry algebra contains the
relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath anticommutator and the R-symmetry group both depend on the
type of available spinors for a given spacetime dimension. Using the
reality properties of spinors from Table B.2 we see that we can choose
our conventions so that the minimal spinor is Majorana or Weyl for
@xmath , (pseudo)Majorana for @xmath , symplectic Majorana for @xmath ,
Majorana-Weyl for @xmath and symplectic Majorana-Weyl for @xmath . The
results are as follows.

-   @xmath . Here, we have Majorana supercharges, satisfying

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Alternatively, we can use a Weyl basis where the supercharges are
    @xmath and satisfy

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Here, the @xmath superscripts indicate the chirality of the
    supercharges and @xmath . The R-symmetry group is @xmath with the
    chiral components transforming in @xmath .

-   @xmath . Here, we have Majorana supercharges satisfying

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The R-symmetry group is @xmath with the supercharges transforming in
    @xmath .

-   @xmath . Here, we have symplectic Majorana supercharges, satisfying

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the symplectic metric and where @xmath must be even.
    The R-symmetry group is @xmath with the supercharges transforming in
    @xmath . The number @xmath must be even.

-   @xmath . Here, we have Majorana-Weyl supercharges. Due to this
    property, the @xmath supercharges can be decomposed into @xmath
    supercharges of positive chirality and @xmath supercharges of
    negative chirality which satisfy the algebra

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which shows that, in contrast to the @xmath case, supercharges of
    opposite chirality do not mix. The R-symmetry group is @xmath with
    the supercharges transforming @xmath . The numbers @xmath must be
    even.

-   @xmath . Here, we have symplectic Majorana-Weyl supercharges
    satisfying the algebra

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where again supercharges of opposite chirality do not mix. The
    R-symmetry group is @xmath and the supercharges transform in @xmath
    . The numbers @xmath must be even.

For reviews on supersymmetry algebras in diverse dimensions, the reader
is referred to [ Strathdee:1987jr , deWit:1997sz , West:1998ey ,
VanProeyen:1999ni ] .

#### 2.1.2 Massless representations

Here, we discuss the construction of massless representations of
supersymmetry allgebras in diverse dimensions. We start by discussing
the automorphisms of supersymmetry algebras in diverse dimension. Next,
we examine some general properties of the massless representations,
which lead to an upper bound on the number of possible supersymmetries
in a given dimension. Finally, we turn to the actual construction of
such representations for the cases @xmath .

##### Automorphism groups

The @xmath anticommutation relation of the supersymmetry algebra
possesses a set of symmetries that form the automorphism group of the
algebra. Since the existence of such a group implies that all
representations of the supersymmetry algebra fall into its irreducible
representations, we need to identify this automorphism group for all
possible cases.

The automorphism group naturally splits into a spacetime and an internal
part. The spacetime part is the little group of the Lorentz group, i.e.
the subgroup that leaves the @xmath –momentum @xmath invariant. For the
massless representations of interest, we can pass to a lightlike frame
where the @xmath –momentum is @xmath and the little group is identified
with the @xmath that rotates its zero components. To find the @xmath
representations of the supercharges, we note that the latter have been
defined as spinors of @xmath and so we have to consider the
decomposition @xmath . Under this decomposition, a Weyl spinor (in the
even-dimensional case) and a Dirac spinor (in the odd-dimensional case)
decompose as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the subscripts @xmath correspond to the @xmath “helicity”
eigenvalues @xmath . The internal part is the R-symmetry group,
corresponding to “rotations” of the vector formed by the @xmath
supercharges that preserve the supersymmetry algebra. From the previous
subsection, we know that the supercharges transform in the @xmath of
@xmath for @xmath , the @xmath of @xmath for @xmath , the @xmath of
@xmath for @xmath , the @xmath of @xmath for @xmath and the @xmath of
@xmath for @xmath .

##### General properties of massless representations

We will now consider the general properties of the massless
representations of supersymmetry algebras. Considering, for simplicity
and without loss of generality, the Majorana case, we write the @xmath
anticommutator in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and evaluating it explicitly in our lightlike reference frame, we easily
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, in the @xmath –representation considered in Appendix C, we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for the vector of @xmath helicities. Taking the
expectation of this expression, for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , in a
state @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, the @xmath components of the supercharges create zero-norm
states and can be safely set to zero. So, in constructing the
representations, we must consider only the nonzero @xmath components
which we will collectively denote as @xmath . The number of real nonzero
components is found using Eq. ( B.39 ) for the real dimension of a
minimal spinor in @xmath dimensions, multiplying by the number @xmath of
supersymmetries and dividing by @xmath to remove the zero components.
This way, we are left with @xmath real components where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

These components can be grouped into @xmath pairs of lowering and
raising operators @xmath , where @xmath . They can be normalized so as
to satisfy the algebra of @xmath uncoupled fermionic oscillators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can be chosen so that the lowering (raising) operators have weight
@xmath ( @xmath ) with respect to one of the @xmath helicity operators,
say @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain the representations of the algebra ( 2.19 ), we consider a
Clifford vacuum, characterized by its helicity and annihilated by all
lowering operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and transforming in an @xmath –dimensional irreducible representation of
the automorphism group. Acting on this vacuum with the raising
operators, we obtain a representation whose states have the form @xmath
, where each value of @xmath corresponds to @xmath states of helicity
@xmath . In total, the representation space is comprised of @xmath
states. The lowest representation is obtained from a Clifford vacuum
that is a singlet of the automorphism group and contains @xmath states
forming a spinor of @xmath .

From this construction, we can obtain an upper bound on the possible
number of supersymmetries in any given dimension as well as an upper
bound on the spacetime dimensionality for which supersymmetry can exist.
The above results imply that the highest-helicity state for a given
Clifford vacuum has helicity @xmath . However, since fields of spin
higher than @xmath cannot be consistently coupled to gravity, physically
relevant representations should not contain states of helicity higher
than @xmath or lower than @xmath . Thus, we are led to the restriction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying this bound to Eq. ( 2.23 ), we see that it implies an upper
bound on the number @xmath of supersymmetries that we may have in a
given dimension. Moreover, for @xmath this equation has no solution for
@xmath , that is, supersymmetry requires at most 11 spacetime dimensions
.

The results of this section up to now are summarized in Table 2.1 ,
which contains the various properties of the supercharges and the
allowed numbers of supersymmetries in all spacetime dimensions from
@xmath to @xmath .

##### Massless representations of minimal supersymmetry in @xmath

Using the above results, we can build the representations of any
supersymmetry algebra in any spacetime dimension. The easiest procedure
for obtaining the representations consists of the following steps: (i)
consider the lowest representation which transforms as a spinor of
@xmath , (ii) embed the automorphism group into @xmath and read off the
particle content of the lowest representation by considering the
decomposition of this spinor representation and (iii) construct higher
representations by taking the tensor product of the lowest
representation with irreducible representations of the automorphism
group. Since this procedure is best illustrated by considering specific
examples, we will next examine the detailed construction of the
representations of the minimal supersymmetry algebras in @xmath and
@xmath .

-   @xmath . In eleven dimensions, the unique supersymmetry algebra is
    the @xmath algebra which has @xmath real nonzero supercharges
    transforming as a spinor @xmath of the little group @xmath . The
    fact that @xmath implies that there exists only one representation
    of the supersymmetry algebra. So, acting with the @xmath raising
    operators on the unique @xmath –singlet Clifford vacuum, we obtain a
    representation space of @xmath states transforming as a Dirac spinor
    @xmath of @xmath . To find the field content of this representation
    space, we must arrange these @xmath states into irreps of the little
    group @xmath . To do so, we first decompose the @xmath Dirac spinor
    into the two irreducible Weyl spinors @xmath and @xmath . Next, we
    consider the embedding @xmath , under which these Weyl spinors
    decompose as @xmath and @xmath . So, the representation contains the
    bosons @xmath (graviton) and @xmath ( @xmath -form) plus the fermion
    @xmath (gravitino). This is the @xmath gravity multiplet

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.28)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath . In ten dimensions, the minimal supersymmetry algebras have
    @xmath and @xmath . Considering for definiteness the second case, we
    have @xmath real nonzero supercharges transforming as a spinor
    @xmath of the little group @xmath . Since @xmath , there are two
    possible representations. Acting with the 4 raising operators on a
    @xmath –singlet Clifford vacuum, we obtain @xmath states
    transforming as a reducible spinor @xmath of @xmath . We note that
    in this case, the automorphism group coincides with the group
    corresponding to the Clifford algebra of the ladder operators. To
    find their field content, we must arrange the reducible spinor
    @xmath of @xmath into two irreducible representations of the same
    group, one bosonic and one fermionic. The desired decomposition is
    @xmath . So, the first representation of the supersymmetry algebra
    contains the boson @xmath (gauge field) and the fermion @xmath
    (positive-chirality fermion). This is the @xmath , @xmath vector
    multiplet

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The second representation is obtained by tensoring the above
    representation with one of the 8–dimensional irreducible
    representations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . The relevant
    representation for @xmath supersymmetry turns out to be @xmath .
    Taking the tensor product according to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

    we obtain the bosons @xmath (graviton), @xmath ( @xmath -form) and
    @xmath (dilaton) and the fermions @xmath (positive-chirality
    gravitino) and @xmath (negative-chirality fermion). We thus arrive
    at the @xmath , @xmath gravity multiplet

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.31)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where we noted that the 2–form potential can be traded for a dual
    6–form potential.

-   @xmath . In seven dimensions, the minimal supersymmetry algebra is
    the @xmath algebra, which has @xmath real nonzero supercharges
    transforming in the @xmath of the @xmath automorphism group. Since
    @xmath , there are two possible representations. Acting with the 4
    raising operators on a @xmath –singlet Clifford vacuum, we obtain
    @xmath states transforming as a reducible spinor @xmath of @xmath .
    To find their field content, we first arrange the @xmath of @xmath
    into the irreducible representations @xmath and @xmath . We next
    consider the embedding @xmath , under which these representations
    decompose as @xmath and @xmath . So, the first representation of the
    supersymmetry algebra contains the bosons @xmath (gauge field) and
    @xmath (real triplet of scalars) and the fermions @xmath (fermion
    doublet). This is the @xmath , @xmath vector multiplet,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.32)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is a @xmath doublet index. The second representation is
    obtaining by taking the tensor product with @xmath according to

      -- -- -- --------
               (2.33)
      -- -- -- --------

    and contains the bosons @xmath (graviton), @xmath (2–form) @xmath
    (gauge field triplet) and @xmath (dilaton) plus the fermions @xmath
    (gravitino doublet) and @xmath (fermion doublet). This is the @xmath
    , @xmath gravity multiplet

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where we noted that the 2–form potential can be traded for its dual
    3–form potential.

-   @xmath . In six dimensions, the minimal supersymmetry algebras have
    @xmath and @xmath . Considering for definiteness the second case, we
    have @xmath real nonzero supercharges transforming in the @xmath of
    the @xmath automorphism group; equivalently, one may write the
    automorphism group as @xmath and the representation of the
    supercharges as @xmath . Since @xmath , there are four possible
    representations. Acting with the @xmath raising operators on a
    @xmath –singlet Clifford vacuum, we obtain @xmath states
    transforming as a reducible spinor @xmath of @xmath . To find their
    field content, we first arrange the @xmath of @xmath into the
    irreducible spinors @xmath and @xmath . We next embed @xmath in
    @xmath in such a way that @xmath and @xmath correspond,
    respectively, to the fundamentals of @xmath and @xmath . So, the
    first representation of the supersymmetry algebra contains the
    bosons @xmath (complex doublet of scalars) and the fermion @xmath
    (positive-chirality fermion). This is the @xmath , @xmath
    hypermultiplet

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where each @xmath is understood as a real scalar and each @xmath as
    a symplectic Majorana spinor. The remaining representations of the
    algebra are obtained by tensoring this representation with the three
    smallest irreducible representations of @xmath . Taking the tensor
    product with @xmath according to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

    we obtain the boson @xmath (gauge field) and the fermions @xmath
    (negative-chirality fermion doublet). This is the @xmath , @xmath
    vector multiplet,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Likewise, taking the tensor product with @xmath according to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    we obtain the bosons @xmath (anti-self-dual 2–form) and @xmath
    (dilaton) and the fermions @xmath (positive-chirality fermion
    doublet). This is the @xmath , @xmath tensor multiplet,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Finally, taking the tensor product with @xmath according to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

    we obtain the bosons @xmath (graviton), @xmath (self-dual 2–form)
    and the fermions @xmath (negative-chirality gravitino doublet). This
    is the @xmath , @xmath gravity multiplet,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

### 2.2 Supergravity

As with many types of symmetry, supersymmetry may be treated either as a
rigid symmetry, where the transformation parameters are constant, or as
a local gauge symmetry, where the transformation parameters are
spacetime-dependent. However, in contrast to ordinary internal
symmetries, supersymmetry possesses the special property that it mixes
with the spacetime Poincaré symmetry. So, treating supersymmetry as a
local symmetry actually requires promoting the full super-Poincaré
symmetry to a local one and thus leads to theories containing gravity.
These theories are known by the name of supergravity . The gauge field
of local supersymmetry is the vector-spinor gravitino appearing in all
gravity multiplets.

Supergravity theories were originally formulated with the hope that they
would tame the ultraviolet divergences that plague four-dimensional
quantum gravity. However, although these theories exhibit better
ultraviolet behavior than ordinary quantum gravity, it turns out that
they are still non-renormalizable, failing to realize this initial hope.
Nevertheless, supergravity theories emerged back to life, not as
fundamental theories of gravity, but rather as effective field theories
describing the low-energy degrees of freedom of underlying theories,
such as superstring theories and M-theory; in this viewpoint, the
ultraviolet divergences are regarded as low-energy artifacts that are
guaranteed to cancel in the complete theory.

During the years, there has been developed a substantial machinery for
the construction of supergravity theories. Some of the popular methods
are the following.

-   Noether method : Start from an incomplete theory (e.g. a linearized
    or rigidly supersymmetric theory) and appropriately modify the
    Lagrangian and supersymmetry variations of the fields term by term
    until the theory becomes locally supersymmetric.

-   Superspace methods : Introduce fermionic spacetime coordinates in
    addition to the usual bosonic ones and formulate general relativity
    on this extended space by replacing the vielbein, the torsion and
    the curvature by the supervielbein, the supertorsion and the
    supercurvature. The only fundamental difference of this construction
    from ordinary general relativity is that supertorsions and
    supercurvatures must be subject to constraints to eliminate spurious
    degrees of freedom.

-   Gauging the super-Poincaré algebra : Promote the super-Poincaré
    symmetry to a local symmetry by introducing appropriate gauge fields
    (bosonic for even generators and fermionic for odd generators) and
    impose suitable constraints to eliminate non-propagating degrees of
    freedom.

Here, we will choose the last method and illustrate it for the case of
simple ( @xmath ), pure (no matter multiplets) supergravity in 4
dimensions, i.e. the theory describing the minimal gravity multiplet
@xmath . The Noether method will be employed in other parts of this
thesis. For more information on the construction of supergravities in
diverse dimensions, the reader is referred to the classic review [
VanNieuwenhuizen:1981ae ] , the more recent reviews [ Tanii:1998px ,
deWit:2002vz ] and the collection of original papers [ Salam:1989fm ] .

#### 2.2.1 Gauge theory of the super-Poincaré group

Here, we will construct simple supergravity in 4 dimensions using the
McDowell-Mansouri [ MacDowell:1977jt ] formalism (see also [
Townsend:1977fz , vanNieuwenhuizen:2004rh ] ) which treats the theory as
a gauge theory based on the super-Poincaré group. To begin, let us
recall some elementary facts about gauge theories. Consider a field
@xmath and an infinitesimal transformation under a symmetry group,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge parameter, expressed in terms of the
generators @xmath of the symmetry group. Gauging the symmetry group,
i.e. promoting the global symmetry to a local one, is achieved by
introducing a gauge field @xmath with the transformation law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the covariant derivative of @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

transforms in the same way as @xmath . The curvature @xmath of @xmath is
defined through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

has the explicit form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and transforms covariantly so that it can be used to build invariant
actions.

To construct supergravity theories, we need to apply the above
principles for the super-Poincaré group, generated by the translation
generators @xmath , the Lorentz generators @xmath and the supersymmetry
generators @xmath . However, to make the analogy with gauge theory more
complete, we actually need to generalize the supersymmetry algebra to
the super-anti-de Sitter algebra, given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a free parameter. The super-Poincaré algebra is
recovered through the Inönü-Wigner contraction @xmath , effected by the
limit @xmath .

We begin by considering a transformation of the form ( 2.42 ), where the
parameter @xmath is expressed in terms of the generators as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

To promote the symmetry to a gauge symmetry, we introduce the gauge
field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose individual components @xmath (spin connection), @xmath (vielbein)
and @xmath (gravitino) are associated with Lorentz transformations,
translations and supersymmetry transformations respectively. Inserting (
2.48 ) and ( 2.49 ) into the transformation law ( 2.43 ) and using the
algebra ( 2.2.1 ), we find that these components transform according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The super-Poincaré covariant derivative is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The curvature of @xmath can be computed using either ( 2.45 ) or ( 2.46
). Decomposing it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find the individual components

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In standard terminology, @xmath is a true curvature while @xmath and
@xmath are torsions.

Having described the building blocks of the theory, we are now faced
with the problem of constructing an invariant action. To do so, it is
instructive to first consider the case of gravity and then generalize to
supergravity.

#### 2.2.2 Pure gravity

In the case of pure gravity, the available gauge fields are @xmath and
@xmath with curvatures

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the usual curvature and torsion 2–forms of
general relativity. To find the appropriate action for the theory, the
usual gauge-theory arguments suggest that we search for the simplest
possible quantity that is quadratic in the curvatures and respects the
symmetries of the theory. Making the assumption that the indices of the
curvatures are contracted with constant tensors, the only possible term
involves the curvature @xmath and leads to the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the value of the coefficient will be justified below. Eq. ( 2.55 )
is, of course, not the action for Einstein gravity. However,
substituting the first of ( 2.54 ) for @xmath and expanding, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the first term in ( 2.56 ) is a Gauss-Bonnet term that may be
safely ignored. The second term is just the well-known Einstein-Hilbert
action. Finally, the third term is a cosmological constant term, as
expected in the gauging of the anti-de Sitter group. Applying the
contraction @xmath , only the second term survives and we are thus left
with the Einstein-Hilbert action,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although this action is the desired one, in the present formulation (
first-order formalism) @xmath and @xmath appear as independent fields
that are both to be varied in the action. In contrast, in the ordinary
formulation of gravity ( second-order formalism), one has the
torsion-free condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

which fixes the form of the spin connection to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that only @xmath is to be varied in the action. So, one has to show
that the first-order formalism is equivalent to the second-order one,
i.e. that the equations of motion in the first-order formalism are the
constraint equation @xmath and the Einstein equation. To do so, we write
the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian as @xmath , emphasizing that @xmath is a
functional of both @xmath and @xmath . To obtain the equations of
motion, we first use an integration by parts to write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see thus that the equation of motion of @xmath is algebraic, as
expected for a non-propagating field. It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is a matter of simple algebra to show that its solution is indeed
@xmath . To vary with respect to @xmath , we write @xmath and so we need
only vary the quantity @xmath . Making use of the identity @xmath , we
indeed obtain the Einstein equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

This completes the demonstration of the equivalence of the two
formalisms.

To clarify the meaning of the torsion-free condition in the present
context, we consider a GCT with parameter @xmath and a local Poincaré
transforation with parameter @xmath acting on the vielbein. Subtracting
the two relations, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, if the constraint ( 2.58 ) holds, general coordinate
invariance becomes indeed equivalent to local Poincaré invariance and so
a gauge theory of the Poincaré group leads to gravity. Another
consequence of this constraint is that the correct covariant derivatives
to use when coupling fields to gravity are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

plus its appropriate generalizations with Christoffel symbols for fields
with curved-space indices. The commutator of two covariant derivatives
is now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is, it involves only the Riemann curvature.

To summarize, we have managed to construct gravity in a manner
completely analogous to gauge theories. The only departures from the
construction of ordinary gauge theories are that (i) the starting point
must be the anti-de Sitter algebra, which is to be contracted to the
Poincaré algebra in the end and (ii) the torsion-free constraint must be
satisfied to eliminate spurious degrees of freedom.

#### 2.2.3 Simple supergravity

To generalize the above construction to supergravity, we start from the
full expressions ( 2.2.1 ), which we write as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To find the appropriate action, we need again the simplest quantities
quadratic in the curvatures and consistent with all symmetries.
Neglecting supersymmetry for the moment, there is now one more such
quantity, involving the curvature @xmath . The complete action is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a coefficient to be determined later. Expanding this
action according to ( 2.2.3 ) and simplifying the various terms using
the gamma-matrix duality relations ( B.8 ), we find @xmath where @xmath
is given in ( 2.55 ) and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.68)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We observe that the unwanted third term cancels provided that the
coefficient @xmath is set to @xmath . In this case, the first and second
term reduce to the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

which contains the Rarita-Schwinger term plus a gravitino “mass” term,
the latter being a consequence of gauging the super-anti-de Sitter
group. Applying the contraction @xmath , only the first term survives.
So, the complete action reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the Einstein/Rarita-Schwinger action.

Again, this action may either be regarded as a first-order action @xmath
where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all to be varied or as a
second-order action @xmath where @xmath is a function of @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , and only @xmath and @xmath are to be varied. In the
second-order formalism, the action ( 2.70 ) must be supplemented with a
constraint that eliminates spurious degrees of freedom and the
appropriate condition turns out to be again @xmath , since it is the
only one that may be solved algebraically. This time however, the
constraint implies that we have non-trivial torsion,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the first-order formalism we have to show, as before, that this
constraint follows from the equation of motion for @xmath . To do so, we
expand the second term in ( 2.70 ) writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we noted that the term involving Christoffel symbols in @xmath
drops out. Varying with respect to @xmath , writing @xmath as the sum of
@xmath and the contorsion,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

and recalling that @xmath does not contribute to the variation of @xmath
, we end up with the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we set @xmath . Contracting with @xmath and using ( 3 ) and the
Majorana property, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, ( 2.74 ) can be solved for the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the antisymmetry of @xmath , ( 2.76 ) can be inverted to yield
the contorsion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

which results in the following expression for the spin connection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the contorsion tensor ( 2.78 ) we obtain exactly the torsion
2–form ( 2.71 ). Hence, we have shown once again that the first- and
second-order formalisms are equivalent. We have also seen that
supergravity provides an explicit realization of a gravitational theory
with torsion.

What remains is to verify that the action ( 2.70 ) is invariant under
the supersymmetry transformations in ( 2.2.1 ). For the vielbein and
gravitino, these transformations are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, regarding the supersymmetry variation of the spin connection,
we have to choose between first- and second-order formalism. In the
first case, we have to compute the variations of @xmath and @xmath and
the resulting variation of @xmath and substitute in @xmath , while in
the second case we have to compute the variations of @xmath and @xmath
and substitute in @xmath . Although both approaches are quite
cumbersome, there exists a useful trick that combines the advantages of
the two formalisms, appropriately called 1.5 order formalism. To explain
it, we use the chain rule to write the variation of the second-order
action in terms of the first-order action as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.81)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

But, at the solution @xmath , we have @xmath and we are left with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, all we have to do is plug the (simple) variations of @xmath
and @xmath into the (simple) first-order action and we are done. Using
the 1.5 order formalism, it is quite easy to prove invariance of the
action under ( 2.82 ). We start by rewriting the action in the more
convenient form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all occurences of the vielbein have been explicitly separated and
where the Rarita-Schwinger term was rewritten by using gamma-matrix
duality. The variation of the Einstein part is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variation of the Rarita-Schwinger part can be written as @xmath
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the second terms in @xmath and @xmath resulting from integrating
the @xmath term by parts. Starting from @xmath , we use the identity (
B.8 ) to write it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be further simplified using the gamma-matrix relation @xmath
which follows easily from the identities of § B.1.2 . After some
straightforward algebra, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

which exactly cancels @xmath . Turning to @xmath , we use the definition
of the torsion tensor and Eq. ( 2.71 ) to write @xmath . This way, we
find the extra two terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

which cancel each other as a result of a Fierz identity. This completes
the proof of supersymmetry and the construction of the theory.

The main result is that the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invariant under the super-Poincaré group, including the local
supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Eqs. ( 2.90 ) and ( 2.91 ) we made explicit that the spin connection
appearing in @xmath and @xmath is not the usual spin connection @xmath
of Einstein gravity, but rather the spin connection @xmath that solves
its equations of motion. If one wishes to express the action in terms of
@xmath , one has to substitute the relation @xmath in ( 2.90 ). This
results in a fairly complicated action involving extra four-fermion
terms arising from the contorsion tensor.

The construction method developed in this section may be applied to more
general cases, where the torsions and the supersymmetry variations are
given by more complicated expressions that those encountered here. In
the rest of this thesis we will state the actions of such theories
neglecting four-fermion terms, which amounts to replacing @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath and @xmath respectively. The only exception will be
eleven-dimensional supergravity, whose action and transformation rules
can be written in a compact form similar to ( 2.90 ) and ( 2.91 ).

### 2.3 Scalar Coset Manifolds

A consequence of supersymmetry, in both rigid and local cases, is that
certain types of scalar fields appearing in supersymmetry multiplets are
required to parameterize certain coset manifolds of the form @xmath ,
where the allowed forms of @xmath and @xmath depend on the particular
supersymmetry algebra. Accordingly, the action describing these scalar
fields has the form of a nonlinear sigma model over the coset space.
Moreover, the global symmetries of the scalar manifold, a part of which
corresponds to global symmetries of the supersymmetry algebra, may be
promoted to local symmetries yielding gauged nonlinear sigma models.
Since the structure of the scalar manifolds plays an essential role in
the supergravities to be considered, we give a brief account of coset
spaces and their main properties.

#### 2.3.1 Coset spaces and their geometry

Given a group @xmath and a subgroup @xmath , the right coset @xmath is
defined as the set of equivalence classes of elements of @xmath under
the right action of @xmath , i.e. the set of points @xmath modulo the
identification @xmath for all @xmath . To describe the symmetries of the
coset space, we split the generators of @xmath into the generators
@xmath of @xmath and the generators @xmath of @xmath . Since @xmath is a
subgroup, the commutator of two @xmath ’s will not involve @xmath . By
making the further assumption that that the algebra is reductive , i.e.
that @xmath form a representation of @xmath , we can decompose the
algebra of @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Considering an @xmath –dimensional coset manifold, we introduce
coordinates @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath ,
and the associated derivatives @xmath . From the @xmath ’s, we can form
a @xmath –valued matrix @xmath , called coset representative , and
impose rigid symmetry under left multiplications with elements of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

and local symmetry under right multiplications with elements of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the above construction, the choice of @xmath is not unique; one can
choose many representatives for the coset space. To isolate the physical
degrees of freedom, we can “fix the gauge” by selecting @xmath as a
particular function of @xmath , @xmath . Since the transformation ( 2.93
) does not preserve this gauge choice, it must be accompanied by a
compensating transformation of the type ( 2.94 ), so that the complete
transformation law under @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an element of @xmath selected so that the transformation
retains the functional form of @xmath .

On the coset space under consideration, we can define certain
geometrical quantities. From a given coset representative @xmath , one
can construct the @xmath –valued left-invariant Maurer-Cartan form
@xmath (here @xmath ), whose elements can be expressed in terms of
@xmath and @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this, it is clear that @xmath parameterizes the tangent-space
rotations of the representative with respect to @xmath and are
identified with the connection of @xmath , while @xmath defines an
orthonormal frame on the coset space and is identified with the coset
vielbein. This can be explicitly verified by noting that, under a local
transformation ( 2.95 ) of @xmath , the Maurer-Cartan form ( 2.96 )
transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that, under @xmath , @xmath does indeed transform like a connection
and @xmath like a vielbein. Now, taking the exterior derivative of the
Maurer-Cartan form, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 2.96 ), we arrive at the relation

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.99)
  -- -- -- --------

In most cases of interest, we have two simplifications. The first one is
the condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which defines a symmetric coset space and implies that the commutator
@xmath is an element of @xmath . Then, Eq. ( 2.99 ) can be split into
the Maurer-Cartan structure equations

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.101)
  -- -- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second simplification is the antisymmetry property

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which can be shown to hold for any reductive space and implies that
@xmath can be embedded in some @xmath group. Then, using the @xmath
–invariant tensor @xmath and the vielbein, we can construct an invariant
metric on @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Also, the connection @xmath resulting from the embedding of @xmath in
@xmath is a spin connection in the usual sense. Accordingly, the
structure equations ( 2.101 ) and ( 2.102 ) turn into equations for the
torsion of @xmath and the curvature of @xmath and read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 2.3.2 Nonlinear sigma models and gauging

Based on the above preliminaries, we are in a position to describe the
nonlinear sigma models that occur in supergravity theories. To this end,
all we have to do is to identify the coordinates @xmath with scalar
fields @xmath defining a map from the spacetime manifold to the coset
manifold. Accordingly, the @xmath –dependent transformations
parameterized by @xmath are associated with @xmath –dependent
transformations parameterized by @xmath . Considering a coset
representative @xmath we now write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are called composite connection and composite
vielbein respectively, and are defined as the pullbacks of @xmath and
@xmath from the scalar to the spacetime manifold,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The transformation law of the Maurer-Cartan form ( 2.107 ) is then given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Maurer-Cartan structure equations for this case can be derived as
before and are given by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.110)
  -- -- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, since the coset space coordinates are now spacetime fields, one
needs to write down a kinetic Lagrangian. This Lagrangian must be
invariant under the usual spacetime symmetries as well as under rigid
@xmath transformations and local @xmath transformations. As in gravity
theories, the Lagrangian can be written in first- or second-order form.
The appropriate second-order Lagrangian can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the first form has manifest local @xmath invariance, while the
second form is obtained after gauge fixing and is no longer @xmath
–invariant.

In the above, the group @xmath i.e. the isometry group of @xmath
corresponds to a global symmetry of the theory. It is possible to gauge
this symmetry by promoting the parameters of isometry group or a
subgroup thereof to functions of the spacetime coordinates, introducing
the corresponding gauge fields and coupling them in an appropriate
manner to all fields that transform non-trivially under @xmath . This
construction is of particular importance in gauged supergravities and we
illustrate it below. We start by considering an isometry transformation
of the @xmath , parameterized as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To promote this isometry to a local symmetry, we introduce dynamical
gauge fields @xmath transforming as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we replace the ordinary derivative by the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the gauge coupling. Appropriately, the Maurer-Cartan
form ( 2.107 ) is replaced by its covariant version

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Maurer-Cartan structure equations become

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.118)
  -- -- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the gauge field strength. Finally, the scalar Lagrangian
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A very detailed example of the above construction will be given in §
5.1.5 for the case of the nonlinear sigma model of the hyperscalar
manifold of @xmath , @xmath supergravity.

### 2.4 Supergravities in @xmath and in @xmath

In the concluding section of this chapter, we will review the minimal
supergravity theories in eleven and ten dimensions.

#### 2.4.1 Eleven-dimensional supergravity

The first case we will consider is @xmath , which is the highest
dimension in which one can construct a supergravity theory. In this
dimension there exists a unique supergravity theory with @xmath
supersymmetry, known to be related to all superstring theories and
conjectured to be one of the low-energy limits of the hypothetical
M-theory.

The unique @xmath supersymmetry algebra in eleven dimensions admits a
single representation given by the following multiplet

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The complete action describing the interactions of this multiplet was
found by Cremmer, Julia and Scherk [ Cremmer:1978km ] in 1977. It is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.122)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and is invariant under the local supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.123)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath is the spin connection in the first-order formalism, which
is written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As for @xmath , it is the supercovariant spin connection, given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Also, @xmath and @xmath stand for the 4-form field strength and its
supercovariant generalization respectively,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Also, apart from the usual continuous symmetries, this theory has a
global discrete symmetry under parity/time reversal, accompanied by the
sign reversal

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath lying in the transverse directions.

The theory described above is unique in many senses. First, as already
mentioned, @xmath is the highest dimension for supergravity and admits a
unique @xmath multiplet. Second, it is impossible to obtain a theory
described in terms of a dual 6–form potential: a duality transformation
is impossible due to the presence of the Chern-Simons term and attempts
to directly construct the dual theory have failed due to uncancelled
supersymmetry variations [ Nicolai:1981kb ] . Third, the theory does not
admit the usual extension via the addition of a cosmological term and a
gravitino mass term [ Bautier:1997yp ] . Fourth, it does not admit any
gauging [ Castellani:1983kd ] since the only global symmetry of the
theory is a discrete one. A thorough review of 11D supergravity and its
solutions is given in [ Duff:1986hr ] .

Moreover, although @xmath supergravity is not chiral and cannot give
rise to a chiral theory upon ordinary compactification, it can yield a
chiral @xmath theory if one defines it on the @xmath orbifold. In such a
case, supersymmetry requires chiral boundary conditions for the fermions
and yields chiral fermions on the orbifold fixed points. Anomaly
considerations require that the theories on the fixed points be coupled
to @xmath vector multiplets with gauge group @xmath . This is the
heterotic M-theory of Hořava and Witten [ Horava:1996qa , Horava:1996ma
] .

#### 2.4.2 Ten-dimensional @xmath supergravity

The next case to be considered is @xmath , which contains all
supergravities arising as low-energy limits of critical superstring
theories. In this dimension, there exist two theories with @xmath
supersymmetry (Type IIA and Type IIB supergravity) and one theory with
@xmath supersymmetry. The latter theory can be coupled to Yang-Mills
fields and arises as a low-energy limit of heterotic and Type I string
theory.

The minimal supersymmetry algebra in ten dimensions is the chiral @xmath
algebra, which has the following representations

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath , @xmath supergravity coupled to super Yang-Mills theory is
constructed by combining the gravity multiplet with @xmath vector
multiplets transforming in the adjoint representation of a gauge group.
The theory was first constructed in its 6–form version [
Chamseddine:1981ez ] and later in the 2–form version [ Bergshoeff:1982um
, Chapline:1983ww ] . For the latter case, the Lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.129)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and is invariant under the supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the above we have ignored @xmath terms in the Lagrangian and @xmath
terms in the supersymmetry transformation laws. Also, @xmath stands for
the modified field strength

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

involving the Yang-Mills field. Invariance of this field strength under
Yang-Mills gauge transformations requires that @xmath transform as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Yang-Mills gauge transformation parameter.

The @xmath , @xmath supergravity just described arises as a low-energy
limit of Type I and heterotic string theories. In the first case the
allowed gauge group can be @xmath while in the second case it can be
either @xmath or @xmath . These restrictions of the gauge group were
first discovered through anomaly considerations. We will have a lot to
say about that in Chapter 4.

## Chapter 3 Anomalies

Since their discovery, anomalies have played a very important role in
field theory, both in Standard Model physics and in unified theories
beyond the Standard Model. Their importance is even more profound in the
context of higher-dimensional theories involving gravity, namely string
theories, their effective supergravities and related models. In such
cases, the requirement of anomaly cancellation seriously constrains the
possible particle content of these theories and proves to be a crucial
guiding principle for the construction of consistent models. Since
anomalies are a central part of this thesis, in this chapter we aim to
present a fairly detailed and self-contained review of this subject.

### 3.1 Introduction to Anomalies

It is a well-known fact of classical field theory that a symmetry of the
action of a field system under a continuous transformation gives rise to
a conserved current. However, in certain cases, a current that is
conserved in the classical theory fails to be so in the quantum theory.
This phenomenon is called anomaly .

Although anomalies arise in various occasions, we will here consider two
specific types which, in standard terminology, are called singlet
anomalies and nonabelian anomalies . The first type corresponds to
global symmetries whose associated currents are not coupled to external
fields; in our case, the symmetry to be considered is the chiral
symmetry of massless fermions. The second type corresponds to local
symmetries whose current couples to gauge and/or gravitational fields;
in our case the symmetries to be considered are the gauge and GCT/LLT
symmetries of chiral fermions and the associated anomalies are called
gauge, gravitational and mixed anomalies .

The story of anomalies dates back to 1949 when Fukuda and Miyamoto [
Fukuda:1949 ] and Steinberger [ Steinberger:1949wx ] calculated the
triangle diagram for the electromagnetic decay @xmath , essentially to
find that gauge invariance of the amplitude is incompatible with the
naive conservation law of the axial current. In 1951, Schwinger [
Schwinger:1951nm ] also noted that regulating the axial current of QED
in a gauge-invariant manner yields an effective Lagrangian giving a
nonzero @xmath decay rate. The significance of these results was not
however recognized at the time, the usual viewpoint being that they
reflect ambiguities of perturbation theory. The @xmath decay problem was
revisited during the 1960’s in the context of PCAC where Sutherland [
Sutherland:1967vf ] and Veltman proved that this decay cannot occur, in
sharp disagreement with experiment; this paradox motivated further study
of the problem. The breakthrough came in 1969 when Adler [ Adler:1969gk
] and Bell-Jackiw [ Bell:1969ts ] independently found that imposing
gauge invariance on the vector vertices inevitably gives an anomaly in
the conservation law of the axial current of QED, which results in the
correct value for the @xmath decay rate. Subsequently, Bardeen [
Bardeen:1969md ] extended this result to nonabelian gauge anomalies in
theories with chiral fermions, while Adler and Bardeen [ Adler:1969er ]
showed that the anomaly is a strictly one-loop effect receiving no
higher-order perturbative corrections. During the seventies it became
clear that anomalies have a topological meaning and, in particular,
singlet anomalies are related [ Jackiw:1977pu , Nielsen:1977aw ] to the
Atiyah-Singer index theorems [ Atiyah:1968mp , Atiyah:1968rj ,
Atiyah:1968ih , Atiyah:1971ws , Atiyah:1971rm ] . Another key result was
due to Fujikawa [ Fujikawa:1979ay , Fujikawa:1980eg ] who related the
anomaly with the variation of the fermion integration measure in the
functional integral. However, it was during the eighties that anomalies
was studied in a really systematic and unified manner. In particular,
all types of anomalies were given a topological interpretation [
Alvarez:1984yi ] in terms of index theorems, while Stora [ Stora:1983ct
] and Zumino [ Zumino:1983rz , Zumino:1983ew ] developed the descent
formalism relating nonabelian anomalies in @xmath dimensions to chiral
anomalies in @xmath dimensions; similar relations were obtained by
Alvarez-Gaumé and Ginsparg [ Alvarez-Gaume:1984cs ] . Further
developments include the relations of anomalies to supersymmetric
quantum mechanics [ Alvarez-Gaume:1983at , Friedan:1983xr ] and the
equivalence of Lorentz and Einstein gravitational anomalies [
Bardeen:1984pm ] . The above culminated in a powerful formalism by means
of which one can calculate all types of anomalies in any dimension and
express the anomaly structure of a theory in a particularly elegant way.
On the physical side, the implications of these results were striking,
particularly in the context of 10D superstring theory. The most famous
results are the calculation of gravitational anomalies in all dimensions
by Alvarez-Gaumé and Witten [ Alvarez-Gaume:1984ig ] which revealed that
Type IIB supergravity is anomaly-free and the discovery of Green and
Schwarz [ Green:1984sg ] who found a mechanism for anomaly cancellation
in @xmath supergravity. Since then, the study of anomalies continues to
provide valuable insights in model building and still remains an active
field of research.

In the rest of this section, we will give a very general description of
singlet and nonabelian anomalies and we will discuss their most
important physical aspects.

#### 3.1.1 Singlet anomalies

The first case we will consider are singlet anomalies, i.e. anomalies
associated with global symmetry currents. The best-known such case is
the chiral anomaly associated with spin @xmath fermions. To examine it,
we consider a theory of massless Dirac fermions in @xmath --dimensional
Euclidean ¹ ¹ 1 In Sections 3.1–3.3, we will follow the standard
convention in the literature and work in the Euclidean. From Section 3.4
on, we will switch back to Minkowski spacetime by analytic continuation.
spacetime, transforming in a representation @xmath of a gauge group
@xmath and coupled to gravity. The classical action of the theory is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This action is classically invariant under the chiral transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

To find the associated conserved current, we may employ the Noether
procedure. We first take @xmath to be position-dependent so that the
action is no longer invariant but is modified by terms that contain the
derivatives of @xmath . So, at first order, the variation of the action
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the axial current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking @xmath back to a constant value, invariance of the action leads
to the conservation law

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the quantum case, the object of interest is not the classical action,
but the effective action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The effective action thus defined is invariant under any transformation
of @xmath since the latter are just integration variables. However, this
invariance does no longer guarantee that a classical current will be
conserved in the quantum theory (in the expectation-value sense). The
reason is that the variation of @xmath does not only receive the
contribution from the variation of @xmath , but may also receive an
extra contribution from the variation of the integration measure @xmath
. Taking this into account, we write the transformation of the partition
function @xmath under ( 3.2 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Jacobian of the integration measure. To first order
in @xmath , we can take

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the variation of the effective action is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and invariance of @xmath for constant @xmath requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which expresses a violation of the Ward identity of @xmath . The
quantity @xmath is called the singlet anomaly . The integrated
expression

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.11)
  -- -- -- --------

will also be referred to as the singlet anomaly.

##### Fujikawa’s method

Let us now calculate the anomaly according to the above guidelines. To
find the variation of the integration measure, we will use Fujikawa’s
method [ Fujikawa:1979ay , Fujikawa:1980eg ] . According to that method,
we introduce a complete set @xmath of (commuting) eigenvectors of @xmath
satisfying the orthonormality condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we expand @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant Grassmann-valued coefficients,
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functional integration measure is then defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us determine how the measure changes under the transformation ( 3.2
). The new coefficients @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath are given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and so we arrive at the transformation law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the minus signs arise from the fact that @xmath and @xmath are
Grassmann variables. It follows that the Jacobian of the transformation,
to linear order in @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where “ @xmath ” denotes a functional trace and “ @xmath ” denotes a
trace over gamma-matrix and group indices. Comparing with ( 3.8 ), we
read off the integrated anomaly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

As it stands, this expression is ill-defined since it involves the sum
of a vanishing quantity ( @xmath ) over an infinity of states. One must
thus regularize this quantity in a manner that respects the symmetries
of the problem. The standard (and least rigorous) method introduces a
Gaussian UV cutoff by inserting the convergence factor @xmath where
@xmath should be taken to zero at the end of the day. This way, one
obtains the regularized anomaly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The usual way to compute the chiral anomaly is to write the trace in (
3.20 ) in terms of a plane-wave basis, expand the exponential and
extract the term surviving at the @xmath limit. In four dimensions, the
calculation is straightforward and yields the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the two terms correspond to the gauge and gravitational part.
However, the generalization of the plane-wave method to higher
dimensions is quite messy, especially in theories involving gravity.
Yet, it is possible to develop a powerful formalism that allows us to
treat all cases simultaneously and derive results valid for any
spacetime dimension. This will be the objective of Section 3.2.

#### 3.1.2 Nonabelian anomalies

We now turn to the anomalies associated with local symmetry currents,
whose best-known examples are the spin @xmath gauge, gravitational and
mixed anomalies. These arise in @xmath –dimensional theories of Weyl
fermions interacting with gauge and/or gravitational fields. The
classical action is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the positive-chirality projection of the Dirac operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The classical action ( 3.22 ) is invariant under local gauge
transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

general coordinate transformations (GCT)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and local Lorentz transformations (LLT)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

To find the associated conservation laws, it is advantageous in this
case to reformulate them in terms of the external gauge and
gravitational fields. To this end, we first define @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath as the operators that generate a gauge transformation of @xmath
with parameter @xmath , a GCT of @xmath with parameter @xmath and a LLT
of @xmath with parameter @xmath respectively, leaving the other fields
invariant. The combined action of these operators on a functional @xmath
of @xmath and @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and thus, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

noting that the covariant derivative on the second line acts on all
terms to its right.

In the classical case, we take @xmath to be the action @xmath with the
understanding that the fermions are integrated out by their equations of
motion. Noting that the variational derivatives of the action with
respect to @xmath and @xmath give the gauge current and the
energy-momentum tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

we readily compute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Invariance of the action leads then to the laws

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

expressing covariant conservation of @xmath and @xmath and symmetry of
@xmath .

Turning to the quantum case, we are interested in the effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose variational derivatives with respect to @xmath and @xmath yield
the induced gauge current and the induced energy-momentum tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, in a similar manner as before, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

If that were the total variation of @xmath , its vanishing would lead to
Eqs. ( 3.31 ) for the expectation values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
However, now the fermions are not integrated out by their equations of
motion but through the functional integration in ( 3.32 ). So, the
variation of @xmath may receive additional terms from the Jacobian of
the integration measure. Parameterizing the Jacobian as

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.35)
  -- -- -- --------

we obtain, instead of ( 3.31 ), the equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which express the violation of the Ward identities of @xmath and @xmath
and the failure of @xmath to be symmetric. The quantities @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are called the gauge, Einstein and Lorentz
contributions to the anomaly respectively. The integrated expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

will be called by the same names.

However, the above description is actually redundant [ Bardeen:1984pm ]
due to the fact that the Einstein and Lorentz anomalies are not two
independent objects. Indeed, one can exploit the freedom of LLT’s of the
vielbein so as to fix a gauge where only one type of anomaly appears.
The most convenient choice for calculations is to pick a gauge where
@xmath is symmetric so that the second of ( 3.33 ) ensures that @xmath
is symmetric as well. In that case, only the Einstein anomaly appears
and Eqs. ( 3.1.2 ) simplify to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can then switch to the Lorentz form of the anomaly by adding the
so-called Bardeen-Zumino [ Bardeen:1984pm ] counterterm to the action.
The recipe is as follows. As we will see later, a pure Einstein anomaly
has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath –form depending on @xmath , the affine
connection @xmath and the curvature @xmath and @xmath is a numerical
coefficient. The corresponding pure Lorentz anomaly is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is, by the very same expression with the replacement @xmath and
with the affine connection replaced by the spin connection.

The gauge , gravitational and mixed anomalies are then defined as the
terms of @xmath depending only on @xmath , the terms of @xmath depending
only on @xmath and the terms of @xmath with mixed dependence
respectively.

##### Consistency and covariance

Nonabelian anomalies are constrained by a condition arising from the
symmetries to which they correspond, called the Wess-Zumino (WZ)
consistency condition [ Wess:1971yu ] . For the case of gauge
transformations, this condition is derived by observing that, the
commutator of two gauge transformations with parameters @xmath and
@xmath is a gauge transformation with parameter @xmath . Indeed, acting
on @xmath with the commutator and using the Jacobi identity, we easily
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 3.41 ) must hold for any functional of @xmath and, in particular,
for @xmath . Using ( 3.38 ), we arrive at the WZ consistency condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since this is by definition obeyed by the anomaly @xmath , the latter is
called the consistent anomaly . Although the usefulness of the WZ
consistency condition is not at all obvious at the present stage, it
turns out that this condition is so strong that may even enable us to
reconstruct the full expression for an anomaly given its leading term.

A property of consistent anomalies is that they violate the covariance
of the associated current. To see this, we define the operator @xmath as
the one implementing an arbitrary variation of @xmath , @xmath . Then,
considering the action of the commutator @xmath on @xmath , we easily
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, the same relation must hold for @xmath . Using the first of (
3.38 ) and () and the Jacobi identity, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, in the presence of an anomaly, the covariant gauge transformation of
@xmath is violated by an extra term. If we insist that the theory be
phrased in terms of a covariant current, then we must search for a
current of the form @xmath , where @xmath should transform so that the
non-covariant term in ( 3.44 ) cancels,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

If such a quantity exists, @xmath is the covariant current of the
theory. Its divergence defines the covariant anomaly @xmath [
Bardeen:1984pm ] as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Exactly analogous results hold for the GCT/LLT cases.

Hence, nonabelian anomalies admit two different equivalent descriptions.
The consistent anomaly, specified in the usual way, is a fundamental
quantity arising from the variation of the effective action under gauge
transformations. On the other hand, the covariant anomaly is the one
that is most easily computed. For that reason, in Section 3.3 we will
compute the covariant anomaly and, later on, we will use the WZ
condition to switch to the consistent form.

##### Fujikawa’s method

To proceed, let us try to extend Fujikawa’s method to deal with
nonabelian anomalies. In doing so, we are immediately faced with the
problem of defining the effective action for Weyl fermions. The naive
definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

is not valid because the integral does not correspond to a functional
determinant of a differential operator. Indeed, for a positive-chirality
spinor @xmath satisfying @xmath , one sees that @xmath is a
negative-chirality spinor satisfying @xmath so that @xmath is a map from
the space of positive-chirality spinors to the space of
negative-chirality spinors. Therefore, the eigenvalue problem of @xmath
is ill-defined and it does not make sense to define @xmath through its
functional determinant nor to regulate the anomaly using its
eigenvalues. To address the problem, one may either (i) replace @xmath
by some new operator with a well-posed eigenvalue problem, define @xmath
in terms of its determinant and regulate the anomaly using its
eigenvalues or (ii) keep the original definition of @xmath absorbing the
projection operator in the definitions of the spinors and regulate the
anomaly in terms of the eigenvalues of the ordinary Dirac operator
@xmath . It turns out that the two methods lead to the consistent and
the covariant anomaly respectively. Although we are ultimately
interested in consistent anomalies, the calculation methods to be
introduced in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 require that we use the second method
which gives the covariant anomalies. The consistent form of the
anomalies can then be deduced using the WZ condition.

To develop the method, we first rewrite the effective action ( 3.47 ) in
the equivalent form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we defined the projections @xmath and @xmath . These may be
expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the corresponding projections of the
eigenvectors of @xmath . These satisfy the orthogonality relations
@xmath and so Eqs. ( 3.49 ) can be inverted leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functional integration measure is then defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

From these expressions, we can derive the required Fujikawa expressions
for gauge and gravitational anomalies. Starting from the gauge anomaly,
we consider the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

under which the coefficients in ( 3.50 ) transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

resulting in the following transformation of the integration measure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, the Jacobian is now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the last term gives the integrated anomaly. Since this expression
involves the usual eigenvectors @xmath of @xmath , we can regulate it
exactly as in the singlet case, with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding expression for the anomaly under GCT’s is found in an
analogous manner. Here, we consider a GCT on the fermion field which,
modulo a LLT, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, following exactly the same steps, we find the regularized
expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 3.56 ) and ( 3.58 ) have a similar form to ( 3.20 ) and, for that
reason, they may be computed by the same methods. E.g. using the
plane-wave method in four dimensions gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the two terms correspond to the gauge and mixed anomaly (the
latter is nonzero only for a @xmath gauge group in which case @xmath ).
Again, the generalization to higher dimensions requires more efficient
methods.

#### 3.1.3 Physical aspects of anomalies

After this introduction to anomalies, and before proceeding to their
explicit computation, let us pause to discuss some of their physical
aspects with the objective of clarifying their interpretation and their
importance for the physical theories of interest.

To clarify the origin of anomalies, it is instructive to discuss the
various alternative methods available for their computation. The main
approaches are discussed below.

1.  Fujikawa’s method. Using this method, anomalies are expressed in
    terms of the variation of the fermion integration measure in the
    functional integral defining the effective action, as in Eq. ( 3.19
    ). The resulting expression is ill-defined. To regulate it in a
    gauge-invariant manner, one can use (i) a Gaussian cutoff, (ii)
    heat-kernel regularization or (iii) @xmath –function regularization.
    In case (i) the anomaly itself can be computed using either
    plane-wave expansions or supersymmetric path integrals while in
    cases (ii,iii) it can be computed using Seeley coefficients. In all
    cases, the anomaly manifests itself as a finite term arising from
    the regulator.

2.  Feynman-diagram method. Using this method, anomalies in @xmath
    dimensions are calculated by computing the divergence of the current
    through one-loop UV-divergent diagrams with one chiral fermion
    running in the loop and @xmath external legs; in particular, the
    singlet anomaly comes from diagrams with one axial current insertion
    and @xmath external gauge bosons and/or gravitons while gauge,
    gravitational and mixed anomalies correspond, respectively, to
    diagrams with @xmath external gauge bosons, gravitons and both,
    coupled to the loop fermion through @xmath vertices. Gauge-invariant
    regularization may be achieved using (i) the Pauli-Villars method
    involving extra regulator fields of large mass @xmath or (ii)
    dimensional regularization, where we work in @xmath dimensions and
    use a careful definition of @xmath . In both cases, there is a
    finite term surviving the @xmath and @xmath limits respectively,
    giving the anomaly.

3.  Adler’s operator method. Using this method, anomalies are calculated
    by directly computing the divergence of the current using its
    operator definition. Being a product of two local field operators at
    the same point, this current is singular. To regulate it, one uses
    the point-splitting method, i.e. separates the two local operators
    by a distance @xmath and inserts a Wilson line to maintain gauge
    invariance. Due to this insertion, there is a finite term surviving
    the @xmath limit, equal to the anomaly.

So, whatever method one might choose to use, the origin of anomalies is
exactly the same: it is impossible to regulate the current in a
consistent way without violating its conservation law by new terms
involving the external fields . Put otherwise, the operators @xmath and
@xmath “do not commute” and so it is impossible to maintain gauge
invariance without spoiling invariance under chiral transformations. For
details on these methods, the reader is referred to the original papers,
the modern reviews [ Scrucca:2004jn , Harvey:2005it ] and the book [
Bertlmann:1996xk ] .

The common aspect of all calculation methods outlined above is that
anomalies appear during the regularization of ultraviolet-divergent
quantities. Based on this, one would be tempted to interpret an anomaly
is an ultraviolet effect. However, unlike the usual low-energy artifacts
appearing during regularization of UV divergences, anomalies are finite
and regulator-independent and cannot be removed by adding local
counterterms to the action. It was first recognized by ’t Hooft in [
'tHooft:1979bh ] and further elucidated in [ Frishman:1981dq ,
Coleman:1982yg ] that an anomaly is most appropriately interpreted as an
infrared effect which, if present in a fundamental theory, is also
present in an effective theory and vice versa.

Let us finally discuss the physical implications of anomalies. The
existence of singlet anomalies in a theory alters its physical content
but, nevertheless, it does not threaten its consistency as long as the
symmetry current is not coupled to gauge fields ² ² 2 However, if the
anomalous chiral current of a gravitational theory is coupled to a gauge
field, the situation is problematic since the @xmath interaction
acquires an anomalous variation; moreover, if one tries to absorb the
anomaly into a redefinition of the current then GCT invariance is lost.
. In fact, the existence of the chiral anomaly was actually required for
the understanding of many long-standing problems of high-energy physics,
namely the @xmath decay, the @xmath problem [ 'tHooft:1976up ,
'tHooft:1976fv ] , the mass of the @xmath meson and several types of
hadronic and semileptonic decays [ Wess:1971yu ] . On the other hand,
the existence of nonabelian anomalies does pose serious threats to the
consistency of a theory. To discuss them, we must distinguish between
two cases. The first case refers to renormalizable theories, where Ward
identities are needed to ensure that the unphysical polarizations of
gauge fields decouple and that the S-matrix is unitary; in the presence
of anomalies these identities are violated and such states may appear as
poles in the S-matrix thus violating unitarity [ KorthalsAltes:1972aq ]
and renormalizability [ Gross:1972pv ] . The loss of renormalizability
is also easily seen by considering an @xmath –point function and noting
that the contributions involving anomalous diagrams scale in a different
way from the other contributions. The second case refers to
non-renormalizable effective theories. Here, loss of unitarity would not
be fatal if there was a way to cancel it in the UV-complete theory;
however, the infrared nature of anomalies rules out this possibility and
so an anomalous theory is again inconsistent. For that reason, the study
of anomalies is of utmost importance in low-energy effective theories
such as the supergravities considered in this thesis.

### 3.2 Calculation of Singlet Anomalies

In this section, we will present the actual calculation of all possible
types of singlet anomalies, as first done in the seminal paper [
Alvarez-Gaume:1984ig ] of Alvarez-Gaumé and Witten. In particular, we
will illustrate the second approach of employed in that paper (see also
[ Alvarez-Gaume:1983at , Friedan:1983xr ] ), which is based on
supersymmetric quantum-mechanical path integrals, following the more
modern treatment of [ Scrucca:2004jn ] . Using this method, we will
present the detailed calculation of the spin @xmath chiral anomaly which
also serves as a proof of the Atiyah-Singer index theorem. By
extrapolating this result to the cases of spin @xmath fermions and
self-dual @xmath –forms, we will then deduce the anomaly for these
fields as well.

#### 3.2.1 The spin–@xmath anomaly

To calculate spin– @xmath singlet anomalies, we will proceed as follows.
As a preliminary step, we will start by the Fujikawa expression ( 3.20 )
and relate it to the Dirac index and to the Witten index of a suitable
supersymmetric theory. Then, using the latter description, we will
compute the anomalies by means of supersymmetric path integrals.

##### The singlet anomaly as a Dirac index

To make a connection between anomalies and index theory, consider Eq. (
3.20 ) for the spin– @xmath chiral anomaly, which involves the trace of
@xmath over the eigenvectors of @xmath . It is easy to see that, given
an eigenvector @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath , @xmath is also an
eigenvector with eigenvalue @xmath . Since @xmath is Hermitian, its
eigenvectors that correspond to different eigenvalues are orthogonal,
i.e. @xmath if @xmath . So, the only states that give nonzero
contributions to the sum ( 3.20 ) are the zero modes of @xmath .
Denoting these states by @xmath , @xmath , we can split them into two
irreducible representations @xmath of the Clifford algebra, classified
by the @xmath eigenvalue according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, ( 3.20 ) can be written as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the difference between the number of zero modes with
positive and negative chirality. Considering the positive- and
negative-chirality projections @xmath and @xmath and noting that @xmath
, we can write ( 3.61 ) in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

This establishes a relation between anomalies and index theory: the
spin– @xmath chiral anomaly is equal to @xmath times the index of the
operator @xmath .

##### The singlet anomaly as a Witten index

The chiral anomaly admits yet another interpretation as the Witten index
of a certain supersymmetric quantum-mechanical theory. To see how this
comes about, let us first recall some elementary facts about @xmath
supersymmetric quantum mechanics. A quantum-mechanical system with
@xmath supersymmetry is characterized by (i) a Hilbert space @xmath
consisting of a bosonic and a fermionic subspace (ii) an operator @xmath
that anticommutes with all fermion operators and has eigenvalues @xmath
( @xmath ) in a bosonic (fermionic) state and (iii) one hermitian
supercharge @xmath mapping bosonic to fermionic states and vice versa.
The Hamiltonian of such a system is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see an interesting property of such a theory, consider a bosonic
energy eigenstate @xmath with @xmath . From this, we can construct the
fermionic state @xmath , which, since @xmath , is also an energy
eigenstate of eigenvalue @xmath . Hence, if @xmath , for every bosonic
energy eigenstate there exists a fermionic energy eigenstate with the
same eigenvalue and vice versa. On the other hand, if @xmath , the
corresponding energy eigenstates can be non-degenerate.

The Witten index [ Witten:1982df ] of the theory is defined as the
difference between the numbers of bosonic and fermionic states of the
theory,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, by the arguments of the previous paragraph, it only receives
contributions from the zero-energy sector of @xmath . Hence, it does no
harm to insert a factor of @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Apart from the insertion of @xmath , this looks much like the partition
function of a statistical-mechanical system at inverse temperature
@xmath and may be calculated by standard methods, one of which is based
on the Euclidean path integral. As for the insertion of @xmath , its
only effect is to switch the boundary conditions of the fermions from
antiperiodic to periodic ³ ³ 3 This is easily verified by noticing that
fermion correlators with one insertion of @xmath satisfy relations like
e.g. @xmath , which are consistent only with periodic boundary
conditions. .

The relevance of the above to anomalies is evident once we compare (
3.65 ) and ( 3.20 ). The comparison reveals that, given a supersymmetric
quantum-mechanical theory which realizes the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

on its Hilbert space, the singlet anomaly is proportional to the Witten
index of the theory,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a theory does indeed exist. It involves @xmath bosonic fields
@xmath that act as coordinates on @xmath , their fermionic superpartners
@xmath , a set of fermions @xmath and @xmath transforming in the
representation @xmath of the gauge group and its conjugate @xmath
respectively and a set of external fields given by the vielbein @xmath ,
the spin connection @xmath and the gauge field @xmath . Its Lagrangian
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is invariant under the supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This theory may be constructed as a dimensional reduction of the 2D
sigma model [ Hull:1985jv ] used to describe the heterotic string or in
the context of 1D representations of gauge field theories [
D'Hoker:1995bj ] . The Witten index of this theory is easily shown to
admit the path-integral expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the trace over the one-particle states created by
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath is the Euclidean continuation of the
Routhian @xmath , defined as a Lagrangian with respect to @xmath and
@xmath and as a Hamiltonian with respect to @xmath and @xmath . To prove
that the Lagrangian ( 3.68 ) leads to the identifications ( 3.66 ) for
@xmath and @xmath , we first compute the conjugate momenta

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we find the supercharge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we must quantize the theory. For @xmath and @xmath this is carried
out as usual by imposing the (anti)commutation relations @xmath while,
for @xmath , the fact that the canonical momentum is a multiple of the
field itself requires that we employ Dirac’s quantization method
treating the third of ( 3.71 ) as a second-class constraint. This leads
to the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

the last one being a Dirac bracket. These relations can be realized
through the assignments

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, upon insertion in ( 3.72 ), lead to the first identification

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for @xmath , a consistent choice is given by the product @xmath ,
which anticommutes with all @xmath ’s and has eigenvalues @xmath . Then,
the second of ( 3.74 ) leads to the second identification

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### The calculation

Let us turn to the actual calculation. According to the above, the
chiral anomaly is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we employed the change of variable @xmath and @xmath is the
Euclidean Routhian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath , the leading contributions to the path integral
come from constant solutions. To evaluate the integral, we expand about
these solutions according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

and compute the terms of ( 3.78 ) quadratic in the fluctuating fields.
The expansion simplifies if we use Riemann normal coordinates around
@xmath . In this particular coordinate system, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the leading high-temperature contribution from the fluctuations of
the fields is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is @xmath –independent. Passing back to the vielbein basis,
integrating by parts and introducing the “2–forms”

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the anomaly is given by the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote the one-particle trace over
@xmath and the path integrals over the fluctuations @xmath and @xmath
respectively. The first is easily found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for @xmath , it is equal to the free (periodic) fermion determinant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, @xmath is given by the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the prime implies that the zero mode is to be excluded and where
we multiplied and divided by the free boson determinant. To evaluate the
determinant in the numerator, we first write it as an infinite product
of ordinary determinants as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath on the circle. Bringing
@xmath to a skew-diagonal form, we see that each determinant in ( 3.89 )
breaks into a product of @xmath determinants so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 3.89 ) and ( 3.90 ) in ( 3.88 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting everything together, we write the anomaly as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

To saturate the @xmath integral, we need the term that contains exactly
@xmath occurrences of @xmath . Then, the prefactor @xmath can be
absorbed in the @xmath ’s and @xmath . Making use of the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

we arrive at our final expression for the anomaly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s and @xmath are from now on understood as 2-forms in
the usual sense and where the subscript “ @xmath ” indicates that only
terms proportional to the volume form on @xmath should be kept.

The objects in ( 3.94 ) are quite familiar from the theory of
characteristic classes. The product in square brackets is just the Dirac
genus @xmath , while @xmath is the Chern character @xmath of the bundle
associated with the gauge field. Therefore, the anomaly may be written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recalling that the anomaly is also @xmath times the index of @xmath , we
have actually proven the Atiyah-Singer index theorem for the
curved-space Dirac operator. In the literature, this is known as the
supersymmetric proof [ Alvarez-Gaume:1983at , Friedan:1983xr ] .

#### 3.2.2 The spin–@xmath anomaly

The above method can be extended in a straightforward way to the spin–
@xmath chiral anomaly. The trick there is to enlarge the gauge group by
adding an extra @xmath factor with the gauge field being the spin
connection on @xmath so as to yield an extra vector index for the
fermion; the relevant @xmath –fields must be taken to transform in the
vector representation. Therefore, we may suspect that the spin– @xmath
chiral anomaly is obtained by the spin– @xmath mixed chiral anomaly by
inserting a factor of @xmath to account for the extra @xmath factor,
i.e. is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, Eq. ( 3.96 ) would represent the spin @xmath anomaly if all
degrees of freedom of the gravitino @xmath were unconstrained. However,
the chiral gravitino @xmath is actually subject to the constraints
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , whose net effect is the removal of one spin
@xmath degree of freedom of the same chirality as @xmath . This can be
taken into account by subtracting the spin– @xmath chiral anomaly from (
3.96 ), leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

By now it should be no surprise that the integral on the RHS of ( 3.97 )
is actually the index of the Rarita-Schwinger operator.

#### 3.2.3 The self-dual @xmath–form anomaly

Another field that gives rise to a singlet gravitational anomaly in
@xmath dimensions is an @xmath –form potential @xmath with a
(anti-)self-dual @xmath –form field strength @xmath . Although such a
field is bosonic rather than fermionic, it gives rise to anomalies due
to the fact that the antisymmetric tensor representations of the Lorentz
group with (anti-)self-dual field strengths are constructed by taking
the tensor product of two Weyl spinors with equal chirality. The
self-dual @xmath –form anomaly may be calculated as before. However, we
have established relations between anomalies and index theorems that
enable us to deduce its form rather easily. In particular, we expect
that the anomaly is related to the index of the operator @xmath
associated with a bispinor @xmath , which is equal to the integral
@xmath of the Hirzebruch polynomial. To find the correct relation, we
must take into account the various constraints satisfied by @xmath . In
particular, the second spinor index of @xmath should be projected to the
same chirality as the first index, while the (Minkowski-space) field
strength of @xmath is required to be real. Moreover, there is an extra
minus sign since the @xmath –form obeys Bose rather than Fermi
statistics. This leads to an overall factor of @xmath so that the
anomaly reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result coincides with that of the explicit calculation in [
Alvarez-Gaume:1984ig ] .

### 3.3 Calculation of Nonabelian Anomalies

The formalism of the previous section can be extended in a
straightforward way to compute nonabelian anomalies. As before, we will
present a detailed calculation for the spin @xmath case and deduce the
results for the spin @xmath and self-dual @xmath –form case.

#### 3.3.1 The spin–@xmath anomaly

The calculation of the spin @xmath nonabelian anomalies proceeds in much
the same way as for the chiral anomalies. As before, we will use
Fujikawa’s method to transcribe the anomalies to functional traces and
then we will compute the latter using supersymmetric path integrals.

##### The calculation

Starting from the gauge anomaly ( 3.56 ), we can again use the
supersymmetric sigma model, the only difference being the insertion of
@xmath . So, the gauge anomaly is given by the path integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by ( 3.82 ). To proceed, it is convenient to
exponentiate this term according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

keeping in mind that only terms linear in @xmath must be retained. This
way, we find the expression

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which has a form similar to ( 3.77 ), but with @xmath replaced by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So, we immediately read off the gauge anomaly

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To isolate the terms that saturate the @xmath integral and are linear in
@xmath , we have to pick the monomials containing @xmath @xmath ’s and
@xmath @xmath ’s. Absorbing @xmath factors of @xmath in the @xmath ’s
and @xmath , we write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Turning to the gravitational anomaly ( 3.58 ), we must evaluate the
supersymmetric path integral with the insertion of the sigma-model
quantity corresponding to @xmath . As seen from ( 3.74 ), this quantity
is given by @xmath so that the appropriate path integral is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we took account of the Euclidean continuation. Recalling that at
the high-temperature limit we expand about constant solutions, we must
also consider the expansion of @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the last equation follows from the fact that @xmath does not
contribute and from the use of Riemann normal coordinates. To proceed,
we use the exponentiation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the understanding that only terms linear in @xmath must be kept.
This way, we find the expression

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which has a form similar to ( 3.77 ), but with @xmath replaced by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So, the gravitational anomaly is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the skew-eigenvalues of @xmath . Picking up the terms
that saturate the @xmath integral and are linear in @xmath , we write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The purely gravitational anomaly corresponds to the case @xmath , in
which case the terms of interest contain @xmath @xmath ’s. Since the
integrand in ( 3.111 ) is even in the @xmath ’s, @xmath must also be
even. Thus, we establish that spin @xmath gravitational anomalies can
only occur in @xmath dimensions.

The above results can also be represented by the use of characteristic
classes. Indeed, the anomaly under gauge transformations can be written
in the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the anomaly under GCT’s is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To apply the above expressions, one has to use the characteristic class
formulas of () keeping the terms that are proportional to the volume
form on @xmath and linear in the transformation parameters. The gauge,
gravitational and mixed contributions are then obtained in the way
specified in § 3.1.2 .

Finally, we are now in a position to understand why the anomalies
computed above are covariant. Considering the gauge case, Eq. ( 3.112 )
is an expression involving only the curvature @xmath and the parameter
@xmath and thus the divergence of the associated current is guaranteed
to transform covariantly under gauge transformations. The reason for
this can be traced back to Eq. ( 3.56 ): since the regulator involves
the ordinary Dirac operator @xmath , there is just one occurrence of
@xmath and the relevant contributions correspond to Feynman diagrams
with one axial and @xmath vector currents. In contrast, the diagrams
required for the computation of the consistent anomaly involve @xmath
@xmath currents, leading to a different expression involving the
connection @xmath explicitly. Moreover, the extra Bose symmetry present
in the latter case yields an extra @xmath factor for the leading @xmath
terms. This information, along with the WZ condition, is all we need in
order to obtain the consistent anomalies from the covariant anomalies
found here.

#### 3.3.2 The spin–@xmath anomaly

The spin @xmath anomalies are obtained in a straightforward way by
applying the modifications of the previous subsection to the results of
§ 3.2.2 . So, the anomaly under gauge transformations is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the anomaly under GCT’s is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the gauge, gravitational and mixed contributions are collected as
before. Again, one easily sees that spin @xmath gravitational anomalies
can only occur in @xmath spacetime dimensions.

#### 3.3.3 The self-dual @xmath–form anomaly

Let us finally turn to the case of the self-dual @xmath –form anomaly,
which is purely gravitational. By the same arguments as before, one
finds the expression

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, again, the anomaly is nonvanishing only in the case @xmath .

#### 3.3.4 The consistent anomaly from the descent equations

The expressions obtained in the previous section for nonabelian
anomalies have a strong resemblance to those for chiral anomalies,
suggesting that there also exists an interpretation of the former in
terms of index theorems. On the other hand, a close look at these
equations reveals that the contributions to the anomaly in @xmath
dimensions come from monomials with @xmath powers of the curvatures so
that the “index theorems” at hand, if any, must actually refer to @xmath
dimensions. This could be regarded as a hint that gauge/gravitational
anomalies in @xmath dimensions are somehow related to chiral anomalies
in @xmath dimensions. To investigate this relation, there are several
approaches (see for example [ Alvarez:1984yi ] and [
Alvarez-Gaume:1984cs ] ). Here, will use the simplest of these methods,
which consists in applying the WZ consistency condition and the descent
equations discussed in Appendix D to deduce the form of the consistent
anomaly and its relation to the chiral one.

Let us for simplicity consider the spin– @xmath gauge anomaly in @xmath
dimensions. Following the formalism of § C.2 , we introduce extra
coordinates @xmath , we apply a gauge transformation @xmath to transform
the gauge field @xmath to the @xmath –dependent gauge field @xmath and
we introduce the BRS operator @xmath whose action on @xmath is a gauge
transformation with parameter @xmath . Let us now specialize to the case
where the 1–form @xmath takes the infinitesimal value

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and set @xmath , i.e. evaluate all quantities at @xmath . Then, the
action of @xmath on @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is, amounts to a gauge transformation with parameter @xmath . It
follows that the action of @xmath on the effective action yields the
gauge anomaly,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, due to the nilpotency of @xmath , @xmath is @xmath –closed,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To write this condition in a more familiar form, we consider the case
where there are just two extra coordinates @xmath so that @xmath . Then,
we can write the condition ( 3.120 ) in the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.121)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is just the WZ consistency condition! So, an anomaly that is
@xmath –closed is automatically consistent.

Next, consider the singlet anomaly in @xmath dimensions. For later
convenience, we write a general singlet anomaly in the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath equals @xmath times the integrand in ( 3.95 ), ( 3.97 ) or
( 3.98 ). Since @xmath is a closed form, it can be expressed in terms of
a Chern-Simons form as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Acting with the BRS operator @xmath on @xmath and using the first
descent equation, we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, acting with @xmath on @xmath , using the second of the descent
equations and integrating on a @xmath –dimensional boundary-free
submanifold @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is, @xmath is @xmath –closed.

According to the previous paragraphs, an obvious candidate for the
consistent anomaly is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, in fact it is the only choice since the solution of the WZ
consistency condition is uniquely defined up to normalization. To
determine the coefficient @xmath , we consider the leading term (i.e.
the term containing the largest number of powers of @xmath ) of the
above expression. It is given by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.127)
  -- -- -- ---------

On the other hand, the leading term of the covariant gauge anomaly (
3.112 ) is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the leading term of the consistent gauge anomaly must be given by
the same expression, divided by @xmath to account for Bose
symmetrization. So, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This fixes the normalization factor to @xmath and so the consistent
anomaly is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as can be verified by explicit computation. The same arguments hold for
all other anomalies.

### 3.4 The Anomaly Polynomials

The end result of the previous section is that the consistent nonabelian
anomalies in @xmath dimensions follow from singlet anomalies in @xmath
dimensions through the descent equations. We are now in a position to
summarize these results and express the anomaly structure of a theory in
a compact and elegant way through the so-called anomaly polynomials.

From this section on, we will switch back to Minkowski spacetime through
the Wick rotation @xmath and @xmath . Our starting point is Eq. ( 3.122
) for singlet anomalies in @xmath dimensions, whose Minkowski
continuation reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The explicit expressions for @xmath for the various cases are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.132)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the superscripts “ @xmath ”, “ @xmath ” and “ @xmath ” refer
respectively to spin– @xmath , spin– @xmath and antisymmetric @xmath
–form fields. Using the descent equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

one then obtains the consistent Minkowski anomalies according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The explicit expressions for @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.135)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, we have used the shorthand @xmath and the superscript “ @xmath ”
over a characteristic class to denote its descent. Also, the last
equations in ( 3.4 ) and ( 3.4 ) include an extra factor of @xmath :
this is a consequence of the fact that, for the case of @xmath
–dimensional anomalies, the trace must be taken over @xmath rather than
@xmath spinor indices.

So, in the end, the complete anomaly structure of a @xmath –dimensional
theory is completely determined by the formal @xmath –forms @xmath .
Expanding these forms according to the formulas of Appendix D , one
easily sees that they always contain prefactors proportional to @xmath .
To further simplify the notation, it is useful to absorb such factors in
a suitable redefinition of the anomaly polynomials. For the cases of
interest, @xmath and @xmath , we find it convenient to define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The quantities @xmath thus defined are called the anomaly polynomials .
The gauge, gravitational and mixed contributions to these polynomials
are extracted by keeping the terms involving only @xmath , the terms
involving only @xmath and the terms involving both @xmath and @xmath
respectively and they are denoted by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
results for the spacetime dimensions of interest, @xmath and @xmath are
as follows.

-   @xmath . The anomaly polynomials in 10 dimensions are given by

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.137)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    In the above, we have neglected the spin– @xmath gauge and mixed
    anomalies due to the fact that the gravitino does not couple to
    gauge fields in the theories of interest.

-   @xmath . The anomaly polynomials in 6 dimensions are given by

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.138)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    The third polynomial in the list is relevant to the case where there
    are spin-1/2 fermions charged under two gauge group factors, @xmath
    and @xmath , and can be derived by a straightforward generalization
    of the above methods.

### 3.5 Anomaly Cancellation

As stressed in § 3.1.3 , gauge, gravitational and mixed anomalies
threaten the consistency of physical theories even if the latter are
regarded as effective low-energy models. The only way out is that these
anomalies cancel by some mechanism. The simplest case is when the
anomalies of a theory cancel out when summed over all channels, as
happens in the Standard Model. However, in effective theories, anomaly
cancellation may be achieved even if the net anomaly is nonzero; this
may happen if the effective action contains terms involving @xmath –form
fields whose classical variation is equal and opposite to the quantum
anomaly. The first and most known example is the celebrated
Green-Schwarz mechanism [ Green:1984sg ] (see also [ Green:1987mn ] ),
which we will describe in detail here.

#### 3.5.1 The Green-Schwarz mechanism

The basic idea behind the Green-Schwarz mechanism is that, under certain
conditions, the anomalies of a theory (a one-loop effect) may be
cancelled by the anomalous variation of certain classical terms in the
effective action (a tree-level effect). To explain this rather
counterintuitive idea, it is useful to recall what a low-energy
effective action really is. In the context of effective theories (e.g.
the low-energy supergravities of string theory), the low-energy
effective action is usually said to be the action obtained by truncating
the massive modes. However, according to its proper definition, the
effective action is the action obtained by integrating out the massive
modes. This would result in additional terms involving irrelevant
higher-derivative operators. Since these terms have no a priori reason
to respect the gauge symmetries of the theory, they can generally have
anomalous variations. It may be then the case that these variations
cancel the anomalies of the naive low-energy theory.

Let us consider a @xmath –dimensional theory containing nonabelian
anomalies and let @xmath be the total anomaly polynomial. Then the
variation of the effective action under a gauge/Lorentz transformation
is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is obtained from @xmath through the descent equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, suppose that (i) the theory under consideration contains a @xmath
–form potential @xmath and (ii) the anomaly polynomial @xmath can be
written in the factorized form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are two polynomials constructed out of the same
curvature invariants as @xmath . Then the anomalies of the theory can be
cancelled by adding to the action suitable terms involving @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . We must stress here that the factorization condition
( 3.141 ) is not trivially satisfied: in general, it imposes very
stringent constraints on the field content of the theory.

Let us calculate the variation of the effective action corresponding to
the anomaly polynomial ( 3.141 ). By the first of ( 3.140 ), @xmath is
exact and thus the same must hold for @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the
latter can be expressed in terms of Chern-Simons forms as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, since @xmath and @xmath are closed, we see that the @xmath –forms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are candidates for the Chern-Simons form @xmath of @xmath . Thus, the
most general form of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the coefficient @xmath reflects the ambiguity in the definition of
@xmath up to an exact form and may be deduced by the WZ consistency
condition. Now, considering the variations of @xmath and @xmath under a
local gauge/Lorentz transformation,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we find that the corresponding variation of @xmath is given by the
second of ( 3.140 ) with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the anomalous variation of the effective action under the
transformation is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next, consider the @xmath –form field @xmath . Normally, this field does
not transform under Yang-Mills gauge transformations and LLT’s, while
its field-strength is defined in the usual way, @xmath . Here, we endow
@xmath with the gauge/Lorentz transformation property

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we replace @xmath by the modified field-strength

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is gauge and Lorentz invariant. Then, we add to the action the
Green-Schwarz term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which contains the interaction @xmath plus an irrelevant counterterm.
The classical variation of this term is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.151)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

that is, it is equal and opposite to the variation of @xmath . Hence,
the inclusion of this term renders the theory anomaly-free since

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation mechanism.

From the above, the inclusion of the Green-Schwarz term may seem a
little ad hoc . In the context of model building, this is not a serious
problem: one simply regards this term as a necessary addition to the
action of the theory in order to restore its consistency at the quantum
level. However, in the context of a low-energy effective theory, this
term must be present in the underlying theory because the latter would
be otherwise inconsistent. Fortunately, it turns out that, in all
theories of the second type that are of interest, such a term exists.
The reason why it may not be present in the effective action in the
first place is because it may correspond to a higher-derivative
correction.

### 3.6 Global anomalies

Apart from the local anomalies analyzed in the preceding sections, there
is also another type of anomalies that can arise in @xmath –dimensional
theories with chiral fermions. These are called global anomalies and
they may arise when the @xmath –th homotopy group of the gauge is
non-trivial. In such cases, there exist “large” gauge transformations,
under which the fermionic determinant can acquire a phase factor that
renders the quantum theory ill-defined. Below, we review the essential
facts about global anomalies and we state the necessary and sufficient
conditions for their absence in six dimensions.

#### 3.6.1 Witten’s @xmath anomaly

To describe global anomalies in gauge theories, we will follow Witten’s
[ Witten:1982fp ] original approach, referring to an @xmath gauge theory
with one doublet of Weyl fermions in four-dimensional Euclidean
spacetime. Taking for the moment the gauge fields to be classical and
ignoring their action, we write the partition function of the theory as
(cf. Eq. ( 3.48 )),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the square root arises because only half of the chiral components
of @xmath contribute. However, this square root is a source of ambiguity
since it is not clear which sign we should take. To be specific, we saw
in § 3.2.1 that the eigenvalues of @xmath come in pairs of opposite
sign. Hence, the square root of the determinant in ( 3.153 ) is obtained
by picking only one eigenvalue from each such pair and, by convention,
we can define @xmath to be the product of all positive eigenvalues. Now,
consider a gauge transformation of @xmath to @xmath where the @xmath
–valued gauge function @xmath satisfies @xmath , i.e. corresponds to a
map from @xmath to @xmath . If @xmath is continuously connected to the
identity then the above definition of @xmath is invariant under the
gauge transformation; the sign of an eigenvalue of @xmath cannot change
under an infinitesimal transformation. However, the peculiar feature of
the gauge group @xmath in four dimensions is that its fourth homotopy
group is non-trivial,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means that there exist “large” gauge transformations where @xmath
“wraps” twice around @xmath and thus cannot be continuously deformed to
the identity. Under such a transformation, the sign of an eigenvalue of
@xmath can change. If there occurs an odd number of such changes, then
@xmath picks up an overall minus sign, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This phenomenon is called a global anomaly .

The existence of global anomalies in a theory implies that the theory is
not self-consistent. The reason is that, in their presence, the
partition function ( 3.153 ) cannot be integrated any further. Indeed,
treating @xmath as a quantum field and considering the full partition
function

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we see that, due to Eq. ( 3.155 ), the contribution from each @xmath is
cancelled by an equal and opposite contribution from the corresponding
@xmath . Thus, the partition function @xmath equals zero and the
observables of the theory are ill-defined.

We now proceed to show that, in the theory under consideration, such an
anomaly does exist. To see this, we introduce a fifth coordinate @xmath
ranging from @xmath to @xmath and we let

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

be the corresponding 5D Dirac operator. The 5D gauge field @xmath is
chosen as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that @xmath evolves adiabatically from @xmath to @xmath as @xmath
varies from @xmath to @xmath . For the given configuration, there exists
an index theorem, called the Atiyah-Singer “ @xmath ” index theorem [
Atiyah:1971ws ] , which states that the number of zero modes of @xmath
is odd. To see the relevance of this to our problem, we let @xmath be
such a zero mode. By ( 3.157 ) and ( 3.158 ), @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the adiabatic approximation, one may use the separation of variables
@xmath , where @xmath is chosen to be an eigenvector of @xmath with
eigenvalue @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

noting that an eigenvalue of @xmath is the same thing as an eigenvalue
of @xmath (as @xmath is also a basis for the Clifford algebra). Then,
Eq. ( 3.159 ) leads to the following equation for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is solved by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order for this solution to be normalizable, @xmath must be positive
as @xmath and negative as @xmath . Hence, in the adiabatic
approximation, each zero mode of @xmath signifies a change of sign in an
eigenvalue of @xmath as @xmath varies from @xmath to @xmath , i.e. a
change of sign in an eigenvalue of @xmath as @xmath goes to @xmath .
Going beyond the adiabatic approximation only corrects this exact
correspondence to a @xmath correspondence. Hence, since the number of
zero modes of @xmath is odd, so is the number of sign changes in the
eigenvalues of @xmath as @xmath goes to @xmath and Eq. ( 3.155 ) does
indeed hold.

To generalize the above problem, we first consider the case where the
theory contains a net number @xmath of positive-chirality @xmath
doublets (since two Weyl spinors of opposite chirality make up a Dirac
spinor, only the net number counts). The effect of this change is that
the RHS of ( 3.155 ) now equals @xmath . Hence, if @xmath is odd then
@xmath changes its sign while, if @xmath is even, then @xmath is equal
to an integer power of @xmath and we need not worry about the definition
of the square root. Even more generally, we may consider a theory with a
net number @xmath of positive-chirality multiplets in an arbitrary
representation @xmath of @xmath . Writing @xmath , the “ @xmath ” index
theorem for the case at hand implies that @xmath changes its sign if the
quantity @xmath (which is always an integer) is odd. Therefore, in the
most general case, the condition for the absence of global anomalies is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 3.6.2 Generalizations

The above considerations can be generalized to any @xmath –dimensional
theory with Weyl fermions in representations of a gauge group @xmath
with non-trivial @xmath –th homotopy group,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In such a case, under a non-trivial gauge transformation, the partition
function changes as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a phase factor which, unless it equals a multiple of
@xmath , signifies the presence of a global anomaly (for the case of
@xmath in 4D, @xmath ). As before, such an anomaly is dangerous, since
the full partition function receives which add up to zero, rendering the
theory ill-defined.

The value of the phase factor can be computed according to two
alternative methods (i) generalize the original approach of [
Witten:1982fp ] and study the evolution of the eigenvalues of @xmath by
invoking suitable index theorems or (ii) embed @xmath in a larger group
@xmath with trivial @xmath and calculate the global anomaly in terms of
the local gauge anomaly for @xmath [ Elitzur:1984kr , Kiritsis:1986mf ,
Bershadsky:1997sb ] . Since the meaning of global anomalies is by now
quite clear, we leave technical details aside and we just present the
results.

In the six-dimensional case of interest, the possible gauge groups that
may lead to global anomalies are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , for which

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The conditions for the absence of global anomalies can be computed as
indicated above (actually, in the 6D case, there is another [
Bershadsky:1997sb ] possible method based on geometrical engineering).
They are expressed in terms of the coefficients @xmath , defined by
@xmath , and they are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.167)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These conditions, when applicable, supplement the local anomaly
cancellation conditions in six-dimensional theories.

## Chapter 4 Anomaly Cancellation in Superstring Theory and M-Theory

In this chapter, we prepare the setting for the main part of the thesis
by giving a detailed account of anomaly cancellation in superstring and
M-theory models. We begin by reviewing the classic examples in ten
dimensions, namely the automatic cancellation of anomalies in Type IIB
supergravity and the Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation in heterotic and
Type I theories. We next review the construction of Hořava and Witten
which considered eleven-dimensional supergravity on a @xmath orbifold,
regarded as a manifold with boundary on the orbifold fixed points. In
that case, the symmetries of the theory impose chiral boundary
conditions for the fermions on the fixed points, yielding a chiral
theory with an anomalous spectrum. Anomalies are cancelled by
introducing extra fields living on the fixed points and applying a
special version of the Green-Schwarz mechanism.

### 4.1 Anomaly Cancellation in Superstring Theory

Here, we give an account of anomaly cancellation in superstring theory,
based the developments made during the first superstring revolution of
1984-5. In particular, we demonstrate that @xmath Type IIB theory is
manifestly anomaly-free while @xmath heterotic/Type I theory can be made
anomaly-free, for certain choices of the gauge group, through the
Green-Schwarz mechanism.

#### 4.1.1 Anomaly cancellation in Type IIB supergravity

Let us start with Type IIB supergravity, whose field content is given by
the gravity multiplet @xmath , where @xmath . The anomalies of this
theory are purely gravitational and arise from @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Noting that the fermions are Majorana-Weyl, the fermionic part
of the anomaly equals the sum of the contributions from one
positive-chirality Weyl gravitino and a negative-chirality Weyl spinor.
Including the contribution from the antisymmetric tensor field, we find
the total anomaly polynomial

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the explicit formulas from Eq. ( 3.4 ), we immediately find that
the total anomaly vanishes ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the “miraculous” anomaly cancellation of Type IIB superstring
theory, first proven in [ Alvarez-Gaume:1984ig ] . This is due to the
fact that the three anomaly polynomials in ( 4.1 ) are linearly
dependent and so cancellation may occur if the spectrum of the theory is
chosen appropriately. Note that in the absence of the gravitino, we
would only be left with the polynomials @xmath and @xmath which are
linearly independent; this is an indication that the only consistent 10D
gravitational theories with chiral fields are supergravity theories.

#### 4.1.2 Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation in heterotic/Type I theory

Next, let us apply the above to @xmath , @xmath supergravity coupled to
super Yang-Mills theory, which is the low-energy limit of heterotic and
Type I superstring theories, following the original work [ Green:1984sg
] . The field content of the theory is given by the gravity multiplet
@xmath and @xmath vector multiplets @xmath , transforming in the adjoint
representation of some gauge group of dimension @xmath . Now the theory
contains anomalies of all types, arising from @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. The gravitational anomaly receives contributions from all three types
of fields and is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The gauge and mixed anomalies receive contributions only from the
gauginos. The gauge anomaly is simply given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the mixed anomaly reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the above, “ @xmath ” stands for the trace in the adjoint
representation; the trace in the fundamental representation will be
denoted as “ @xmath ”. Putting everything together, we find the total
anomaly polynomial

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Since the above anomaly is nonvanishing, the only way to achieve anomaly
cancellation is via the Green-Schwarz mechanism of § 3.5.1 . Since the
theory contains a 2–form @xmath , the factorization condition ( 3.141 )
takes the specific form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, noting that the only curvature invariants available for the
construction of @xmath are @xmath and @xmath , we may choose our
normalization so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a yet undetermined constant. A first condition for the
factorization ( 4.7 ) to be possible is that the irreducible parts of
@xmath and @xmath vanish. Regarding the former, it is known that @xmath
has a sixth-order Casimir, which implies that @xmath cannot be expressed
in terms of lower-order traces. Hence, in order for factorization to be
possible, the coefficient of @xmath must vanish, i.e. we must have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a first dramatic demonstration of the restrictions imposed by
anomaly cancellation: the factorization condition tells us that anomaly
cancellation requires the presence of vector multiplets and also
uniquely fixes the dimension of the gauge group. Turning to the @xmath
term and noting that its coefficient is fixed, factorization requires
that the adjoint of the gauge group must have no sixth-order Casimirs,
i.e. that @xmath must be reducible according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are two constants. Provided that ( 4.9 ) and (
4.10 ) hold, the anomaly polynomial ( 4.6 ) is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.11)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From this expression, we can fix the value of the coefficient @xmath
appearing in ( 4.8 ). Indeed, from the fixed values of the coefficients
of @xmath and @xmath , we immediately see that we must have @xmath .
Therefore, the factorized expression ( 4.7 ) should read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are four more constants. The
six constants in Eqs. ( 4.11 ) and ( 4.12 ) can now be determined by
comparing the two expressions term-by-term. The comparison yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

To summarize, the factorization condition requires that (i) the gauge
group of the theory has dimension @xmath and (ii) the adjoint
representation of the gauge group has no sixth-order Casimir, with
@xmath being reducible according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

If this is the case, the anomaly polynomial takes the factorized form (
4.7 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Green-Schwarz mechanism may operate.

To determine the possible gauge groups for which anomaly cancellation
may occur, one is thus instructed to search of gauge groups of dimension
@xmath satisfying Eq. ( 4.14 ). Originally, Green and Schwarz started
from the second requirement. In searching for groups with no sixth-order
Casimir, they encountered the @xmath identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

expressing the sixth-order trace in the adjoint in terms of traces in
the fundamental. For the case of @xmath , the first term on the RHS
vanishes and @xmath is reducible. The remarkable facts are that (i) the
reduction of @xmath is exactly given by ( 4.14 ) and that (ii) the
dimension of @xmath is @xmath , exactly that required by ( 4.9 )!
Searching for other groups with the same properties, they also learned
that the exceptional group @xmath also has no sixth-order Casimirs.
Since the dimension of @xmath is @xmath , they were led to consider the
496–dimensional gauge @xmath which again turned out that this group
satisfied all anomaly cancellation conditions. Let us briefly review
these two examples.

-   @xmath . For @xmath , the decompositions of second-, fourth- and
    sixth-order adjoint traces in terms of fundamental ones are given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.18)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Combining these relations, we easily find the required relation

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.19)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

-   @xmath . For each of the @xmath factors, labelled by @xmath , the
    decompositions of fourth- and sixth-order traces are given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    For the full @xmath group, we write

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.21)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Applying this to @xmath and using ( 4.20 ) and the identity @xmath ,
    we find again the desired relation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In what follows, it will be convenient to define the “fundamental”
    trace for @xmath as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.23)
      -- -------- -- --------

    so that its normalization coincides with that of the @xmath
    subgroup.

Today, it is known that the only groups for which anomaly cancellation
is possible are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The application of the Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation mechanism is
now straightforward. Applying the first descent equation, we write the
4–form @xmath in ( 4.15 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Chern-Simons forms of @xmath and @xmath
respectively. By the descent equations, the variation of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we consider the 8–form @xmath and we let @xmath denote its
descent. Then, we find that the anomalous gauge/Lorentz variation of the
effective action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Replacing the ordinary field strength ( 2.131 ) by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and changing the transformation law ( 2.132 ) of @xmath to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

we see that the anomaly is cancelled by the Green-Schwarz term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above discoveries had a striking impact on the development of string
theory. Regarding the @xmath theory, Green and Schwarz showed that the
corresponding Type I superstring theory also satisfies the RR tadpole
cancellation condition [ Green:1984ed ] and proved anomaly cancellation
using string-theory arguments [ Green:1984qs ] . As for the @xmath
theory, the fact that there was no known superstring model realizing its
gauge group motivated the search for such a model and eventually led to
the discovery of the heterotic string [ Gross:1985dd ] , which admits
both @xmath and @xmath as possible gauge groups. Moreover, it was found
that the @xmath Green-Schwarz interaction in ( 4.29 ) is present in
superstring theory, in the form of a one-loop string correction to the
supergravity effective action, with exactly the right coefficient to
cancel the variation ( 4.26 ). These discoveries marked the onset of the
first superstring revolution of 1984-1986, which firmly established
string theory as an active area of theoretical physics.

### 4.2 Anomaly Cancellation in Heterotic M-theory

An archetypal model for orbifold compactification which provides an
impressive exhibition of the role of anomaly cancellation in model
building is provided by heterotic M-theory or Hořava-Witten theory [
Horava:1996qa , Horava:1996ma ] , that is, 11D supergravity compactified
on the @xmath orbifold. Compactification on this orbifold results in a
chiral spectrum on the orbifold fixed planes, but the price to pay is
the appearance of anomalies. The only way to cancel these anomalies is
through the introduction of 10D vector multiplets on the orbifold fixed
planes and the anomaly cancellation conditions uniquely fix the gauge
group on each plane to be @xmath . The important fact is that, after a
modification of the Green-Schwarz mechanism and a careful examination of
the role played by the supergravity Chern-Simons term, the theory turns
out to be anomaly-free and, moreover, the gauge coupling is uniquely
fixed. The dynamics of the resulting theory are believed to correspond
to a strongly-coupled version of the @xmath heterotic string.

#### 4.2.1 11–dimensional supergravity on @xmath

The Hořava-Witten construction begins by considering 11D supergravity on
the orbifold @xmath . The starting point is thus the 11D supergravity
Lagrangian and transformation rules of § 2.4.1 . Reinstating the
gravitational coupling @xmath and ignoring @xmath terms, we have the
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.30)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From our discussion of the symmetry properties of 11D supergravity in §
2.4.1 , we know that it is invariant under a @xmath symmetry
corresponding to parity transformations and certain transformations of
the fields. Let us examine this symmetry more carefully. We choose
@xmath to act as a parity transformation along the eleventh dimension
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath parity assignments to the fields follow from invariance of
the action and supersymmetry transformation laws. For the metric, we
obviously have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we consider the Chern-Simons term in ( 4.30 ) whose
invariance requires that all combinations of the type @xmath must be
@xmath –even. Using @xmath and the fact that @xmath is @xmath –even
while @xmath is @xmath –odd, we see that the only consistent way to
achieve invariance is through the assignment

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, for @xmath and @xmath , we can consider the @xmath
transformation law. We first parameterize the parity assignments as
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Invariance of the @xmath part immediately
implies that @xmath . To determine @xmath , we consider the @xmath
–dependent term of @xmath , which we write schematically as @xmath .
Under @xmath , this transforms to @xmath . Consistency of the two
expressions demands that @xmath anticommutes with @xmath and commutes
with @xmath . The obvious choice is @xmath , where the normalization
follows from invariance of the action. Finally, invariance of @xmath and
@xmath rules out the minus sign and we find @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, consider compactification of @xmath on the @xmath orbifold. This
orbifold is constructed by taking @xmath and modding out the @xmath
symmetry, that is, it corresponds to a fundamental domain of the @xmath
action on @xmath . Parameterizing @xmath by the interval @xmath with the
ends identified, we see that the orbifold can be represented by the
interval @xmath whose endpoints at @xmath and @xmath are fixed points of
the @xmath action. To find the particle spectrum of the theory on the
10D fixed planes, we first consider the usual Kaluza-Klein decomposition
of the 11D fields on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and we project out the fields
that are odd under @xmath . The spectrum on the fixed planes is then
obtained from ( 4.34 ) by discarding the @xmath –odd fields . Using (
4.33 )- 4.35 , we easily see that the surviving fields are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath subscripts on spinors indicate 10D chirality. This
spectrum is nothing but the chiral @xmath , @xmath gravity multiplet of
( 2.31 ). This is the first success of Hořava-Witten theory:
compactification of 11D supergravity on the @xmath orbifold gives rise
to 10D chiral fermions, evading Witten’s [ Witten:1983ux ] no-go theorem
about compactifications of non-chiral theories on ordinary manifolds.

On the other hand, the appearance of chiral fermions in the theory
inevitably gives rise to anomalies, which imply that the theory is
inconsistent at this stage. The idea of Hořava and Witten was to
introduce extra ten-dimensional fields living only on the orbifold fixed
planes with the purpose of cancelling these anomalies. Since the theory
already contains gravity, the only available multiplet is the @xmath ,
@xmath vector multiplet with field content

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The remaining tasks are to construct the action describing the boundary
vector multiplets, state the anomaly cancellation conditions and
identify the mechanism by which anomalies may cancel.

Before we proceed, we note that the theory can be formulated according
to two different, but equivalent, formalisms. In the “upstairs”
formalism, one regards the 11D spacetime as @xmath subject to @xmath
invariance. This orbifold has no boundary and partial integrations with
respect to @xmath do not give rise to surface terms. In the “downstairs”
formalism, the spacetime manifold is thought of to be @xmath with @xmath
. This is a manifold with two boundaries located on the two @xmath fixed
planes and partial integrations with respect to @xmath give rise to
surface terms. Since @xmath has twice the volume of @xmath , the
requirement that the action be the same in both approaches implies that
the associated gravitational couplings must be related according to
@xmath . Also, by arguments related to M2–branes and @xmath –flux
quantization conditions, it has been proven [ Harmark:1998bs ] that
@xmath is the true 11D gravitational coupling. In what follows, we will
mainly use the downstairs approach and, for definiteness, we will
restrict our considerations to the fixed plane at @xmath , which we will
call @xmath .

#### 4.2.2 Anomaly analysis

For the problem at hand, it is advantageous to begin the analysis by
examining the anomaly structure of the theory. To determine the
gravitational anomalies resulting from the bulk fields, we note that, in
the limit of a small compactification radius where the two planes
effectively coincide, the total anomaly must be equal to that of a 10D
positive-chirality gravitino plus that of a 10D negative-chirality
spinor. Given the fact that the two fixed planes are symmetric, we
conclude that the anomaly contribution on each fixed plane is given by
half the above sum. Including another factor of @xmath due to the
Majorana-Weyl property of spinors, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inclusion of the boundary vector multiplets gives rise to extra
gravitational, gauge and mixed anomalies, all arising from the
positive-chirality gaugino. The gravitational contribution reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the gauge and mixed contributions are read off from ( 4.4 ) and (
4.5 ) respectively. Adding all contributions, we find the total anomaly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.41)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now, we can proceed as in the case of @xmath , @xmath supergravity. As
will become clear later, we are again interested in factorizations of
the form ( 4.7 ) where now we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The requirement that the coefficient of @xmath vanishes leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the @xmath term must factorize as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Provided that these relations hold, Eq. ( 4.41 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.45)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which implies that the coefficient @xmath in ( 4.42 ) should be equal to
@xmath . Then, the factorized anomaly should have the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and comparison with ( 4.45 ) yields the numerical coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the decomposition of @xmath should read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Provided that this holds, the factorized form of the anomaly polynomial
is given by ( 4.7 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

For reasons that will become clear later, it is convenient to express
@xmath in terms of @xmath and another 8–form @xmath that only depends on
the Lorentz curvature @xmath . Using ( 4.23 ) and performing
straightforward manipulations, we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath –independent form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

This way, our factorized anomaly takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

To determine the possible gauge groups that may yield the desired
cancellation, we may proceed as before. Now, the obvious candidate for
the gauge group is the 248–dimensional @xmath group. Indeed, the @xmath
identities ( 4.20 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

lead indeed to the desired decomposition ( 4.48 ). Moreover, it may be
proven that only this group has this property. Therefore, anomaly
cancellation on the fixed planes uniquely determines the gauge group on
each fixed plane to be @xmath .

A very important result that emerges from this anomaly analysis is that
the particle spectrum of the full theory is constrained to be exactly
that of the @xmath 10–dimensional heterotic string, this time however
with one @xmath localized at each 10D boundary of the 11D world. This
led Hořava and Witten to conjecture that 11–dimensional supergravity
compactified on @xmath corresponds to some special limit of the @xmath
heterotic string (hence the name “heterotic M-theory”) and showed that
this limit must be a strong-coupling one. Therefore, anomaly
considerations have again taken us a long way towards discovering new,
unexpected, duality relations between string theory and M-theory.

#### 4.2.3 The boundary action

Having introduced new boundary fields, necessary for anomaly
cancellation, we must now determine the action describing those fields
and their couplings to the bulk supergravity. This can be done by
starting from the globally supersymmetric Yang-Mills action and apply
the Noether method introducing additional interactions and modifications
to the supersymmetry transformations until the theory becomes locally
supersymmetric. However, at the present stage, there are several
unresolved issues which should be taken into account.

First of all, the super Yang-Mills action introduces a gauge coupling
@xmath , which is a priori undetermined. Moreover, one can combine it
with the gravitational coupling @xmath and form the dimensionless
combination

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given that the theory is to be dual to the heterotic string, the
parameter @xmath must be fixed by some scalar expectation value of the
string theory. However, the only scalar in heterotic string theory is
the dilaton @xmath which, in the given compactification, is determined
in terms of compactification radius @xmath . Therefore, from the string
viewpoint, the parameter @xmath is an extra parameter introduced into
the theory. In order for the duality with the heterotic string to work,
the parameter @xmath must be fixed within the present theory, i.e. the
value of the gauge coupling @xmath must be fixed in terms of the
gravitational coupling @xmath .

Second, the mechanism for anomaly cancellation is not obvious. Since the
theory does not contain a @xmath –form field localized on the boundary,
the usual Green-Schwarz mechanism is clearly not applicable. An
important hint is provided by the calculations of [ Vafa:1995fj ,
Duff:1995wd ] which show that string loop corrections to Type IIA
superstring theory induce a @xmath Green-Schwarz-type interaction where
@xmath is given in ( 4.52 ). Since M-theory reduces to the Type IIA
theory on @xmath , it must contain an @xmath interaction. Then, if the
boundary conditions of @xmath are modified so as to induce an anomalous
variation on the boundary, this interaction might serve to cancel part
of the anomaly. Moreover, such a modification to the boundary conditions
also affects the Chern-Simons @xmath interaction and so we have a second
candidate for an anomaly-cancelling term. However, this still leaves us
with the question of what gives @xmath its anomalous variation.

The above issues are actually more closely related than it might seem at
first and can be resolved in an elegant and consistent way. The
additional interactions required for local supersymmetry require the
modification of the boundary value (or the Bianchi identity) of @xmath
by a term proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the anomaly 4–form in
( 4.49 ). Solving the resulting equations for @xmath , we find that
@xmath has an anomalous variation of the boundary. Then, it turns out
that the first part of the anomaly ( 4.53 ) is cancelled by the
variation of @xmath while the second part is cancelled by the variation
of @xmath , with all coefficients working out exactly right if the gauge
coupling @xmath is related to the gravitational coupling @xmath in a
certain way. The final result is an anomaly-free, self-consistent theory
with no undetermined fundamental parameters.

##### The vector multiplet action

To construct the locally supersymmetric action for the boundary vector
multiplets, we start from the globally supersymmetric @xmath , @xmath
super Yang-Mills action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is invariant under the supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

To couple the theory to the bulk supergravity, we introduce the usual
Noether coupling of the supercurrent to the gravitino, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, this still leaves the residual variation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

which cannot be cancelled neither by introducing additional boundary
interactions nor by modifying the supersymmetry transformation rules.
However, a crucial observation is that the bulk theory contains the
interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose variation under @xmath contains the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used @xmath . This term has the right structure to cancel
@xmath , provided that the boundary condition (or Bianchi identity) of
@xmath is appropriately modified on the boundary .

In the downstairs approach where the theory lives on a manifold @xmath
with boundary, this relation is formulated as follows. We first
integrate ( 4.61 ) by parts and obtain the surface term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we restricted our considerations to the fixed plane at @xmath .
This surface term can cancel the variation @xmath , provided that the
boundary value of @xmath (previously equal to zero by the @xmath
projection) is taken to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, in form notation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Actually, from the structure of the anomaly 4–form @xmath in ( 4.49 ),
we deduce that the above term must be supplemented by a gravitational
contribution. Thus, we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.65 ) must be solved for the gauge field @xmath . To this end, we
introduce the Chern-Simons form of @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we see that the boundary value ( 4.65 ) for @xmath can be obtained
by requiring that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the descent equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

it follows that @xmath acquires an anomalous gauge/Lorentz variation,
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the upstairs approach, originally used in [ Horava:1996ma ] , the
partial integration of the variation ( 4.61 ) does not give rise to a
surface term but instead leaves the 11D variation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can cancel the variation @xmath , provided that the Bianchi
identity of @xmath is modified to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the distribution @xmath . This modified Bianchi
identity admits a 1–parameter family of solutions for @xmath . This
seems to bring an extra free parameter in the theory but it turns out
that anomaly cancellation eventually fixes the value of this parameter.
For a very careful treatment of anomaly cancellation and related issues
in the upstairs approach, the reader is referred to [ Bilal:1999ig ,
Bilal:2003es ] .

The construction of the rest of the action is straightforward. Without
going into much detail, we note that a modification of the supersymmetry
transformation law for @xmath induces an uncancelled variation of the
@xmath kinetic term while the supercurrent interaction @xmath also has
an uncancelled variation under @xmath , both variations being of the
form @xmath [ Horava:1996ma ] . Eventually both terms cancel if we
introduce the extra interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

This completes the construction of the theory, up to @xmath terms.

#### 4.2.4 Anomaly cancellation

Let us now study the anomaly cancellation mechanism of the theory. As
remarked earlier on, the possible sources for the cancellation of
anomalies are the @xmath Chern-Simons term and the @xmath
“Green-Schwarz” term, and we have just verified that the requirement for
supersymmetry induces a modified boundary condition for @xmath and an
anomalous variation for @xmath . What remains is to see whether the
coefficients work out right so that the anomalies cancel and how the
value of the parameter @xmath is determined.

We start from the Chern-Simons term of ( 4.30 ). Using form notation, we
write it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, using the anomalous variation ( 4.69 ) of @xmath and the boundary
condition ( 4.65 ) for @xmath , we readily find that the gauge/Lorentz
variation of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

This variation corresponds to the anomaly 10–form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding anomaly polynomial is easily computed by the descent
equations (in reverse order). We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our “unhatted” normalization of § 3.4 , we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

This anomaly polynomial has exactly the right form to cancel the first
part of the anomaly ( 4.53 ), provided that the respective coefficients
are equal and opposite. This leads to the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

which determines the numerical value of the dimensionless coupling
@xmath of the theory ¹ ¹ 1 The difference from the standard value @xmath
found e.g. in [ Harmark:1998bs , Bilal:2003es ] is only due to our
different conventions for the gravitational coupling which follow those
of [ Cremmer:1978km ] . .

Let us pass to the @xmath “Green-Schwarz” term of the theory. A
computation through string loop corrections [ Vafa:1995fj ] or fivebrane
considerations [ Duff:1995wd ] gives, in our present conventions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the form @xmath is exactly the one appearing in 4.52 , hinting
that this term can completely cancel the remaining anomaly. The
application of the Green-Schwarz mechanism is then quite
straightforward. Evaluating the gauge/Lorentz variation of @xmath
according to ( 4.69 ) and using ( 4.79 ), we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.81)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This leads to the anomaly 10–form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

and to the anomaly polynomial

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equal and opposite to the second term of ( 4.53 ) and thus this
part of the anomaly does also cancel. It is remarkable that the
Green-Schwarz term ( 4.80 ), deduced through string loop calculations,
involves exactly the form @xmath appearing in our anomaly analysis and
has exactly the right coefficient to cancel the anomaly when we fix
@xmath to the value given in ( 4.79 ).

## Chapter 5 Anomaly-Free Supergravities in Six Dimensions

The issue of anomaly freedom in chiral supergravities can be examined
not only in the usual context of superstring theories, but also in the
context of lower-dimensional supergravities, many of which arise from
superstring and M-theory compactifications. Among these latter theories,
six-dimensional chiral supergravities play a prominent role due to the
fact that the presence of gravitational and mixed nonabelian anomalies
on top of gauge and mixed abelian ones in these theories implies that
the requirement of anomaly cancellation may lead to powerful constraints
singling out a relatively small number of consistent models. Moreover,
there also exists the option of gauging the R-symmetry of the theory,
which leads to supergravities that cannot be realized in terms of
straightforward string compactifications. In this chapter, we will
review @xmath , @xmath minimal supergravities, we will thoroughly
examine the issue of anomaly cancellation in these theories and we will
present the results of a systematic search for anomaly-free theories,
under a certain set of conditions on the allowed gauge groups and
representations. We also discuss anomaly cancellation on the
six-dimensional theories living on the fixed points of @xmath , @xmath
supergravity on @xmath .

### 5.1 @xmath, @xmath Supergravity

#### 5.1.1 A quick survey of @xmath supergravities

Before we begin our study of @xmath , @xmath minimal supergravities, let
us first present a survey of the various six-dimensional supergravity
theories. The available possibilities can be read off Table 2.1 and the
main properties of the resulting theories are summarized as follows.

1.  @xmath . There exists a non-chiral @xmath supergravity, constructed
    in [ Tanii:1984zk ] , as well as chiral @xmath and @xmath
    supergravities [ Townsend:1983xt ] which have not been constructed
    up to date. These theories are considered of limited interest.

2.  @xmath . There exists a non-chiral @xmath supergravity, whose first
    version was constructed in [ Giani:1984dw ] . This theory contains
    the @xmath gravity and vector multiplets, it has an @xmath gauge
    group and admits no stable maximally symmetric vacua. The
    construction was generalized by Romans [ Romans:1985tw ] to include
    a mass term for the 2–form of the supergravity multiplet and leads
    to distinct theories, determined by the values of the @xmath
    coupling @xmath and the mass parameter @xmath . For @xmath , one has
    an ungauged supergravity with a 6D Minkowski vacuum. The theory with
    @xmath and @xmath is a gauged theory known as Romans supergravity.
    It is symmetric under the anti-de Sitter superalgebra @xmath , it
    has a scalar potential with two AdS extrema (one fully
    supersymmetric and one non-supersymmetric) and it is the only pure
    supergravity that exhibits the Higgs mechanism in a supersymmetric
    ground state. This theory can also be obtained [ Cvetic:1999un ] by
    a warped @xmath reduction of massive Type IIA supergravity. There
    also exists a chiral @xmath theory [ Townsend:1983xt , Romans:1986er
    ] containing the @xmath gravity and tensor multiplets.

3.  @xmath . The @xmath supergravities are necessarily chiral and were
    first constructed in [ Nishino:1984gk , Nishino:1986dc ] . They
    contain the @xmath supergravity multiplet plus arbitrary numbers of
    vector multiplets, tensor multiplets and hypermultiplets. The vector
    multiplets may belong to a gauge group under which the
    hypermultiplets may be charged. The case when the gauge group does
    not include the @xmath R-symmetry group leads to ungauged theories
    with a 6D Minkowski vacuum. The case when the gauge group includes a
    subgroup of the R-symmetry group leads to gauged theories which have
    the remarkable property that they admit a vacuum consisting of 4D
    Minkowski space times an internal @xmath . Many of the ungauged
    theories may be obtained from string theory via various mechanisms;
    on the contrary, the origin of the gauged theories still remains
    unclear.

From the above, it is already obvious that the @xmath chiral
supergravities are by far the most interesting among the six-dimensional
supergravities, since they have the richest structure and they are the
ones that can potentially be used to make contact with 4D phenomenology.
We turn to a detailed study of these theories immediately on.

#### 5.1.2 General facts about @xmath, @xmath supergravity

The minimal supersymmetry algebra in six dimensions is the @xmath
algebra ¹ ¹ 1 In the literature, one often encounters an alternative
convention where the number of supersymmetries is counted in terms of
Weyl spinors; in that convention, the algebra is called @xmath . which
is chiral and has @xmath as its R-symmetry group. As we saw in § 2.1.2 ,
its massless representations are classified in terms of the @xmath
little group and the @xmath R-symmetry group and are given by

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, the spinors are symplectic Majorana-Weyl, the index @xmath takes
values in the fundamental representation of @xmath and the @xmath (
@xmath ) superscripts denote positive (negative) chirality for spinors
and (anti-)self-duality for 2–forms.

A general @xmath , @xmath supergravity theory coupled to matter is
constructed by combining one supergravity multiplet with @xmath tensor
multiplets, @xmath vector multiplets and @xmath hypermultiplets, where
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined so as to include group
multiplicities. The @xmath real scalars in the tensor multiplet
parameterize the coset space @xmath . The @xmath real hyperscalars
parameterize a quaternionic manifold of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath subgroup is identified with the R-symmetry group, and
the hyperinos furnish an appropriate representation of @xmath . The
allowed choices for @xmath [ Nishino:1986dc ] are the canonical case
@xmath plus the extra cases @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The vector multiplets may belong to a gauge group
@xmath which is the product of a subgroup of the isometry group @xmath
and a possible “shadow” group @xmath under which all other multiplets
are inert. In the first three cases, where @xmath is non-compact, this
essentially means ² ² 2 For the remaining cases where @xmath is compact,
the gauge group can be any subgroup of @xmath times @xmath but the
hyperinos are restricted to transform only under @xmath . that @xmath is
a subgroup of the @xmath holonomy group times @xmath . We write this
gauge group as @xmath , where @xmath contains the factors from @xmath
and @xmath while @xmath is the R-symmetry factor arising in gauged
theories and can be either @xmath or a @xmath subgroup thereof.
Introducing an extended index @xmath that runs over all group factors in
@xmath (i.e. @xmath for ungauged theories and @xmath for gauged
theories), we write the full group as @xmath .

The transformation properties of the various fermions under the gauge
group are as follows. Under @xmath , the hyperinos may transform in
arbitrary representations while the gravitino and tensorinos are inert.
Under @xmath , the hyperinos are inert (although the hyperscalars are
charged) while the gravitino, tensorinos and gauginos transform
non-trivially. In particular, in the case where the whole @xmath is
gauged, Eq. ( 5.1.2 ) indicates that the gravitino, the tensorinos and
the @xmath gauginos transform in the fundamental @xmath while the @xmath
gauginos transform in the @xmath . In the case where only a @xmath is
gauged, the gravitino, the tensorinos and all gauginos have unit charge.

The @xmath , @xmath supergravity coupled to matter was first constructed
by Nishino and Sezgin in [ Nishino:1984gk , Nishino:1986dc ] and further
generalized in [ Nishino:1997ff , Ferrara:1998gh , Riccioni:2001bg ] to
include new couplings and more than one tensor multiplet. In the general
case, the standard construction method is to start with a general ansatz
for the supersymmetry variations and equations of motion involving a set
of undetermined coefficients and then fix all coefficients through the
requirement of closure of the supersymmetry algebra on the fields. This
approach, although rather technical, has the merit that it is valid for
arbitrary @xmath where a Lagrangian formulation of the theory is not
possible due to the self-duality conditions; in the @xmath case, the
invariant Lagrangian can be derived by integrating the equations of
motion. On the other hand, since we are mostly interested in the case
@xmath , it is more natural to follow the somewhat simpler Noether
procedure to derive the full supergravity Lagrangian, up to @xmath
terms.

#### 5.1.3 Gravity and tensor multiplets

Our starting point is the the locally supersymmetric Lagrangian
describing the gravity and tensor multiplets, i.e. the set of fields
@xmath . This can be derived quite easily by standard methods and we do
not find it necessary to repeat the discussion here. The result is the
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

which is invariant under the set of supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.4 Vector multiplets

The next step in our construction is to couple the theory to vector
multiplets in a way consistent with local supersymmetry. For
definiteness, we take the gauge group @xmath to be the full holonomy
group of the scalar manifold, @xmath , and we let @xmath be the adjoint
index for @xmath which is decomposed into the adjoint indices @xmath and
@xmath of @xmath and @xmath respectively (the restriction to a subgroup
of @xmath as well as the addition of abelian factors is a trivial
matter). Our starting point is the well-known globally supersymmetric
Lagrangian for vector multiplets,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the summation index @xmath labels the simple factors of the gauge
group and @xmath are some numerical constants that will be determined by
anomaly considerations in the next section. The Lagrangian ( 5.226 ) is
invariant under the rigid supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our first step towards obtaining a locally supersymmetric theory is to
introduce the usual Noether coupling of the gravitino to the
supercurrent of the multiplet. The required term is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, we must cancel the @xmath variation of @xmath . This variation is
found to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and can be cancelled by the @xmath variation of the additional term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The introduction of these new interactions results in additional
uncancelled terms of the form @xmath coming from the @xmath and @xmath
variations of @xmath and @xmath respectively. The first one vanishes by
the 6D identity @xmath , while the second one is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be cancelled by introducing the additional interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

What remains is to cancel the @xmath and @xmath terms coming from the
@xmath variations of @xmath and @xmath . These terms are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

To cancel these terms, we use standard spinor identities plus the
gamma-matrix duality relation ( B.8 ) to write thir sum in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Noting that the term inside brackets is exactly the supersymmetry
variation of @xmath in ( 5.1.3 ), we see that one can cancel this
variation by introducing the interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This interaction, immediately recognized as a Green-Schwarz term, plays
an important role in the context of anomaly cancellation. Here, we note
that, in contrast to the 10D case, the 6D Green-Schwarz term is not a
higher-derivative correction to the action of the theory but it is
present in the low-energy action in the first place.

Combining the above terms, we finally find that the locally
supersymmetric Lagrangian describing the vector multiplets and their
couplings to the gravity and tensor multiplet is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.16)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 5.1.5 Hypermultiplets

Our final step in constructing the @xmath , @xmath supergravity action
is to couple the theory to hypermultiplets. In what follows, we shall
derive the action describing the hypermultiplets and their couplings to
the other multiplets of the theory in two steps. In the first step, we
will consider the case where the hypermultiplets are inert under the
gauge group and we construct the appropriate locally supersymmetric
action. In the second step, we will gauge the theory by identifying the
gauge group with a subgroup of the holonomy group of the scalar
manifold, letting the hypermultiplets transform under this gauge group
and introducing extra interactions so as to maintain local
supersymmetry. In the course of the discussion, we will explain the fact
that the scalar manifold must be quaternionic in the locally
supersymmetric case. We will also see the appearance of a scalar
potential, which plays a significant role when the @xmath R-symmetry is
gauged.

##### The action for neutral hypermultiplets

We begin by constructing the locally supersymmetric action for the case
where the hypermultiplets are neutral under the gauge group. For the
moment, we take the scalar manifold to have the general form @xmath ,
with @xmath and @xmath chosen so that its dimension is @xmath ; the
metric of that space is denoted by @xmath . The restrictions imposed by
supersymmetry on the scalar manifold will arise during the discussion.

Let us first examine the parameterization of the scalar manifold.
According to the guidelines of § 2.3 , we consider a coset
representative given by a matrix @xmath whose Maurer-Cartan form
decomposes as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the generators of @xmath , @xmath and the
coset, @xmath and @xmath are the @xmath and @xmath connections and
@xmath is the coset vielbein. The pullback of this Maurer-Cartan form is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

As explained in Section 2.3 , the covariant derivatives of fields
carrying @xmath and @xmath indices must be modified by couplings to the
composite connections @xmath . Explicitly, for the supersymmetry spinor
@xmath (one @xmath index), the hyperino @xmath (one @xmath index) and
the gauginos @xmath (one @xmath adjoint index and one @xmath fundamental
index) we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The reason for the absence of the composite @xmath –connection in the
covariant derivative of the gauginos @xmath is a technical one and
originates [ Nishino:1986dc ] from the requirement of supersymmetry of
the action. Given these covariant derivatives, we can define the @xmath
and @xmath curvatures, @xmath and @xmath through the commutators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Another useful geometrical quantity is the triplet of complex structures

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfy the @xmath algebra. This will be shown to be proportional
to the curvature @xmath , as a result of supersymmetry.

The rigidly supersymmetric theory of the hypermultiplets is described by
the sigma-model Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is invariant under the transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, as usual in sigma models, this invariance does not hold for any
choice of the scalar manifold @xmath [ Bagger:1982fn ] . First, we note
that @xmath takes its value in the tangent space @xmath of @xmath while
@xmath and @xmath take their values in @xmath and @xmath respectively.
Consistency of the first transformation law in ( 5.24 ) requires then
that @xmath . Since @xmath is real, @xmath must be pseudoreal, the
generic choice being @xmath . Second, cancellation of the @xmath
variations requires that the coset vielbein @xmath be covariantly
constant,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This property implies the following identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the antisymmetric tensor of @xmath . Furthermore, it
results in the integrability condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

relating the curvature @xmath of @xmath to the @xmath and @xmath
curvatures. In rigid supersymmetry, the spinor @xmath is constant and
the second of ( 5.1.5 ) implies that @xmath , i.e. that the @xmath
connection is flat. Plugging this into ( 5.27 ), we see that the
holonomy of @xmath is contained in @xmath , that is, rigid supersymmetry
requires @xmath to be a hyperKähler manifold.

Let us now construct the locally supersymmetric theory. In the standard
way, we introduce the appropriate interaction of the gravitino with the
hypermultiplet supercurrent,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose variation cancels the @xmath variation of @xmath in the usual
manner. The variation of @xmath under @xmath yields the uncancelled term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which cancels if we introduce the interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another uncancelled term arises from the @xmath variation of @xmath . It
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

To cancel this term, we note that the modified commutator ( 5.1.5 )
implies that the gravitino kinetic term in @xmath acquires the extra
term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is exactly equal and opposite to @xmath , provided that the @xmath
curvature @xmath is related to the complex structure @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

This tells us that now the holonomy of @xmath must be contained in
@xmath with nonzero @xmath curvature, that is, local supersymmetry
requires @xmath to be a quaternionic manifold. The complete locally
supersymmetric Lagrangian for neutral hypermultiplets is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.34)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### The action for charged hypermultiplets

To complete the construction of the theory, we must generalize the above
for the case where the hypermultiplets are charged under the Yang-Mills
group. Without loss of generality, we will here restrict to the case
where @xmath and @xmath and we will construct the complete locally
supersymmetric theory.

To gauge the theory, we consider an @xmath isometry transformation on
the scalar manifold. Under this transformation, the hyperscalars
transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are @xmath Killing vectors. A convenient basis for these
vectors is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

To promote this isometry to a local symmetry, we introduce the @xmath
gauge fields @xmath , transforming as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose field strengths, defined in the usual way, are denoted by @xmath .
We then replace the ordinary derivative acting on the hyperscalars by
the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath and @xmath being the @xmath and @xmath gauge
couplings. Appropriately, the Maurer-Cartan form ( 5.18 ) is replaced by
the gauged version

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.40)
  -- -- -- --------

and the covariant derivatives ( 5.1.5 ) are appropriately modified by
using the composite connections of the gauged theory and adding gauge
couplings. Explicitly, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the @xmath structure constants. Another important
building block of the gauge theory is the “prepotential” @xmath , given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and satisfying the identity [ Nishino:1986dc ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity appears in the generalization of the second commutator in
( 5.1.5 ) for the gauged theory, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having introduced the necessary formalism, we are ready to derive the
Lagrangian for the gauged theory. Our first step is to replace all
derivatives in the Lagrangians ( 5.3 ), ( 5.16 ) and ( 5.23 ) and
transformation rules ( 5.1.3 ) and ( 5.24 ) by gauge-covariant ones. So,
regarding the hypermultiplets, we obtain the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.45)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The combination @xmath obtained this way is not locally supersymmetric
though. The reason is that @xmath and @xmath now include extra
contributions involving the @xmath gauge fields; these do not affect the
supersymmetry variations of the various interaction terms, but they do
modify the variations of the gravitino and hyperino kinetic terms. For
the gravitino kinetic term, the modified commutator ( 5.44 ) implies
that its supersymmetry variation acquires the extra terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

By exactly the same considerations, it is easy to see that the hyperino
kinetic term also gives rise to the extra variation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

We immediately see that @xmath exactly cancels the covariant version of
the variation @xmath . On the other hand, the variations @xmath and
@xmath require additional terms for their cancellation. Starting from
@xmath , the possible sources for its cancellation may be the
modification of the gaugino supersymmetry transformation law by the
extra term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

or an additional interaction of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are two coefficients, which can be determined by
considering the @xmath terms. The variations of this type arising from
the @xmath variation of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the @xmath variation of @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that the requirement for cancellation of the terms
proportional to @xmath and @xmath fixes the coefficients @xmath and
@xmath to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, let us consider the @xmath variation of the gaugino kinetic term
in @xmath . Doing an integration by parts and using ( 5.43 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, using @xmath , we find that the @xmath variation of
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it cancels the first term of @xmath . The second term can cancel by
the @xmath variation of the new term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose @xmath variation cancels @xmath . Two other uncancelled terms are
the @xmath variations of the @xmath and @xmath terms of @xmath , given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. @xmath is cancelled by the @xmath variation of yet another
new term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose @xmath variation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that its first part cancels the third term of @xmath and its second
part cancels @xmath . What remains to be cancelled are the @xmath
variations of @xmath and @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. To cancel them, we introduce the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose @xmath and @xmath variation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

and indeed yields the desired cancellation.

To summarize, the terms that should be added to @xmath in order to
restore local supersymmetry in case @xmath is gauged are the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The important fact emerging from the above rather technical discussion
is that the theory includes a scalar potential given by the last term of
( 5.66 ). The appearance of this potential has interesting consequences
for the allowed compactifications of the theory.

#### 5.1.6 The complete Lagrangian

We are now in a position to summarize the above results. By combining (
5.3 ), ( 5.16 ), ( 5.45 ) and ( 5.66 ), we obtain the full Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.67)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is invariant under the local supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Lagrangian ( 5.67 ) correspond to one of the two possible
formulations of @xmath , @xmath supergravity, as explained in [
Nishino:1997ff ] ; the Lagrangian derived in the original papers [
Nishino:1984gk , Nishino:1986dc ] is the dual to the one considered
here. The main differences are (i) the reversed dilaton signs in the
kinetic terms of the vector fields, (ii) the absence of the
Green-Schwarz term and (iii) a modification of the @xmath supersymmetry
transformation law and to its field strength. Regarding the
ten-dimensional origin of these theories (only for the case when @xmath
R-symmetry is not gauged), the Lagrangian derived here originates from
Chamseddine’s 6–form version of @xmath , @xmath supergravity, while its
dual version originates from Chapline and Manton’s 2–form version.

### 5.2 Anomaly Cancellation in @xmath, @xmath Supergravity

After the above general discussion on @xmath , @xmath supergravity
theories, we are ready to examine the issue of anomaly cancellation in
these models [ Salam:1985mi , Bergshoeff:1986hv , Ketov:1989an ,
Ketov:1990jr , Erler:1993zy , Schwarz:1995zw ] . In particular, we will
discuss the conditions and the available mechanisms for the cancellation
of local anomalies as well as the conditions for the absence of global
anomalies in the context of ungauged and gauged supergravities. The
discussion will be fairly detailed and self-contained, with the aim of
providing a reference for future work on this topic.

#### 5.2.1 Local anomalies

Let us first examine the local anomalies. Starting from gravitational
anomalies, we represent the total gravitational anomaly of the theory by
the anomaly 8–form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Passing to the gauge and mixed anomalies, we have to introduce some
notation. For our analysis, it is convenient to rewrite the Yang-Mills
gauge group of the theory as @xmath , where (i) @xmath is a semisimple
group containing factors from @xmath and @xmath given by the product
@xmath where the @xmath ’s are simple, (ii) @xmath is the R-symmetry
factor arising in gauged theories and can be either @xmath or a @xmath
subgroup thereof and (iii) @xmath is an abelian subgroup of @xmath
(abelian factors arising from @xmath would only make sense if resulting
from a fundamental model so that the charges would be fixed). Given
these definitions, we let @xmath and @xmath be the field strengths
associated with @xmath and @xmath . We also let @xmath and @xmath denote
the numbers of hypermultiplets transforming in the representation @xmath
of @xmath and in @xmath of @xmath . Then, using the formulas in Appendix
A, we write the gauge anomaly polynomial as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.70)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where “ @xmath ” and “ @xmath ” stand for the traces in the adjoint and
@xmath of @xmath while “ @xmath ” and “ @xmath ” stand for the traces in
the fundamental of @xmath and in the representation of the gauginos. The
four terms in ( 5.70 ) are recognized as (i) the contribution of the
gauginos and hyperinos to the anomaly under the pure @xmath factors,
(ii) the contribution of the hyperinos to the anomaly under the products
@xmath , (iii) the contribution of the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
gauginos, gravitino and tensorinos to the anomaly under @xmath and (iv)
the contribution of the gauginos to the anomaly under @xmath . In a
similar manner, we find the mixed anomaly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.71)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Eqs. ( 5.70 ) and ( 5.71 ) can be brought into a more convenient form by
expressing all traces in terms of a single representation, which we take
to be the fundamental. For each @xmath we will have expressions of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the various group- and representation-dependent coefficients
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given in Appendix D . Similarly, for
@xmath we will have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 5.2.1 ) and ( 5.2.1 ), introducing the quantities

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath                  
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

and employing the extended index @xmath , we write the gauge and mixed
anomaly polynomials of the theory in the compact forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining ( 5.69 ), ( 5.76 ) and ( 5.77 ), we finally find the total
anomaly polynomial

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.78)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If the total anomaly is to cancel through a Green-Schwarz–type
mechanism, the above polynomial must factorize. A necessary condition
for this is that all irreducible @xmath and @xmath terms in ( 5.78 )
must vanish. Regarding the @xmath term, the fact that @xmath possesses a
fourth-order Casimir implies that the coefficient of this term must
vanish. This way, we are led to our first constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

which clearly shows that the presence of hypermultiplets is necessary
for anomaly cancellation at least for @xmath . Passing to the @xmath
terms, their vanishing requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be achieved either (i) if the relevant representations of
@xmath have no fourth-order invariants ( @xmath for all @xmath ) or (ii)
if the @xmath ’s are chosen appropriately. Provided that ( 5.79 ) and (
5.80 ) hold, the anomaly polynomial reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

To make a general analysis of the factorization properties of this
polynomial, it helps to treat the Lorentz group in an equal footing with
the other gauge groups by defining @xmath as in [ Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc
] . Introducing a summation index @xmath , we can then represent the
anomaly polynomial in the concise form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a real symmetric @xmath matrix with entries

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The anomaly cancellation conditions depend on the properties of the
matrix @xmath as well as on the number @xmath of available tensor
multiplets. The two possible mechanisms are as follows.

1.  Green-Schwarz mechanism . For an arbitrary number of tensor
    multiplets ³ ³ 3 In discussing the @xmath case, we ignore subtleties
    related to the construction of actions for (anti-)self-dual 2–forms.
    , anomalies may be cancelled by the standard Green-Schwarz
    mechanism. In order for that mechanism to be applicable, the matrix
    @xmath must be a matrix of rank @xmath ; if @xmath , the (real)
    nonzero eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath , must satisfy @xmath . For
    @xmath , we may define @xmath as the eigenvectors corresponding to
    @xmath multiplied by @xmath and write the similarity transformation
    of @xmath in the form

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.85)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the sign of @xmath , @xmath is the @xmath –invariant
    tensor and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.86)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Using ( 5.83 ), we can write the anomaly polynomial in the
    factorized form

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.87)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This anomaly can cancel by the standard Green-Schwarz mechanism.
    Letting @xmath be the self-dual 2–form of the supergravity multiplet
    and @xmath be any one of the anti-self-dual 2–forms in the tensor
    multiplets and setting @xmath , we construct the Green-Schwarz term

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.88)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and we modify the gauge/Lorentz transformation law of the @xmath ’s
    to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.89)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is related to @xmath by descent. The variation of (
    5.87 ) under ( 5.88 ) exactly cancels the anomaly of the theory. For
    @xmath , one may repeat the discussion with the appropriate @xmath
    set to zero.

2.  Generalized Green-Schwarz mechanism . In the case @xmath , there
    exists a generalization of the Green-Schwarz mechanism, found by
    Sagnotti [ Sagnotti:1992qw ] , which allows for anomaly cancellation
    under weaker constraints. For that mechanism to apply, the matrix
    @xmath must be a matrix of rank @xmath whose nonzero eigenvalues
    @xmath , @xmath , include an eigenvalue @xmath such that @xmath for
    @xmath . For @xmath , we may define @xmath as before and we write
    the similarity transformation of @xmath as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.90)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where now @xmath is the @xmath –invariant metric and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.91)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This way, the anomaly polynomial is written as a sum of factorized
    terms,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.92)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This anomaly can cancel by a generalization of the Green-Schwarz
    mechanism. Letting @xmath and @xmath be the anti-self-dual 2–forms
    in the tensor multiplets, we construct the @xmath –invariant
    generalized Green-Schwarz term [ Sagnotti:1992qw , Riccioni:1998th ]

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.93)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and we modify the gauge/Lorentz transformation law of the @xmath ’s
    to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.94)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Again, for @xmath , one may repeat the discussion with the
    appropriate @xmath ’s set to zero.

Here, we will only consider theories whose anomalies cancel by the
standard Green-Schwarz mechanism. To examine the conditions for anomaly
cancellation, it is very useful to state them in a more explicit form.
To do so, we compare the general form ( 5.84 ) of @xmath with the
expression ( 5.85 ). Comparison of the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath terms leads respectively to the conditions

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath               (5.95)
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.96)
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.97)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

To begin, we note that we can set @xmath and @xmath without loss of
generality. To proceed, we have to distinguish between the cases @xmath
( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath ).

-   @xmath . In this case, Eqs. ( 5.96 ) imply that @xmath and @xmath
    must be roots of the equation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.98)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and, in order for them to be real, we must have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.99)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Finally, Eq. ( 5.97 ) leads to the condition

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.100)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    for at least one choice for the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s as roots of
    ( 5.98 ), the plus or minus sign depending on the particular choice.
    E.g. in the case of three groups, ( 5.97 ) is satisfied when ( 5.100
    ) holds for each pair @xmath with either one of the sign
    combinations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath . In that case, the first of Eqs. ( 5.96 ) determines @xmath
    , the second of Eqs. ( 5.96 ) gives

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.101)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    and Eq. ( 5.97 ) gives

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.102)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Eqs. ( 5.101 ) and ( 5.102 ) together form an overdetermined linear
    system of @xmath equations for @xmath unknowns. In the general case,
    the system has the form @xmath with

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.103)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    and the constraints determining whether it has solutions are given
    by

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.104)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    From ( 5.103 ), we can see that when we have @xmath for all @xmath
    and @xmath for @xmath where @xmath is a given value of the index
    @xmath , the system reduces to @xmath independent equations and has
    always a solution. For ungauged supergravities, this corresponds to
    the case where the hypermultiplets transform in the adjoint
    representation of @xmath group factors in @xmath and in an arbitrary
    representation of the remaining factor. For gauged supergravities,
    this corresponds to the case where the hypermultiplets transform in
    the adjoint of @xmath ; these were the solutions found in [
    Salam:1985mi ] .

To summarize, the requirement of Green-Schwarz cancellation of local
anomalies in @xmath , @xmath supergravity boils down, for @xmath , to
the four conditions ( 5.79 ), ( 5.80 ), ( 5.99 ) and ( 5.100 ). The
first condition fixes the number of hypermultiplets in terms of the
gauge group. The second condition either holds identically (in the
absence of fourth-order Casimirs) or constrains the numbers of
representations (in the presence of fourth-order Casimirs). The third
condition is an inequality whose main effect is to forbid higher
representations (for which @xmath can attain large negative values).
Finally, the fourth condition imposes a very stringent constraint on the
numbers of representations; it is this latter condition that seriously
reduces the number of possible models in the case when product groups
are considered. In the special case @xmath , the last two conditions are
replaced by ( 5.104 ).

One readily sees that the above anomaly cancellation conditions are
quite weaker than those in the 10D case. Indeed, comparing the two cases
we see that (i) the condition for the cancellation of irreducible
gravitational anomalies does not uniquely fix the dimension of the gauge
group but it just sets an upper bound on the number of non-singlet
hypermultiplets and (ii) the factorization condition does not determine
how the highest-order traces in the gauge anomaly must factorize but
instead leads to two weaker constraints. As a result, these conditions
admit a large number of solutions for the gauge group and the possible
hypermultiplet representations and, in fact, a complete classification
is an intractable task. The search for more solutions than those already
found in the literature was the main motivation for the work presented
in this chapter.

#### 5.2.2 Global anomalies

Besides the perturbative anomalies described above, there is also the
possibility that the theory may suffer from global anomalies, as
discussed in 3.6 . We recall that, in the 6D case under consideration,
such anomalies arise when there is a gauge group factor @xmath with
nontrivial @xmath , the possible cases being @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. For the case of @xmath , @xmath supergravity, the conditions for the
absence of global anomalies in the presence of a factor @xmath in the
@xmath part of the gauge group are given in [ Bershadsky:1997sb ] and
they amount to the following integrality constraints

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.105)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined in § 5.2.1 . Moreover, when the
whole @xmath is gauged, there are also global R-symmetry anomalies. The
condition for their absence is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.106)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Eqs. ( 5.2.2 ) and ( 5.106 ) must be solved together with the local
anomaly cancellation conditions of the previous subsection in order to
determine the possible anomaly-free models.

### 5.3 Known Anomaly-Free Models

In this section, we shall review some of the simplest anomaly-free
@xmath , @xmath supergravity models realized in the context of
superstring compactifications, with the aim of describing concrete
realizations of the anomaly-free theories discussed in the previous
section. As our examples, we will consider the well-known
compactifications of the @xmath and @xmath heterotic string theories on
@xmath . In the @xmath case, we will also consider the construction of
Witten where the symmetry is non-perturbatively enhanced by small
instantons.

#### 5.3.1 Ungauged theories: Heterotic string theory on @xmath

The simplest anomaly-free ungauged supergravities in 6D are those
obtained by the reduction of the two anomaly-free 10D heterotic string
theories on the @xmath manifold. In what follows, we will outline some
of the simplest such constructions, namely the straightforward @xmath
reduction of the @xmath and @xmath heterotic theories as well as the
mechanism of symmetry enhancement by small instantons.

##### Generalities

The @xmath surface is a four dimensional complex Kähler manifold of
@xmath holonomy, that is, a Calabi-Yau 2–fold. Due to this latter
property, compactifications of @xmath , @xmath supergravity on this
manifold give rise to minimal @xmath , @xmath theories in the same way
as the compactifications on Calabi-Yau 3–folds give rise to minimal
@xmath , @xmath theories. Here, we will review certain essential facts
about the @xmath surface and heterotic string compactifications on this
surface.

The main topological quantities of interest in the case of @xmath are
the second terms in the Chern class and Chern character and the first
terms in the Pontrjagin class and @xmath –roof genus, whose explicit
forms (see Appendix C) are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To obtain topological integrals, one uses the formula (see e.g. [
Eguchi:1980jx ] )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which yields the Euler characteristic and the Hirzebruch signature

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this information, one can determine the zero-mode spectrum of wave
operators on @xmath . Starting from the Laplacian, the number of
harmonic @xmath –forms is given by the Betti numbers

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) stands for the number of (anti-)self-dual
harmonic 2–forms. For the Lichnerowicz operator, the number of zero
modes is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the Dirac and Rarita-Schwinger operator, the net number of
positive-chirality zero modes is found from the Atiyah-Singer index
theorem. For the Dirac operator in the absence of gauge fields, one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the Dirac operator in the presence of gauge fields, this is modified
to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the representation of the fermions under the gauge
group. Finally, for the Rarita-Schwinger operator, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After these above preliminaries, let us now examine reduction of
heterotic string theory on @xmath . We have seen in § 4.1.2 that anomaly
cancellation requires replacing the usual 3–form field strength by the
modified field strength @xmath given in ( 4.27 ). This field strength
satisfies the modified Bianchi identity

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The requirement that @xmath be globally well-defined [ Witten:1984dg ]
implies that @xmath should integrate to zero over any 4–cycle in 10D
spacetime. So, assuming that we turn on the background fields @xmath and
@xmath only inside @xmath , we must have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is obviously satisfied if we embed the @xmath holonomy group of
@xmath in the gauge group; the instanton number of the resulting
configuration is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as it should. After this embedding, the 10D gauge group @xmath
decomposes as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is to be identified with the 6D gauge group. Accordingly,
the adjoint representation of @xmath branches into a sum of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath stand for representations @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

Let us now examine how 10D fields of various type reduce on @xmath .
Starting from the fermions of the supergravity multiplet, we know from
Eqs. ( 5.112 ) and ( 5.114 ) that the net numbers of negative-chirality
zero modes of the Dirac and Rarita-Schwinger operators on @xmath are
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively. We also note that the 10D chirality projections correlate
the 6D and 4D chiralities according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and that the 10D fermions are Majorana-Weyl while the 6D ones are Weyl
so the above numbers must be divided by two. Thus, we see that the 10D
positive-chirality gravitino gives rise to 1 6D negative-chirality Weyl
gravitino plus 20 6D positive-chirality hyperinos while the 10D
negative-chirality dilatino gives 1 6D positive-chirality tensorino.
Although supersymmetry guarantees that the number of 6D bosonic zero
modes will be the same, let us verify this explicitly. The 10D graviton
gives rise to one 6D graviton, no vectors (since @xmath has no
isometries) and @xmath scalars. Similarly, @xmath reduces to @xmath
2–form @xmath , no vectors (since @xmath ) and @xmath scalars while
@xmath reduces trivially. Putting everything together and consulting (
5.1.2 ), we see that the above fields arrange themselves into
supersymmetry multiplets, namely one supergravity multiplet, one tensor
multiplet and 20 hypermultiplets. Regarding the hypermultiplets, we note
that they are inert under the gauge group and that, by standard
Kaluza-Klein arguments, the associated hyperscalars parameterize the
coset @xmath included in the discussion following Eq. ( 5.2 ).

The analysis of the reduction of the 10D vector multiplet is slightly
more involved. For the fermions, one now needs to use Eq. ( 5.113 ),
which shows that the net number of negative-chirality zero mode fermions
transforming in @xmath of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where in the last line we have made use of ( 5.116 ) and where the
coefficient @xmath is defined according to ( 5.72 ). So, for each @xmath
the 10D positive-chirality gaugino gives @xmath 6D spinors transforming
in @xmath of @xmath . These are classified either as negative-chirality
gauginos (if @xmath ) or as positive-chirality hyperinos (if @xmath ).
By a similar discussion, one may verify that the bosonic degrees of
freedom work out as required. Specific examples will be discussed below.

##### The @xmath Theory

As a first definite example of the above, let us consider the reduction
of the @xmath theory on @xmath . Embedding the @xmath spin connection in
the gauge group as described above, we decompose @xmath according to the
maximal subgroup,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the factor in brackets corresponding to @xmath . Under this
decomposition, the adjoint @xmath decomposes as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.124)
  -- -- -- ---------

Straightforward application of ( 5.122 ) for the @xmath representations
in ( 5.124 ) gives then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . So, we have one
negative-chirality gaugino in the adjoint @xmath of @xmath , 10
hyperinos in the @xmath , 45 singlet hyperinos and, of course, their
bosonic superpartners. Combining these with the multiplets from the 10D
supergravity multiplet we have, in total, one supergravity multiplet,
one tensor multiplet, one vector multiplet in the @xmath , 10
hypermultiplets in the @xmath and 65 singlet hypermultiplets.

Since the above 6D theory descends from an anomaly-free 10D theory, it
is anomaly-free by construction. However, let us check this explicitly.
The total numbers of vectors and hypers are @xmath and @xmath and so we
have @xmath . For the irreducible @xmath factor, we also have @xmath .
Similarly, we find @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and the
inequalities ( 5.99 ) are satisfied, as is the equality ( 5.100 ) (with
plus sign). So, all anomaly cancellation conditions are indeed
satisfied.

##### The @xmath Theory

The @xmath theory is treated in an entirely analogous manner. In
contrast to the previous case however, it is possible to consider
embeddings in which a part of the @xmath instanton charge is embedded
into the first @xmath factor and the remaining part is embedded into the
second.

In the simplest case where all @xmath instanton charge is embedded into,
say, the second @xmath , the maximal subgroup is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the adjoint decomposes as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The multiplicities @xmath are as before and so we have, in total, one
supergravity multiplet, one tensor multiplet, one vector multiplet in
the @xmath , 10 hypermultiplets in the @xmath and 65 singlet
hypermultiplets. Since the hypermultiplets are all neutral under @xmath
, the latter is a “hidden sector” group. The theory is anomaly-free as
can be easily verified.

In the more general case, one may embed @xmath units of instanton charge
in the first @xmath and @xmath units in the second @xmath under the
condition that @xmath . Now, the maximal-subgroup decomposition is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the adjoint decomposes as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.128)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ---------

By a straightforward modification of the index-theorem formula ( 5.122
), one easily finds @xmath and @xmath . By similar considerations as
before, we then have one supergravity multiplet, one tensor multiplet,
one vector multiplet in the @xmath , @xmath hypermultiplets in the
@xmath , @xmath hypermultiplets in the @xmath and 62 singlet
hypermultiplets. Again the theory is anomaly-free.

##### Symmetry enhancement by small instantons

It has been shown by Witten [ Witten:1995gx ] that, in the case of the
@xmath theory, the gauge symmetry of the theory can be further enhanced
by a non-perturbative mechanism involving instantons collapsing to zero
size. From the point of view of @xmath heterotic string theory, these
instantons have an interpretation as solitonic 5–branes and, assuming
that they are localized at different points, each one contributes an
extra @xmath gauge symmetry factor. One can also use heterotic/Type I
duality to pass to a dual description in terms of @xmath Type I theory
where the instantons correspond to D5–branes with symplectic symmetry
(due to the fact that Type I strings are unoriented). In the Type I
description, it is clear that a configuration that consists of @xmath
coincident instantons shrinking to zero size gives rise to an extra
@xmath gauge symmetry. Since the total @xmath instanton number is 24,
the largest extra symmetry one can get is @xmath . For @xmath , one has
to embed @xmath units of instanton charge in @xmath in order that (
5.117 ) be satisfied; the full symmetry group is thus @xmath .

Let us now analyze the spectrum of the resulting theory. For the
gravitational sector the analysis goes on as before and we have one
graviton, one 2–form, one dilaton and 20 hypermultiplets, all singlets
under the gauge group. For the Yang-Mills sector, it is here more
advantageous to work out the bosonic excitations in the Type I string
description. Open strings in the field of the D5-brane are naturally
divided into strings not attached to the brane (NN), strings with one
end attached to the brane (DN) and strings with both ends attached to
the brane (DD), with N and D referring to Neumann and Dirichlet boundary
conditions respectively. The NN strings originally carry two ordinary
@xmath Chan-Paton factors but, since @xmath is broken to @xmath by the
embedding, their spectrum consists of vector excitations that transform
in @xmath plus @xmath scalar excitations that are singlets. The DN
strings originally carry an ordinary @xmath Chan-Paton factor at their N
end and a symplectic @xmath factor at their D end and, for the same
reason as before, the strings carrying @xmath Chan-Paton factors
transform in @xmath while there are also @xmath strings in @xmath (here,
the @xmath factors are due to the fact that @xmath is pseudoreal).
Finally, for the DD strings, the @xmath projection to unoriented states
implies that the vector excitations @xmath and the scalar excitations
@xmath are described by vertex operators of the type @xmath ( @xmath
–odd) and @xmath ( @xmath –even) respectively. The vectors transform of
course in the adjoint @xmath which corresponds to a second-rank
symmetric tensor of @xmath . For the scalars, the fact that @xmath
contains a normal derivative instead of a tangential one implies that
they transform in the second-rank antisymmetric representation; since
the latter is reducible into a “traceless” part plus a singlet, the DD
scalars transform in @xmath . Combining the above results, we have one
supergravity multiplet, one tensor multiplet, one vector multiplet in
the @xmath , half a hypermultiplet in the @xmath , @xmath
hypermultiplets in the @xmath , one hypermultiplet in the @xmath plus
@xmath singlet hypermultiplets.

By plugging the above numbers in the anomaly cancellation conditions, it
is straightforward to verify that they are all satisfied. This is a very
important check of the consistency of Witten’s construction which is
based in string-theoretical arguments.

#### 5.3.2 Gauged theories: The @xmath model

Besides the string-theoretical models just considered, there also exist
anomaly-free models constructed purely from the 6D supergravity
viewpoint, engineered so that the anomaly cancellation conditions are
met. The best-known of these models and was the one constructed by
Randjbar-Daemi, Salam, Sezgin and Strathdee [ Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc ] in
1985. The gauge group of the theory is taken to be @xmath , and the
representations of the fermions are chosen appropriately so that the
anomaly cancellation conditions are satisfied.

To sketch the construction of the model, we first note note that the
dimension of the gauge group is @xmath . The anomaly cancellation
conditions demand then that the number of hypermultiplets be equal to
@xmath . A natural choice is then to identify them with half a
hypermultiplet in the pseudoreal representation @xmath of @xmath and to
take them to be singlets under @xmath . Recalling that, under @xmath ,
the gravitino, tensorino and gauginos have unit charge while the
hyperinos are inert, we see that the fermionic spectrum of the theory
contains one gravitino in the @xmath , one tensorino in the @xmath ,
gauginos in the @xmath and hyperinos in the @xmath , the subscripts
indicating @xmath charges. Further aspects of this model will be
described in § 6.3.2 .

Repeating the familiar analysis, this time adapted for the presence of
the @xmath R-symmetry factor, one may verify that all anomaly
cancellation conditions are satisfied. However, in this particular case,
the gauge group is a product of three factors and the anomaly
cancellation conditions are far more stringent than in the cases
discussed above. The fact that there even exists a non-trivial model
satisfying all of these conditions is truly remarkable.

Actually, the model outlined above is the first anomaly-free 6D model
found from pure 6D supergravity considerations and, until recently, was
the only known anomaly-free gauged model with @xmath and without
“unnatural” field content. However, as we shall see below, there
actually exist a few other non-trivial consistent models of this type.

### 5.4 Searching for Anomaly-Free Theories

As stated earlier on, the anomaly cancellation conditions of @xmath ,
@xmath supergravity are weaker than those in the 10D case, mainly due to
the existence of the massless hypermultiplets that may transform in
arbitrary representations of the gauge group. As a result, the
classification of the theories satisfying these conditions is a far more
complicated task than the analogous problem in 10D. In this section, we
turn to the problem of obtaining solutions to these conditions in a
systematic manner.

The search for consistent six-dimensional @xmath supergravities is
greatly motivated by a number of reasons, namely (i) their shared
properties with ten-dimensional @xmath supergravities, (ii) their use as
toy models for the study of complicated phenomena such as flux
compactifications, (iii) their connection, in the gravity-decoupling
limit, to the much-studied @xmath supersymmetric gauge theories in four
dimensions, (iv) the possibility of vectorlike [ Salam:1984cj ] or
chiral [ Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc ] compactifications of the gauged
theories down to flat four-dimensional space using a gauge field
residing in an internal @xmath and (v) the partial solution they provide
to the cosmological constant problem in both ungauged [ Kehagias:2004fb
, Nair:2004yu , Randjbar-Daemi:2004ni ] and gauged [ Aghababaie:2003wz ,
Aghababaie:2003ar , Burgess:2004dh ] cases.

Regarding the case of ungauged supergravities, most models found so far
correspond to heterotic string compactifications on @xmath [
Green:1985bx ] , possibly involving symmetry enhancement either from the
Gepner points of orbifold realizations of @xmath [ Erler:1993zy ] or by
small instantons [ Schwarz:1995zw , Witten:1995gx ] , as well as chains
of models obtained from the above ones by Higgsing; some simple cases
have been reviewed in § 5.3.1 . In [ Schwarz:1995zw ] , a few more
models were found by directly solving the anomaly-cancellation
conditions. Finally, many series of models were constructed [
Bershadsky:1996nh , Bershadsky:1997sb ] using geometric engineering via
F-theory. Another class of models corresponds to flat-space 6D gauge
theories, where anomaly cancellation is related to the existence of
non-trivial RG fixed points [ Seiberg:1996qx , Danielsson:1997kt ] .
Although, the number of known anomaly-free 6D ungauged supergravities is
quite large, it is certainly useful to tabulate the simplest of them and
it is interesting to search whether there are more anomaly-free models
or chains of models than those already found.

Turning to the gauged case, the only known anomaly-free model until the
work related to this thesis were the @xmath model of [
Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc ] , briefly described in § 5.3.2 . There are also
a few models [ Salam:1985mi ] involving extra “drone” @xmath ’s. These
models have been found from purely supergravity considerations, guided
by the requirement of anomaly cancellation. The uniqueness of these
models and their interesting physical properties provide a great
motivation for investigating whether more models of this type exist.

In the following sections, we partially address the two problems
mentioned in the preceding two paragraphs. In particular, we conduct a
systematic search for 6D supergravity models satisfying the anomaly
cancellation conditions stated above. Since a complete classification
seems to be very difficult, we will make several assumptions, expected
to hold for many models of potential physical interest. The restrictions
to be imposed are the following.

1.  The theory contains only one tensor multiplet, @xmath .

2.  The semisimple gauge group factor @xmath is a product of up to two
    simple groups.

3.  The hypermultiplets may transform in a set of low-dimensional
    representations of the simple factors in @xmath . The
    representations to be considered are shown on Table 5.1 .

4.  For ungauged theories, the allowed exceptional groups are @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and the allowed classical groups are
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . At most one simple factor in @xmath may
    be a classical group. The abelian factor @xmath is empty.

5.  For gauged theories, all exceptional groups are allowed while the
    allowed classical groups are as before. At most one simple factor in
    @xmath may be a classical group. The abelian factor @xmath can be
    non-trivial.

All of these assumptions have been made on a purely practical basis. In
particular, the lower bounds on the group rank as well as the
restriction to at most one classical group factor were imposed because
the proliferation of possible models in the case these assumptions were
relaxed would make the exhaustive search for anomaly-free models and
their classification an intractable task.

In the next two sections, we will present the complete lists of
anomaly-free models under these conditions, starting from the case of
ungauged supergravities and proceeding to the case of gauged
supergravities. In the course, we will identify as many of the known
models as possible and we will comment on their construction, their
origin and their properties. The results presented should be read
according to the convention that each representation, designated by its
dimension, corresponds to all representations with the same dimension
and second and fourth indices, i.e. to all representations related by
symmetries such as complex conjugation and triality. Accordingly, the
corresponding numbers of multiplets for a representation are understood
as the total numbers of multiplets in these representations. For
example, in the case of @xmath , the notation @xmath refers to the two
conjugate representations @xmath and @xmath and the field content @xmath
is understood as all combinations of the form @xmath with @xmath . Also,
the numbers of singlet hypermultiplets for each model will not be
displayed explicitly.

Finally, there are two issues referring to the reality properties of the
representations under consideration. First, when there appear pseudoreal
representations, one may allow the corresponding numbers of
hypermultiplets to take half-integer values as well. For example, in the
case of @xmath , the notation @xmath refers to “half” a hypermultiplet
in the pseudoreal representation @xmath , also understood as one
hypermultiplet in the minimal representation @xmath . Second, in the
case where there appear complex representations, CPT invariance requires
that these representations occur in complex-conjugate pairs; it is only
these representations that will be considered here.

### 5.5 Anomaly-free Ungauged Supergravities

In this section, we begin our search by considering the case of ungauged
supergravities, i.e. the case where the gauge group does not involve an
R-symmetry subgroup. As mentioned in the introduction, the number of
these models is expected to be quite large; it turns out that this is
indeed the case. In the course of the search, we recover various models
already found in the literature, and we find some models not previously
identified.

#### 5.5.1 Simple groups

Let us start from the case of one simple gauge group. In this case, the
conditions to be solved are Eq. ( 5.79 ) for the cancellation of the
irreducible gravitational anomaly, Eq. ( 5.80 ) for the cancellation of
the irreducible gauge anomaly (when applicable) and the factorization
condition ( 5.99 ). Below, we present all possible models satisfying
these conditions under the assumptions introduced at the end of Section
2. To make the discussion more pedagogical, we illustrate the procedure
in detail.

For the exceptional groups, the only conditions to be solved are Eqs. (
5.79 ) and ( 5.99 ). Noting that the number of singlets must be a
nonnegative integer, we see that the first condition constrains the
number of charged hypermultiplets according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Also, the second condition takes the explicit form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the subscript “ @xmath ” refers to the adjoint. Finally, since
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are excluded from the search, we need not
examine global anomalies. One can immediately see that Eqs. ( 5.107 )
and ( 5.108 ) are automatically satisfied when there is a hypermultiplet
in the adjoint plus @xmath singlets or when all hypermultiplets are
singlets; such solutions will be considered as trivial and will not be
displayed. Our results are shown below.

1.  @xmath . For the @xmath gauge group we must have @xmath and the only
    available representation is the adjoint. Since the hypermultiplets
    can fit in at most one adjoint, the only solutions are the trivial
    ones.

2.  @xmath . Since this is the first non-trivial case to be considered,
    we will present it in some detail. For the @xmath gauge group we
    must have @xmath and the available representations are the adjoint
    @xmath and the pseudoreal fundamental @xmath . So, the condition (
    5.107 ) translates to

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.131)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    and is satisfied by the following matter content

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    plus the appropriate numbers of singlets. However, the second
    condition ( 5.108 ), namely

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.132)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    further restricts the possible solutions to

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath               (5.133)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    Regarding the models (a), one may make a shift of @xmath to @xmath
    and rewrite them as @xmath . These models are then recognized as
    those resulting from the @xmath heterotic string on @xmath by
    embeddding @xmath units of instanton charge in an @xmath subgroup of
    the first @xmath (and ignoring the other @xmath ). These theories
    are the first ones in a chain of theories related to each other by
    successive Higgsing; in terms of theories to be discussed here, the
    relevant parts of the chain are @xmath and @xmath .

3.  @xmath . Now, we have @xmath and the available representations are
    @xmath and @xmath . Proceeding as before, we find the solutions

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath               (5.134)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where, in addition, we imposed the requirement of CPT invariance
    which demands an even number of @xmath ’s, understood as @xmath .

4.  @xmath . Now, we have @xmath and the available representations are
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The possible solutions are

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath               
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.135)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

For the classical groups, there is the extra condition ( 5.80 ) which we
write explicitly as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again, there exist trivial solutions, corresponding to a hypermultiplet
in the adjoint plus @xmath singlets, that will not be displayed. The
search for anomaly-free models can be conducted as before and the
results are summarized as follows.

1.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.137)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.138)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.139)
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      (5.140)
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      (5.141)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    In the first series of solutions, @xmath is restricted to all
    integer values such that all multiplicities, including the @xmath
    singlets, are nonnegative.

2.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.142)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.143)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.144)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.145)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               (5.146)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.147)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.148)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    Let us try to identify some known models.

    -   In the first series of models, the @xmath model is identified
        with the theory obtained from the @xmath heterotic string on
        @xmath by embedding all 24 units of @xmath instanton charge into
        one of the @xmath factors in the decomposition @xmath and
        breaking the other @xmath factor by Higgsing. By further
        Higgsing of this theory, one obtains all the @xmath theories.
        Note that our list also contains models for @xmath which cannot
        be realized in a compactification context.

    -   The @xmath models are identified with the theories resulting
        from the @xmath heterotic string on @xmath , this time by
        embedding @xmath units of instanton charge in an @xmath subgroup
        of the first @xmath . These theories are also the first ones in
        a Higgs chain; in terms of the theories to be discussed here,
        the relevant parts of the chain are @xmath and @xmath . The
        @xmath and @xmath models together form the top of the “Higgs
        tree” that contains all possible chains of theories that can be
        obtained from them by Higgsing. All these chains were
        constructed in [ Bershadsky:1996nh ] by geometric engineering
        via F-theory.

    -   The @xmath models can also be realized [ Bershadsky:1997sb ]
        from the @xmath heterotic string on @xmath by considering the
        decomposition @xmath and embedding @xmath units of instanton
        charge in @xmath .

3.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.149)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.150)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    In the first series of solutions, @xmath is restricted to all
    integer values such that all multiplicities, including the @xmath
    singlets, are nonnegative.

    The first series of models has been identified in the literature [
    Bershadsky:1996nh ] as models with perturbatively enhanced symmetry
    resulting from F-theory compactifications on elliptic Calabi-Yau
    3-folds based on the Hirzebruch surface; in this description, they
    originate from an @xmath singularity on the coordinate of the @xmath
    fiber in that surface. The cases @xmath in this series were also
    given a gauge-theory interpretation [ Intriligator:1997kq ] in terms
    of Type I D5–branes ( @xmath small instantons) placed at a @xmath
    orbifold singularity. For @xmath , where the field content is given
    by

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.151)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    the theory is on the Higgs branch. For @xmath , where the field
    content is

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.152)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    the positions of all instantons are fixed, the blowing-up mode is
    zero and the theory rests on a non-trivial RG fixed point at the
    origin of the Coulomb branch.

#### 5.5.2 Products of two simple groups

We now pass to the more complicated task of identifying anomaly-free
models where the gauge group contains two simple group factors, @xmath .
This time, Eq. ( 5.80 ) (when applicable) and Eq. ( 5.99 ) must hold for
each one of @xmath and @xmath , while we also have the strict equality (
5.100 ) involving both group factors. Before we begin, we note that each
of the simple-group solutions for, say, @xmath can be extended to a
solution for @xmath by simply adding one adjoint of @xmath . Such
“reducible” solutions will not be written out explicitly.

We start our search from the case where both @xmath and @xmath are
exceptional groups, in which case there are no fourth-order Casimirs.
The largest-rank group of this type is @xmath , which is one of the
possible gauge groups of heterotic string theory; it is easily seen that
this group admits only the trivial solutions. The group @xmath ( @xmath
) is that obtained from the reduction of the @xmath heterotic string on
@xmath using the standard (non-standard) embedding(s) of the @xmath
instanton charge. So, in this search, we expect to obtain all solutions
corresponding to these embeddings as well as the chains produced from
these solutions by Higgsing. The solutions found are shown below.

1.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (5.153)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    The first model on the list is the well-known model obtained from
    the reduction of the @xmath heterotic string on @xmath using the
    standard embedding (24 units of instanton charge in one @xmath ).

2.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.154)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    This solution, written in full as @xmath , may be obtained from the
    @xmath models by Higgsing. The chain of Higgsing continues to
    further subgroups.

3.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (5.155)
      -- -------- -- ---------

4.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.156)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    The first class of models on the list may be written in the more
    suggestive form @xmath , @xmath and they are recognized as the
    models constructed by reduction of the @xmath theory on @xmath with
    @xmath and @xmath units of instanton charge embedded in the first
    and second @xmath respectively.

5.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.157)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    The first class of models are obtained from the @xmath models by
    Higgsing. The chain of Higgsing continues further on.

6.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath               
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.158)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

7.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                  @xmath      
         @xmath               
         @xmath               (5.159)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

8.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath               
         @xmath               (5.160)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We finally proceed to the case where @xmath is an exceptional group
while @xmath is classical. In this case, @xmath does have fourth-order
Casimirs and so we also have the extra condition ( 5.80 ) for this
factor. The models found are the following.

1.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.161)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

2.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.162)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.163)
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      (5.164)
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      (5.165)
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      (5.166)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

3.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.167)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

4.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.168)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.169)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.170)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.171)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

5.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.172)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.173)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.174)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.175)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.176)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.177)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.178)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.179)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               (5.180)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.181)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

6.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.182)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.183)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.184)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               (5.185)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

7.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.186)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.187)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.188)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.189)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

8.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.190)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.191)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.192)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.193)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.194)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.195)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.196)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

9.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.197)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.198)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.199)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               (5.200)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

10. @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.201)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.202)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.203)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.204)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.205)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

11. @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.206)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.207)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.208)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.209)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.210)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.211)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      (5.212)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.213)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               (5.214)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath               
                  @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               (5.215)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

12. @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.216)
         @xmath   @xmath               
                  @xmath               (5.217)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.218)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               (5.219)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Before concluding this section we note that, although we have not been
able to make a thorough search for anomaly-free models when the gauge
group is a product of two classical groups, a non-systematic search did
not reveal any interesting models apart from those reported by Schwarz
in [ Schwarz:1995zw ] and some models related to them by Higgsing. For
the sake of completeness, we list the basic models below.

1.  @xmath . There exists the infinite class of models

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.220)
      -- -------- -- ---------

2.  @xmath with @xmath . There exist the well-known small-instanton
    models

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.221)
      -- -------- -- ---------

3.  @xmath . There exists the infinite class of models

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.222)
      -- -------- -- ---------

The reader is referred to [ Schwarz:1995zw , Witten:1995gx ] for more
details on these models.

### 5.6 Anomaly-free Gauged Supergravities

In this section, we continue our search, turning to the case of gauged
supergravities where the R-symmetry group or a @xmath subgroup thereof
is gauged. The search for such models is of considerable interest due to
the fact that these theories can spontaneously compactify on @xmath
through a magnetic monopole background, leading to four-dimensional
theories. In the case where the magnetic monopole is embedded in the
R-symmetry group, stability [ Randjbar-Daemi:1983bw ] of the
compactification is ensured and the 4D theory is vectorlike. However,
under certain conditions, it is also possible to embed the monopole in
one of the other gauge group factors and obtain a chiral 4D spectrum.
The aforementioned facts, as well as other interesting properties of the
gauged models, provide enough motivation for looking for more consistent
theories of this type. In fact, it is the search for anomaly-free gauged
supergravities that motivated the work presented in this Chapter: given
the fact that there is no known construction of such theories following
from standard string/M-theory compactifications, the only way to
identify consistent theories of this type is to directly solve the
anomaly cancellation conditions.

The search for the gauged theories can be carried out in the same manner
as before, this time including an extra @xmath or @xmath factor in the
gauge group. So, the gauge group is now @xmath and the new conditions
that have to be satisfied are Eq. ( 5.99 ) for the @xmath factor plus
Eq. ( 5.100 ) for the gauginos that transform nontrivially under both
@xmath and @xmath ; using ( 5.2.1 ) and ( 5.2.1 ), we easily see that
the first of these conditions is identically satisfied, leaving the
second condition as the only non-trivial one. However, this last
condition amounts to a set of strict equalities and, moreover, regarding
the equalities involving @xmath , the fact that the representations (or
charges) of the fermions under this factor are fixed leaves little
freedom for satisfying these constraints. So, one is led to expect that
the gauged anomaly-free models will be very few.

The results of our search show that this is indeed the case. In the case
of a gauge group of the type @xmath , there is one equality constraint
of the type ( 5.100 ). In our search, we have not found any model
solving the anomaly cancellation conditions. Passing to the case of a
gauge group of the type @xmath , there are three equality constraints of
the type ( 5.100 ) which are expected to seriously restrict the number
of possible solutions. For the case where the whole @xmath is gauged, we
have found no solution. For the case where a @xmath subgroup is gauged,
we have found the following models.

1.  @xmath with the hypermultiplets transforming in

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.223)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    without singlet hypermultiplets. This is a well-known model, first
    found by Randjbar-Daemi, Salam, Sezgin and Strathdee in 1985. The
    important property of this model is that, besides the
    compactification with the monopole embedded in @xmath , it also
    admits a compactification with the monopole embedded in the “hidden”
    @xmath , leading to an @xmath four-dimensional theory with chiral
    fermions.

2.  @xmath with the hypermultiplets transforming in

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.224)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    again without singlets. This is a recently-found model, whose
    existence was reported in [ Avramis:2005qt ] where the absence of
    both local and global anomalies was analytically demonstrated and
    various properties of the resulting supergravity theory were
    investigated.

3.  @xmath with the hypermultiplets transforming in

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.225)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    again without singlets. This is a new model, first reported in [
    Avramis:2005hc ] .

The structure of the models found is truly very interesting. In
particular, they have the shared features that (i) the hypermultiplets
transform in non-trivial representations (and, in the latter two cases,
in product representations), (ii) there are no singlet hypermultiplets
and (iii) the representations involve half-hypermultiplets. Moreover, as
mentioned before, the cancellation of anomalies in these models is very
delicate as can be verified by the explicit calculations of [
Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc ] and [ Avramis:2005qt ] for the former two. These
facts might serve as indications that these gauged models are somehow
related to critical string theory or M-theory by means of some
mechanism. However, although some progress has been made [ Cvetic:2003xr
] regarding the archetypal Salam-Sezgin model, the origin of the models
considered here remains mysterious up to date.

An investigation of the 4D compactifications of the gauged theories,
including discussions of the fermion spectra, supersymmetry breaking and
classical stability, will be presented in Chapter 6 .

As mentioned in Section 5.4 , in the gauged case we have also allowed
for an abelian gauge group factor @xmath that does not act on
hypermultiplets. In the presence of such a factor, the gauge group
includes “drone” @xmath ’s under which all hypermultiplets and gauginos
are singlets. Although this possibility leads to new anomaly-free
models, the usual viewpoint is that turning on a large number of @xmath
’s so that the gravitational and R-symmetry anomalies are tuned to give
a factorizable polynomial is quite ad hoc and so these models are
considered to be less important than the previous ones. Nevertheless,
for reasons of completeness, we will list these models, for the case
where the factor @xmath is simple and the number of @xmath ’s is at most
50. The models found are the following.

1.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.226)
      -- -------- -- ---------

2.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.227)
      -- -------- -- ---------

3.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.228)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.229)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.230)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    The @xmath model has no singlets and is related to the @xmath model
    of ( 5.224 ) in the sense that the @xmath factor in the latter has
    been replaced by 14 @xmath ’s. The existence of the @xmath model was
    first pointed out in the footnote of [ Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc ] .

4.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.231)
      -- -------- -- ---------

5.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.232)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.233)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.234)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

6.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.235)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.236)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.237)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

7.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.238)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.239)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    The first series of models have the same field content as the @xmath
     (a) ungauged theories found in § 3.1 for @xmath .

8.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.240)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

9.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.241)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.242)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.243)
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.244)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.245)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.246)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.247)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

10. @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.248)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.249)
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.250)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.251)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We see thus that allowing for the possibility of @xmath ’s acting
trivially on the hypermultiplets, we obtain many anomaly-free gauged
models, some of which are extensions of the ungauged models of § 5.5 .
Increasing the number of @xmath ’s leads to numerous other models.
However, as stressed above, these models are considered of limited
interest.

### 5.7 Anomaly Cancellation in @xmath, @xmath Supergravity on @xmath

As the issue of Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation in 10D supergravity
can be extended to 6D supergravity, so can the Hořava-Witten
construction of anomaly-free theories living on the 10D fixed planes of
@xmath supergravity on @xmath be extended to theories living on the 6D
fixed planes of @xmath , @xmath supergravity on @xmath . The motivation
of finding such theories is that the stringent anomaly cancellation
conditions of six-dimensional theories may provide a natural way to
specify the matter content on on the brane, in sharp contrast to the
much-studied case of four-dimensional brane worlds in five dimensions.
This scenario has been explored in [ Gherghetta:2002nq ,
Gherghetta:2002xf ] for compactifications of the 3–form version of
gauged @xmath , @xmath supergravity without vector multiplets on @xmath
. In this section, we examine anomaly cancellation in another related
context, namely for compactifications of the 2–form version of gauged
@xmath , @xmath supergravity with @xmath vector multiplets on @xmath ,
and we state the anomaly cancellation conditions in this new context,
based on [ Avramis:2004cn ] . Since that paper has significant overlap
with certain of the preceding sections, we will here restrict to a
sketchy discussion, emphasizing only the issue of anomaly cancellation.

#### 5.7.1 Basics of @xmath, @xmath supergravity

The minimal supersymmetry algebra in seven dimensions is the @xmath ,
@xmath algebra, whose representations (see § 2.1.2 )are given by the
following multiplets

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.252)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where all spinors are symplectic Majorana and the index @xmath takes
values in the fundamental representation of @xmath . Here, we note that
there are two alternative versions of the theory, one involving a 3–form
potential @xmath and one involving a 2–form potential @xmath .

A general @xmath , @xmath supergravity coupled to matter is constructed
by combining the gravity multiplet with @xmath vector multiplets. The
@xmath scalars in the vector multiplets parameterize the coset space

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.253)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the @xmath gauginos transform in the fundamental of @xmath . The
field content of the resulting theory is thus given by the reducible
multiplet

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.254)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath takes values in the fundamental of @xmath and labels the
individual gauginos, @xmath takes values in the fundamental of @xmath
and labels the full set of vector fields of the theory and @xmath is an
index for the scalar coset manifold. To construct gauged theories, one
gauges a subgroup @xmath of the @xmath isometry group of @xmath , whose
dimension must equal the number of vectors of the theory, @xmath , and
whose structure constants must be subject to a certain restriction [
Bergshoeff:1985mr ] . Such a theory has a complicated scalar potential
which, nevertheless, is easily shown to admit a 7D Minkowski vacuum.

The 3–form version of the theory has been first constructed in [
Townsend:1983kk ] (see also [ Giani:1984dw , Mezincescu:1984ta ,
Park:1988id ] ) while the 2–form version of the theory has been
constructed in [ Bergshoeff:1985mr ] . In our setup, our starting point
is the 3–form version of the theory, defined on a 7D manifold with
boundary. Starting from this theory, we apply a duality transformation
of the standard type [ Cremmer:1979up , Nicolai:1981td ] to pass to the
2–form version. Although normally this would yield just the theory of [
Bergshoeff:1985mr ] , the presence of boundaries implies that we must,
in addition, retain a certain boundary term that emerges during the
duality transformation; this will eventually give rise to a
Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation term for the 6D supergravity living
on the boundary of the 7D space.

#### 5.7.2 Compactification on @xmath and anomalies

To obtain a chiral 6D theory from @xmath , @xmath supergravity, we will
consider compactification of the @xmath coordinate on the @xmath
orbifold, in the spirit of Hořava and Witten. The @xmath action is as
usual @xmath and the two fixed points are at @xmath and @xmath . To find
the spectrum of the resulting theory, we need to discuss the reduction
of the various fields on @xmath , make appropriate parity assignments to
the fields consistent with the 7D Lagrangian and supersymmetry
transformation rules, and keep the fields that are even under @xmath .
As we will see, this will yield an anomalous spectrum, which
necessitates the addition of 6D boundary multiplets in order for the
anomalies of the theory to cancel.

The detailed procedure of the reduction of the fields on @xmath was
presented in [ Giani:1984dw ] , whose results we quote here. The 7D
fields decompose a la Kaluza-Klein according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.255)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where here we will use a hat to denote 7D fields. The Kaluza-Klein
ansatz for the 7D metric reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.256)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the various 7D spinors reduce according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.257)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while antisymmetric tensors and scalars reduce in the usual way. The
tilded 6D fields @xmath and @xmath are conveniently traded for the
fields @xmath and @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.258)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We next turn to the @xmath parity assignments. As in the HW case, these
are found by demanding that the 7D Lagrangian and supersymmetry
transformation rules stay invariant under @xmath . By the same
considerations as in [ Bagger:2002rw , Gherghetta:2002nq ] , it is easy
to see that, after projecting out the @xmath -odd fields, the surviving
bosonic fields are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.259)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the spinors are subject to the chirality constraints

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.260)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The surviving fields can be then arranged into multiplets of the @xmath
, @xmath supersymmetry algebra. To do the decomposition, we split @xmath
into a self-dual and an anti-self-dual part as @xmath , we group all
scalars except from @xmath as @xmath and we group all spin– @xmath
fermions except from @xmath as @xmath . Then, the fields surviving the
@xmath projection can be arranged into @xmath , @xmath multiplets as
follows

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.261)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath superscripts on spinors indicate 6D chirality.

The presence of chiral fermions on the fixed planes inevitably
introduces anomalies which, since all vector fields are projected out,
are purely gravitational. To arrive at a consistent theory, we have to
follow the Hořava-Witten recipe by adding boundary fields whose
contribution to the anomalies will cancel those of the bulk fields by a
Green-Schwarz–type mechanism. In contrast to the HW case where only one
type of boundary multiplet was available, here the available types of
boundary multiplets are vector multiplets, tensor multiplets and
hypermultiplets, whose field content is given by

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.262)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Coupling these boundary multiplets to the bulk supergravity and
demanding local supersymmetry introduces various bulk-boundary
interaction terms and requires certain modifications of the boundary
conditions of the bulk fields. In particular, local supersymmetry of the
vector multiplet action requires a modified boundary condition on the
bulk 3–form field strength @xmath which, inserted into the surface term
remaining from the dualization, yields the Green-Schwarz term of the
theory. Also, local supersymmetry of the hypermultiplet action requires
a modified boundary condition on the bulk Yang-Mills field strengths
which in turn induces the quaternionic structure on the manifold spanned
by the 6D hyperscalars. The relevant analysis has been carried out in
detail in [ Avramis:2004cn ] and will not be reproduced here. We will
only concern ourselves with the anomaly constraints of these
bulk-boundary theories, to be described below.

#### 5.7.3 Anomaly cancellation

Given the spectrum of the theories living on the orbifold fixed planes,
we are ready to discuss the issue of anomaly cancellation. Starting from
local anomalies, the bulk theory reduced on @xmath has gravitational
anomalies as an obvious consequence of its chiral spectrum and, as in
the HW case, these anomalies are equally distributed in the two fixed
planes. Noting that the contributions coming from the bulk 2–form @xmath
cancel each other, the bulk gravitational anomaly on a given fixed plane
is half of that corresponding to a negative-chirality gravitino and
@xmath positive-chirality spinors. Using the 6D anomaly polynomials (
3.4 ), we find

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.263)
  -- -- -- ---------

The inclusion of extra boundary multiplets, namely @xmath tensor
multiplets, @xmath vector multiplets and @xmath hypermultiplets,
contributes extra terms to the gravitational anomaly and introduces
gauge and mixed anomalies. The gravitational contribution is given by (
5.69 ) minus the contribution of the 6D gravity multiplet, that is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.264)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, the gauge and mixed contributions are found by modifying (
5.70 ) and ( 5.71 ) to take account of the fact that the bulk gravitino
does not couple to the boundary @xmath R-symmetry as in the purely 6D
case. Using exactly the same conventions as in Section 5.2 , we find the
gauge anomaly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.265)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and the mixed anomaly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.266)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Introducing the anomaly coefficients as in ( 5.72 )–( 5.2.1 ) and
defining

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath                  
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (5.267)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

we can write ( 5.265 ) and ( 5.266 ) in the compact form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.268)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.269)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Combining all contributions, we finally find the anomaly polynomial

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.270)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This time, the condition for the cancellation of the irreducible
gravitational anomaly is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.271)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, since the LHS is an even integer, it implies that the presence of
an odd number of bulk hypermultiplets is necessary for anomaly
cancellation. The condition for the vanishing of irreducible gauge
anomalies is again

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.272)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Provided that ( 5.271 ) and ( 5.272 ) hold, the anomaly polynomial reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.273)
  -- -------- -- ---------

this time with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.274)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From now on, the analysis of the local anomaly cancellation conditions
proceeds exactly as in § 5.2.1 . To summarize, Green-Schwarz
cancellation of local anomalies leads, for @xmath , to the conditions (
5.271 ), ( 5.272 ), ( 5.99 ) and ( 5.100 ), while, in the special case
@xmath , the last two conditions are replaced by ( 5.104 ).

Extend our considerations to take account of the presence of the two
fixed planes and noting that the Green-Schwarz mechanism employed here
involves a single bulk @xmath –form, we have to ensure (see e.g. [
Scrucca:2004jn ] ) that one of the two factors in the factorization
equation is common to both planes, i.e. that we have @xmath or @xmath .
This condition obviously holds when the boundary matter and gauge groups
are the same on both fixed planes, as in the HW model.

Finally, as in the purely 6D case, the theory may also include global
gauge anomalies. For the case when the @xmath part of the gauge group
includes a factor @xmath in @xmath , the conditions for the absence of
global gauge anomalies are given by ( 5.2.2 ). For the case where the
whole @xmath 6D R-symmetry is gauged, we also have the condition

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.275)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

### 5.8 Discussion

In this chapter, we have presented a detailed review of @xmath , @xmath
supergravity, we have stated the most general anomaly cancellation
conditions in the absence of anomalous @xmath ’s and we have made a
thorough search for anomaly-free models, within the limits set by
certain restrictions on the possible gauge groups and their
representations. The search was made for both the ungauged and gauged
cases and all CPT-invariant hypermultiplet representations satisfying
the anomaly cancellation conditions have been enumerated. We have also
presented the anomaly cancellation conditions for a certain
Hořava-Witten–type compactification of @xmath , @xmath supergravity on
@xmath , but we have not performed a search for anomaly-free models of
this type.

Our results are summarized as follows. In the ungauged case, where there
exist numerous solutions to the anomaly cancellation conditions, we have
recovered most of the known models that have already been identified and
constructed via various methods in the literature, plus a series of
closely related models. We have also found some models that have not
been, to our knowledge, previously identified. Classifying these models
and tracing their possible origin is outside the scope of the present
work.

In the gauged case, where the anomaly cancellation conditions are far
more restrictive than in the ungauged case, our search revealed the
existence of just three models. The first is the well-known @xmath model
of [ Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc ] , the second is an @xmath model recently
reported in [ Avramis:2005qt ] and the third is an @xmath model reported
in [ Avramis:2005hc ] . All three models have an intriguing structure in
the sense that the hypermultiplets transform in a single “unusual”
representation of the gauge group with no singlets and, moreover, they
satisfy the anomaly cancellation conditions in a “miraculous” manner. On
the physical side, these models have very interesting properties, the
most important one being the possibility of compactification to four
dimensions through a monopole background with self-tuning of the
cosmological constant. These compactifications however reveal (see
Chapter 7) some phenomenological problems with these theories, for
example the fact that the demand for stability of these
compactifications leads to unrealistic spectra. Allowing for the
presence of extra “drone” @xmath factors, we have identified many more
anomaly-free gauged models. However, the presence of the extra @xmath ’s
renders these models less elegant than those described earlier.

The search presented here can be extended towards several directions,
the focus being on finding new consistent gauged theories. For instance,
one may consider gauge groups that contain three or more simple factors.
Also, one may consider theories with more than one tensor multiplet,
where there exists the generalized Green-Schwarz mechanism that allows
anomaly freedom under weaker constraints. One could finally consider
adding extra @xmath factors that act non-trivially on the
hypermultiplets but, unless there is a physical principle that
determines the @xmath charges in some way, this is a very complicated
task. We hope that the work presented here will motivate further work
along these lines.

## Chapter 6 Magnetic Compactifications and Supersymmetry Breaking

The six-dimensional theories examined in Chapter 5 admit various types
of compactifications to four dimensions. Considering the simplest
compactifications possible, ungauged theories can be compactified on a
torus leading to @xmath , @xmath theories (they can also be compactified
on a magnetized torus giving chiral theories with broken supersymmetry,
but these solutions have gravitational and dilatonic tadpoles). Gauged
theories on the other hand spontaneously compactify to 4D Minkowski
space times a 2-sphere with a magnetic monopole background and this
compactification is unique. The resulting theories may have vectorlike
or chiral fermion spectra, tachyonic instabilites or absence thereof and
partial or complete supersymmetry breaking.

### 6.1 Equations of Motion, Supersymmetry and the Scalar Potential

In order to seek specific solutions of the supergravity theories under
consideration, we need to examine the Lagrangian and the equations of
motion in more detail. To conform with standard conventions, we will use
the dual Lagrangian to ( 5.67 ) (where some dilaton factors have a
reversed sign and the Green-Schwarz term is traded for a redefinition of
the field-strength 3–form). After a further rescaling of the gauge
fields, the bosonic part of the Lagrangian is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the hyperscalar potential which, for the @xmath gauging
of interest, takes the particular form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath and @xmath contributions are separated out, @xmath
labels the various group factors in @xmath and the “prepotentials” have
the explicit form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The equations of motion resulting from the Lagrangian ( 6.1 ) can be
written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
     @xmath      (6.5)
     @xmath      (6.6)
     @xmath      (6.7)
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that we have used the dilaton field equation to absorb all trace
terms in the Einstein equation in its last term. The supersymmetry
variations of the fermions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Let us now find an explicit expression for the scalar potential,
following [ Randjbar-Daemi:2004qr ] . Our first task is to rewrite Eqs.
( 6.3 ) for the prepotentials @xmath in terms of a coset representative
@xmath . In [ Percacci:1998ag ] , it was shown that the appropriate
expression is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

To proceed, we must find a convenient form for the coset representative.
Considering the generic @xmath case, we recall that the @xmath isometry
group is actually defined as the intersection @xmath . Its elements are
therefore the set of @xmath matrices @xmath that leave invariant the
ordinary and symplectic metrics of signature @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the set of matrices that satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each matrix @xmath can be written as @xmath array of @xmath matrices
@xmath , with @xmath . Each of these @xmath matrices can be shown to
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can thus be interpreted as a real quaternion. The elements of the
@xmath maximal compact subgroup are obtained by the restriction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Afther the above preliminaries, we can find an explicit parameterization
for the scalar coset. We first introduce the @xmath array

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where each @xmath is a real quaternion satisfying @xmath . As such, it
can be written as @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are real. It then
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. that @xmath is proportional to the identity. We can then consider
the coset representative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the factor inside parentheses is understood as a scalar. This
representative is easily shown to satisfy the defining relations ( 6.12
) and ( 6.12 ). Using this representative, the prepotentials ( 6.10 )
take the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.18)
  -- -- -- --------

and hence the scalar potential is given by the simple expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering first the case of an ungauged theory ( @xmath ) and noting
that @xmath are antihermitian, we see that the potential is
positive-semidefinite with @xmath as its global minimum; this minimum is
obviously attained at @xmath and possibly in other configurations with
@xmath and @xmath satisfying its equation of motion. Turning to the case
of a gauged theory ( @xmath ), we see that now the potential is strictly
positive-definite; its global minimum is now unique, it is attained only
when @xmath , and it corresponds to an exponential potential for the
dilaton

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the case of a constant dilaton vev , this corresponds to a positive
cosmological constant. As we will see, it is this effective cosmological
constant and the particular form of the dilaton coupling which picks up
the @xmath vacuum as the unique maximally-symmetric solution of the
gauged theory among other maximally-symmetric spaces [ Salam:1984cj ] .
Note that these restrictions are all due to supersymmetry: in a
non-supersymmetric theory, the potential is not constrained and the
theory admits de Sitter or anti-de Sitter spaces as possible solutions [
Randjbar-Daemi:1982hi ] .

### 6.2 Ungauged Theories: Compactification on a Magnetized Torus

An attractive scenario for magnetic compactification has been proposed
by Bachas [ Bachas:1995ik ] in the contexts of 10D superstring theory
and 6D supersymmetric gauge theory, and involves compactification of the
theories in question on magnetized tori. The resulting theories have
chiral spectra and exhibit spontaneous supersymmetry breaking as well as
Nielsen-Olesen instabilities that trigger electroweak symmetry breaking.
The problem with the proposal is that it does not correspond to a
classical solution of the equations of motion of the underlying theory,
mainly because flatness of the tori is incompatible with the existence
of magnetic fields along their directions. In what follows, we give a
brief review of this proposal in the 6D case.

To begin, we neglect gravity for the moment and we consider a @xmath ,
@xmath supersymmetric gauge theory containing vector multiplets and
hypermultiplets. We compactify the theory on @xmath by making the
periodic identifications @xmath and @xmath . We then consider a @xmath
subgroup of the gauge group, we let @xmath denote the corresponding
charge operator and we turn on the vector potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. This configuration corresponds to
a constant magnetic field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order for the vector potential ( 6.21 ) to be well-defined on the
torus, @xmath and @xmath must be related by a gauge transformation,
@xmath . A suitable choice for @xmath is given by @xmath .
Single-valuedness of @xmath as @xmath goes around by @xmath then demands
that @xmath be an integer. We thus have the quantization condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us then consider the mass spectrum of the 4D effective theory.
Starting from the case @xmath , where the vector potential ( 6.21 )
corresponds to two Wilson lines, the 4D masses of all charged fields are
given by the usual Kaluza-Klein formula, including the shifts due to
@xmath . Thus, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formula is valid for both bosons and fermions and implies that all
charged fluctuations, including the vector bosons carrying @xmath
charges, are massive when @xmath . This is an example of gauge symmetry
breaking by Wilson lines, with the vev s @xmath playing the role of the
continuous moduli. Turning to the case @xmath , one first difference is
that @xmath are no longer moduli labelling inequivalent vacua; since the
fluctuations of @xmath correspond to Goldstone bosons of a spontaneously
broken symmetry, the associated vev s are irrelevant. So, without loss
of generality, we may consider the case @xmath . Then, the squared
masses of the charged scalars are given by the eigenvalues of the
internal Klein-Gordon operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the quantity on the RHS is just the Hamiltonian for a 2D particle
of mass @xmath in a constant magnetic field @xmath , the squared masses
are immediately read off from the famous Landau formula, with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath labels the Landau levels, each level having a degeneracy of
order @xmath . Eq. ( 6.26 ) clearly implies that all charged scalars are
massive. Passing to the charged fermions, their squared masses are given
by the eigenvalues of the internal Dirac operator squared,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the internal helicity operator with eigenvalues @xmath .
This leads to the Landau formula for fermions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the degeneracies are as before. Eq. ( 6.28 ) is in fact valid for
charged particles of any spin, provided that we replace @xmath with the
appropriate helicity operator. Now, for a 6D spinor subject to a Weyl
condition @xmath , its 4D chirality is related to its internal helicity
according to @xmath . Considering for definiteness the case @xmath , let
us then examine the masses of the 4D spinors obtained by reduction of a
6D positive-chirality spinor. At the lowest Landau level, we see that
the spinor with negative 4D chirality, @xmath , is massless while the
spinor with positive 4D chirality, @xmath , has a squared mass given by
@xmath . The apparent puzzle of a chiral spinor with nonzero mass is
resolved once we pass to the next Landau level where we find a
negative-chirality spinor with squared mass @xmath ; this spinor pairs
with the positive-chirality spinor from the previous Landau level to
form a massive Dirac spinor. Continuing this construction and including
degeneracies, we see that the fermionic spectrum contains @xmath
massless negative-chirality spinors plus an infinite tower of massive
states, each one containing @xmath Dirac spinors of squared mass @xmath
.

The scenario thus described provides a very attractive setup for
supersymmetry breaking. However, it also suffers from some potential
problems, described below.

1.  Tachyonic instabilities . Consider the mass formula for the scalar
    fluctuations of the @xmath gauge boson. Denote these fluctuations by
    @xmath and arrange them into the charged combinations @xmath . Their
    masses are determined from the appropriate generalization of ( 6.28
    ) for a spin–1 field, given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where now the helicity operator @xmath has eigenvalues @xmath acting
    on @xmath . So, for @xmath , the squared mass of the
    negative-helicity mode @xmath is given by @xmath and thus the
    spectrum contains @xmath tachyonic states. As first pointed out by
    Nielsen and Olesen, the existence of such states renders the vacuum
    unstable. However, this problem can be remedied by (i) modding out
    the torus by a @xmath symmetry that projects out the
    nonzero-helicity modes, (ii) adding more magnetic fields in other
    internal directions such that the masses of the tachyonic modes are
    shifted to zero or positive values or (iii) adding Wilson lines
    along internal cycles so that the 6D vector bosons are massive in
    the first place.

2.  Gravitational/dilatonic tadpoles . Another problem in this model
    arises once we include gravity. To see this, try embed the model
    into a @xmath , @xmath supergravity theory and consider a
    constant-dilaton configuration. Since the torus is a flat manifold,
    Einstein’s equations require that @xmath be equal to zero. However,
    this cannot be so since @xmath contains a contribution from the
    magnetic field and thus the theory has a gravitational tadpole. In a
    Poincaré supergravity where a potential for the dilaton is absent,
    the RHS of the dilaton equation of motion also contains a positive
    term and thus the configuration has a dilatonic tadpole. A potential
    resolution of this problem, given in [ Bachas:1995ik ] , is that the
    classical supergravity (or string theory) vacuum may be modified by
    radiative corrections according to the Coleman-Weinberg mechanism.
    In such a scenario, the classical tadpoles described above are
    assumed to be cancelled by quantum corrections and the flat @xmath
    configuration is identified with the “true” vacuum of the theory.
    However, this reasoning still lacks a rigorous justification.

### 6.3 Gauged Theories: Compactification on a Magnetized Sphere

In this section, we turn to the gauged theory, where the gauge group
includes a @xmath factor. As noted earlier on, this theory admits a
spontaneously compactification to four-dimensional spacetime with a
magnetic monopole background and picks @xmath as its unique
maximally-symmetric ground state. The properties of the resulting
theories depend of the embedding of the magnetic @xmath in the gauge
group. This section is devoted to examining the properties of such
solutions in the context of the original Salam-Sezgin model and the
anomaly-free theories discussed in Chapter 5.

#### 6.3.1 The Salam-Sezgin model

The simplest model of @xmath gauged supergravity admitting a spontaneous
compactification of the sort discussed above is the Salam-Sezgin model [
Salam:1984cj ] , where the gauge group of the theory is just the @xmath
R-symmetry subgroup and a magnetic monopole is turned on in that
direction. Although it is clear that this theory can only serve as a toy
model (among other things, it is anomalous), it illustrates some of the
basic principles of such compactifications. For this reason, we present
the model below.

To begin the construction of the model, we first impose the requirement
that the 4D spacetime be maximally symmetric, which implies that (i) all
background fields must depend only on the two internal dimensions and
(ii) all field strength components with spacetime indices must vanish.
From condition (i) it follows that the @xmath component of the Einstein
equation ( 6.4 ) gives @xmath i.e. that the 4D spacetime is Ricci-flat,
the simplest choice being Minkowski space. Note that there is no
fine-tuning involved in this construction: the 6D cosmological constant
does not appear in the RHS of the Einstein equation due to the dilaton
field equation and so the 4D cosmological constant is self-tuned to
zero. From condition (ii) it follows that all components of @xmath
vanish, i.e. we must take @xmath or pure gauge, and that the only
nonvanishing components of @xmath can be the internal components @xmath
. Furthermore, assuming a constant dilaton and taking the hyperscalars
to sit at the minimum of their potential where they all vanish, the
dilaton field equation requires a non-vanishing @xmath to compensate the
contribution of the potential. Taking @xmath , the RHS of the @xmath
component of the Einstein equation corresponds to a positive
cosmological constant leading to an internal space of constant positive
curvature, the simplest choice being an @xmath . Accordingly, the gauge
field triggering this compactification is a magnetic monopole field,
lying in a @xmath group which, in the present model, is identified with
the @xmath gauge group. To summarize, the Salam-Sezgin ansatz is the
following

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the @xmath radius, while @xmath and @xmath are the
@xmath polar angles. Also, @xmath and @xmath correspond to the
potentials on the northern- and southern-hemisphere patches of the
@xmath which, on the equator, are related by a gauge transformation
parameterized by @xmath . In order for @xmath to be single-valued as
@xmath changes by @xmath , @xmath must therefore be an integer.

In a flat basis, the nonvanishing components of the Ricci tensor are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

while those of the field strength are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the monopole ansatz solves its equations of motion, the only
nontrivial equations to be satisfied are the @xmath components of the
Einstein equations and the dilaton field equation. These are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving the second equation for @xmath and inserting the result into the
first equation, we find that the monopole charge is quantized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it also follows the that the @xmath radius is fixed in terms
of the dilaton vev and the @xmath coupling according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now examine the supersymmetry of the background. For the ansatz (
6.3.1 ), the only nontrivial supersymmetry equations are the @xmath and
@xmath equations, which are respectively written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Starting from the @xmath equation, we plug @xmath and @xmath from ( 6.32
) and ( 6.18 ) respectively and we write it in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath satisfies @xmath , we have @xmath and Eq. ( 6.37 ) is
actually written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the @xmath equation fixes the 4D chirality of @xmath in terms
of the monopole charge, implying that half of the 6D supersymmetries
survive. Turning to the @xmath equation, we plug @xmath from ( 6.3.1 ),
we note that the only nonvanishing spin connection component is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we use again @xmath to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Provided that ( 6.38 ) holds, the @xmath connection cancels the spin
connection in the last of ( 6.40 ) and thus the @xmath equation reduces
to @xmath and is solved by a constant spinor. Therefore, the background
preserves half the 6D supersymmetries and leads to a 4D theory with
@xmath supersymmetry.

Finally, a very interesting, recently discovered property of the
Salam-Sezgin model is its uniqueness. Indeed, in [ Gibbons:2003di ] ,
the authors relaxed the simplifying assumptions of the Salam-Sezgin
model imposing only the requirements for (i) a maximally symmetric 4D
spacetime and (ii) a compact, non-singular 2D internal space.
Considering the appropriate ansatz for the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 4D Minkowski, dS or AdS metric and @xmath is the
warp factor, the authors proved that the Salam-Sezgin solution is in
fact the only possible solution.

#### 6.3.2 General embeddings

As stressed earlier on, the Salam-Sezgin model is only to be regarded as
a toy model since its gauge group is just @xmath , it is anomalous and
it gives a vectorlike 4D spectrum. To obtain more interesting theories,
one must try to embed this model into a more realistic and
quantum-mechanically consistent theory, such as the anomaly-free gauged
theories discussed in § 5.6 . Doing so, there is the possibility of
embedding the @xmath group corresponding to the magnetic monopole into
any gauge group factor and not just identifying it with @xmath . This
possibility remedies one of the problems of the Salam-Sezgin model,
namely it gives a chiral spectrum in 4D. However, in the generic case,
it also raises issues concerning the classical stability of the monopole
solutions. In what follows, we will present the general form of such
solutions and then examine the zero-mode spectrum and classical
stability of these theories.

##### Equations of motion and supersymmetry

We start by considering one of the anomaly-free theories of § 5.6 ,
letting @xmath be the gauge group. The ansatz for the compactification
is similar to ( 6.3.1 ), but with the vector potential now replaced by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath generator, that may in general be a linear
combination of all commuting generators of @xmath . The potentials
@xmath and @xmath on the two patches should now be connected by a gauge
transformation parameterized by @xmath . Single-valuedness of @xmath as
@xmath changes by @xmath requires the quantity @xmath , where @xmath is
the minimal @xmath charge in the theory, be an integer. This results in
a set of quantization conditions on the coefficients defining @xmath in
terms of the generators in the Cartan subalgebra of @xmath .

For simplicity, let us consider the case where @xmath is identified with
a single generator of a given @xmath factor and let @xmath be the
corresponding gauge coupling. Now, the nonvanishing field-strength
components are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

What remains is to satisfy the @xmath components of the Einstein
equations and the dilaton field equation. These are now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the square of the first equation and comparing with the second
equation, we find that the two gauge couplings should be related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging this into the first of ( 6.44 ), we see that the @xmath radius
is expressed in terms of the dilaton vev and the @xmath coupling as
before,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, in contrast to the Salam-Sezgin case, the monopole charge @xmath is
no longer fixed by the field equations but can acquire any integer
value. Moreover, we also have a certain type of tuning between the
couplings @xmath and @xmath .

Another departure from the Salam-Sezgin model is that now supersymmetry
is completely broken. This most easily seen by considering the @xmath
equation which now takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the gravitino no longer couples to the monopole background. In
terms of components, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we see that we cannot satisfy the second and third equations
simultaneously.

##### Zero-mode spectrum

We next turn to a brief discussion of the zero-mode spectrum of the
resulting compactifications. Starting from the fermions, we first note
that the free Dirac operator on has no zero modes on @xmath and
therefore the 4D fermionic zero modes necessarily originate from the 6D
fermions carrying monopole charge. In the case where the monopole is
embedded in one of the @xmath factors, the 6D fields that can give rise
to 4D massless chiral fermions are contained among the associated
gauginos and among the hyperinos that are charged under this group; the
gravitino, tensorino and the rest of the gauginos will of course be
massive. The number of these chiral zero modes is counted using
index-theorem formulas. Turning to the bosons, the squared mass of each
one of the lightest hyperscalar fluctuations will receive two
contributions, one being proportional to the associated eigenvalue of
@xmath at @xmath and the other being proportional to @xmath where @xmath
is the covariant derivative acting on the hyperscalar fluctuations in
the background of the monopole vector potential(s). The first
contribution will make all hyperscalars massive. The second
contribution, if the monopole charges do not add up to zero, will be a
positive quantity proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the radius of
@xmath . Furthermore in the case of a nonzero net monopole charge of the
hyperscalar even the leading (lightest) @xmath scalar modes resulting
from it will belong to a nontrivial irreducible representation of the
Kaluza-Klein @xmath . We shall comment on the masses of some other
bosonic modes below.

##### Classical stability

Let us finally turn to the issue of classical stability. A
compactification is said to be classically stable if the squared masses
of the 4D excitations of all fields are positive or zero. In the
opposite case, there exist tachyonic states of negative mass squared
which render the compactification unstable under small perturbations. In
the present case, such states come from the scalar components of vector
fields that carry magnetic charge, as in the toroidal compactification
of Section 6.1 . To be specific, let @xmath be one of the excitations of
the vector potential tangent to @xmath and charged with respect to
@xmath . This vector has the components @xmath with respect to a complex
basis in the tangent space of @xmath . We also have the reality
condition @xmath . As a Lie-algebra-valued vector we can write @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath are complex fields and the @xmath ’s are among
the charged generators of the gauge group. In order to be able to write
down a general formula which can be applied for any model of this kind,
denote the @xmath charge of @xmath or @xmath by @xmath . The mass
spectrum of @xmath spin-zero fields resulting from such a @xmath object
is given by [ Randjbar-Daemi:1983bw ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath being the monopole charge. From these relations, it is easily
seen that for all those fields for which @xmath there is a tachyon.

In the case where tachyonic modes are present, one may adopt the point
of view that they are welcome in the context of an effective theory as
they are natural candidates for 4D Higgs fields. The quartic term in the
potential for such fields will come from the self-coupling of the 6D
gauge fields and their vev will break the 4D gauge group at the
Kaluza-Klein scale. Such an origin for the Higgs fields has been
considered before as a possible solution to the hierarchy problem. In
order for this interpretation to be complete, one needs to look for new
stable solutions of the 6D field equations which would correspond to the
minimum of the potential for the tachyons interpreted as Higgs fields.
These solutions will necessarily break the spherical symmetry and their
construction may give a geometrical origin to the Higgs mechanism. It
will be interesting to find such solutions.

However, conventional phenomenology usually requires the absence of such
tachyonic states from the spectrum. From Eqs. ( 6.49 ) and ( 6.50 ), we
see that the condition for a compactification to be free of tachyonic
modes is that the embedding of the monopole in the gauge group must be
such that @xmath for all charged excitations, where @xmath is understood
as the sum of the individual @xmath ’s over all the monopole directions
with respect to which the corresponding excitation is charged. Choosing
our conventions so that the minimal charge in the theory is @xmath , we
need then to have @xmath and @xmath for all charged fields. In the case
where @xmath as in the Salam-Sezgin model, these conditions are
automatically satisfied due to ( 6.34 ) and to the fact that all fields
charged under @xmath have unit charge. However, in the remaining cases
where @xmath is embedded into the @xmath factors, this requirement
imposes serious constraints on the allowed groups where the monopole can
be embedded and on the allowed fermion representations with respect to
these groups. One case where a stable compactification is guaranteed to
exist is when the gauge group factor @xmath has a maximal-subgroup
decomposition @xmath with @xmath simple and where all fermions charged
under this group transform in the adjoint. For if this is the case, the
corrsponding decomposition of the adjoint of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

shows that for all charged excitations we have @xmath and so the
compactification is stable if @xmath . However, in compactifications
where @xmath does not have a maximal-subgroup decomposition of the above
form or where there are fermions transforming in representations other
than the adjoint, the resulting configurations are generically unstable.

#### 6.3.3 The @xmath model

Our first example of the above construction is the compactification of
the @xmath model as discussed in [ Randjbar-Daemi:1985wc ] . In the
compactification discussed there, the monopole was embedded in the
@xmath factor of the gauge group. Since the hyperinos are not charged
under this group, the only charged fluctuations of fermions are those of
the @xmath gauginos which, of course, transform in the adjoint @xmath .
Embedding @xmath in @xmath according to the decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

decomposing the adjoint of @xmath according to the branching rule [
Slansky:1981yr ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and discarding neutral fields, we see that the only @xmath
representations that may give rise to fermion zero modes on @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

In 4D, the unbroken gauge group is @xmath where @xmath is the
Kaluza-Klein group originating from the @xmath isometries. The number of
chiral fermions is found to be @xmath , i.e. the 4D massless chiral
fermions form @xmath families of @xmath transforming in the @xmath
–dimensional irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath . The
representations of the chiral fermions under the @xmath symmetry is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the subscripts here denoting the @xmath charges.

From the @xmath charge assignments in ( 6.55 ), we immediately verify
that the 4D theory is free of @xmath triangle anomalies. Furthermore,
absence of @xmath and @xmath anomalies in the 4D theory is guaranteed,
since these groups are safe. Finally, according to the stability
criteria stated in the end of § 6.3.2 , the compactification described
above is stable only if @xmath , which corresponds to two families of
chiral fermions.

#### 6.3.4 The @xmath model

Let us next turn to the compactifications of the @xmath model. A first
example is given by embedding @xmath in @xmath according to the
maximal-subgroup decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the branching rules

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we see that @xmath so that @xmath is an integer. Discarding neutral
fields, we see that the fermion representations under @xmath which can
give rise to fermion zero modes on @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the @xmath hyperinos and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the @xmath gauginos. The unbroken gauge group in @xmath is @xmath .
The chiral fermions originate from the @xmath ’s and the @xmath ’s. We
can regard all the @xmath fermions as left-handed Weyl spinors. The
chiral fermions originating from the decomposition of @xmath of @xmath
then are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the fermions originating from the decomposition of the adjoint of
@xmath produce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the subscripts here denoting the @xmath charges.

As a second example, we consider the successive maximal-subgroup
decompositions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we identify the last @xmath factor with @xmath . Using the branching
rules

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , we see again that, @xmath and @xmath . Discarding neutral
fields, we find that the muliplets of @xmath which can have fermion zero
modes on @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the hyperinos and

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.66)
  -- -- -- --------

for the @xmath gauginos. Now, the unbroken gauge group in @xmath is
@xmath . The spectrum of the @xmath chiral fermions is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clearly seen that the spectrum in both cases is free from all
chiral anomalies, because @xmath and @xmath are safe groups in @xmath
and the @xmath couplings are obviously vectorlike. It is also seen that
there is no value of @xmath which produces a realistic spectrum. One can
study other embeddings with the aim of reducing the gauge group and the
number of families. For example, the group @xmath can be broken
completely by the embedding of a monopole in an @xmath subgroup of
@xmath relative to which the branching is @xmath . By itself this will
produce only a vectorlike theory in @xmath with an unbroken group @xmath
. However, combined with other monopoles in the manner described above,
one can break the group down to @xmath ; however, the number of families
will still be large. Finally, according to the stability criteria of §
6.3.2 , none of the above embeddings and, in fact, no other embedding is
stable.

## Appendix A Notation and conventions

Our main notational conventions are summarized as follows.

-   Metric . We use the “mostly-plus” Minkowski signature @xmath
    throughout the thesis, with the exception of certain sections of
    Chapter 3 and Appendix C, where we follow the standard conventions
    in the anomaly/index theory literature and work in the Euclidean.

-   Physical constants . We use physical units where @xmath . The
    gravitational coupling constant @xmath is defined in terms of
    Newton’s constant as @xmath , so that the canonical normalization of
    the Einstein term is @xmath . In many cases, we set @xmath .

-   Spacetime indices . In general, we denote world indices by @xmath
    and tangent-space flat indices by @xmath . In the context of
    compactification, we will let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote
    world indices of the high-dimensional spacetime, the physical
    spacetime and the internal space respectively and @xmath , @xmath
    and @xmath denote the corresponding tangent-space indices.

-   Covariant derivatives and curvatures . Throughout the thesis, @xmath
    stands for the various GCT- and gauge-covariant derivatives acting
    on tensors, forms and spinors, the specific form being always clear
    from the context. Covariant derivarives that also involve composite
    connections will be denoted by @xmath . The Riemann tensor is
    defined according to the convention

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    The Ricci tensor and scalar are defined as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Also, @xmath will stand for the curvature 2–form

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    whose components are given by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Group theory . Antihermitian generators are used throughout. The
    structure constants of an algebra are defined by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    In the case of gauge theories we adopt the conventional
    normalization, e.g. for @xmath we set @xmath . However, in order to
    follow standard conventions in the anomaly literature, the traces
    involving Lie-algebra-valued quantities, e.g. @xmath , are defined
    by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    in the fundamental representation.

## Appendix B Gamma Matrices and Spinors in Diverse Dimensions

### b.1 Gamma Matrices in Diverse Dimensions

#### b.1.1 The Clifford algebra

The Clifford algebra in an even number of dimensions, @xmath , is
generated by a set of @xmath matrices @xmath which obey the
anticommutation relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Any matrix of dimension equal to that of the @xmath can be expanded in
the complete basis generated by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the fully antisymmetrized product of @xmath gamma matrices. One may
define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is easily seen to satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the case of an odd number of dimensions, @xmath , the @xmath
–dimensional Clifford algebra is satisfied by the @xmath matrices @xmath
of the even-dimensional case plus @xmath .

The above definitions hold for flat space (or in an orthonormal frame in
curved space). Curved-space gamma matrices are obtained from flat-space
ones by raising indices with the inverse vielbein

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and satisfy the Clifford algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### b.1.2 Gamma matrix identities

From the Clifford algebra, one can derive numerous identities involving
products or contractions of gamma matrices. Since these are
indispensable when constructing supergravity theories, we will give a
list of the most important ones below.

1.   Duality relations. Using the Clifford algebra ( B.1 ), the
    properties of the @xmath –tensor and the definition ( B.4 ) of
    @xmath , it is easily shown that an antisymmetrized product of
    @xmath gamma matrices can be expressed in terms of products of
    @xmath gamma matrices according to

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

2.   Gamma matrix products. Since the antisymmetrized matrices in ( B.2
    ) form a basis, any gamma-matrix product can be expressed as a
    linear combination of such matrices. Using the Clifford algebra (
    B.1 ), one can easily establish the relations

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

    from which it also follows that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (B.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Then, by repeated application of ( 2 ), one can derive the following
    identities

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                           @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.11)
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

3.   Gamma matrix contractions. One often encounters products of the
    above type where two or more indices are contracted. The resulting
    expressions are found by contracting the appropriate expressions on
    the RHS of ( 2 ). One finds

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### b.2 Representations of the Clifford Algebra

#### b.2.1 Spinors of @xmath

Let us now construct the representations of the Clifford algebra ( B.1
). To this end, it is convenient to group the gamma matrices into
lowering and raising operators as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The operators thus defined satisfy the algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the algebra of @xmath uncoupled fermionic oscillators. The
representations of this algebra are found in the usual way. We first
define the Clifford vacuum @xmath as the state that is annihilated by
all lowering operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we construct the remaining states in the representation by acting on
this vacuum with the raising operators. Since each operator can act at
most one time, a generic state will have the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

To verify that these states form a spinor representation of the Lorentz
group, we introduce the matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, by virtue of the Clifford algebra ( B.1 ), satisfy the @xmath
algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can be identified with the Lorentz generators acting on the
representation defined by the states ( B.16 ). Given these matrices, we
can construct the following maximal set of commuting operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are the analog of the spin operators in four dimensions. The
action of @xmath on the state @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, since @xmath , the representation defined by @xmath is a spinor
representation of the Lorentz group, called a Dirac representation . Its
real dimension equals @xmath .

#### b.2.2 The Weyl and Majorana conditions

The spinor representations thus defined are not, in general, minimal
irreducible representations of the Lorentz group. As we will see, there
are two types of projection which one may impose to reduce the
independent components of a Dirac spinor. Their existence and their type
depends on the spacetime dimension.

##### Weyl spinors

The first projection is the Weyl projection, which is possible in an
even number of dimensions. In this case, one may easily prove that
@xmath commutes with the Lorentz generators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the Dirac spinor representation is divided into two
subspaces, classified by the eigenvalue of @xmath (called chirality and
equal to @xmath ), both of which transform irreducibly under the Lorentz
group. These are called Weyl spinors , they are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and they have real dimension @xmath . In contrast, in the case of an odd
number of dimensions where the Clifford algebra is satisfied by the
@xmath matrices @xmath of the even-dimensional case plus @xmath , one
may verify that @xmath does not commute with @xmath and so the
representation is irreducible and the notion of a Weyl spinor does not
exist.

##### Majorana spinors

The second projection is the Majorana projection. To discuss it, we
begin by defining the charge conjugation matrix @xmath by the
requirement that the Majorana conjugate of @xmath , @xmath , satisfies
the same equation as the usual Dirac adjoint @xmath . For the case of
massless spinors, this requirement easily leads to the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this relation, one can prove some important properties of @xmath .
First, writing @xmath and iterating ( B.24 ) twice, we find @xmath ,
which implies that @xmath is a multiple of the unit matrix, @xmath .
Taking the transpose of this, we also find @xmath and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. @xmath can be either symmetric or antisymmetric . Second, using (
B.25 ) and the fact that @xmath are either hermitian or antihermitian,
we can write @xmath which tells us that @xmath is a multiple of the unit
matrix. Combining this with ( B.24 ) we find that the same must hold for
@xmath . Since @xmath is positive-definite, the proportionality constant
must be greater than zero and thus we can choose our normalization so
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. we can choose @xmath to be unitary . Third, ( B.23 ) and ( B.24 )
imply that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this last relation, one can determine the allowed values for
@xmath and @xmath for any spacetime dimension by counting the allowed
numbers of symmetric and antisymmetric Clifford algebra matrices
according to ( B.26 ) and comparing them to their expected values. The
results are shown on Table B.1.

After these preliminaries, let us examine the complex conjugation
properties of gamma matrices and spinors. Using ( B.23 ) and the
hermiticity properties of the gamma matrices, we find the complex
conjugation relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( B.25 ), we easily see that the matrix @xmath is unitary. It also
satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, using ( B.27 ), we see that the complex conjugation of the Lorentz
generators @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation has important consequences. Consider a Lorentz
transformation of a spinor @xmath , @xmath . Then, we easily verify that
@xmath transforms in exactly the same way as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we can investigate whether we can impose a reality condition
on @xmath by setting @xmath and @xmath proportional to each other. This
is the Majorana condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is another constant. Consistency of this relation, @xmath ,
requires @xmath and, since @xmath , we must have @xmath . So, the
Majorana condition is possible when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spinors satisfying the Majorana condition with @xmath are called
Majorana spinors while those that satisfy it with @xmath are called
pseudoMajorana spinors . Consulting the previous table, we see that
Majorana spinors exist for @xmath while pseudoMajorana spinors exist for
@xmath .

In the cases where @xmath , one may still impose a reality condition on
spinors if we have extended supersymmetry. In such a case, we have
@xmath spinors, labelled by an index @xmath , and we may replace ( B.31
) by the modified Majorana condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a unitary @xmath matrix. Consistency of this condition
yields the constraint @xmath which, combined with unitarity, implies
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, @xmath must be simultaneously antisymmetric and unitary, which in
turns requires that the number of spinors should be even. Now, the
existence of a multiplet of spinors suggests that there is an internal
symmetry group rotating the spinors as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an antihermitian @xmath matrix, as required by
unitarity. Using ( B.33 ) and ( B.35 ) to compute the corresponding
transformation of @xmath , we find the two alternative expressions
@xmath and @xmath . In order for the symmetry ( B.35 ) to respect the
modified Majorana condition, the two expressions must be equal, i.e. we
must have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The simplest choice for @xmath is the symplectic metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so @xmath must be a matrix that preserves this metric. These
matrices are just the generators of the symplectic group @xmath . For
that reason, condition ( B.33 ) is referred to as the symplectic
Majorana condition and the spinors satisfying it are called symplectic
Majorana spinors if @xmath and symplectic pseudoMajorana spinors if
@xmath . From the table, we see that symplectic Majorana spinors exist
for @xmath while symplectic pseudoMajorana spinors exist in @xmath .

##### Majorana-Weyl spinors

In even dimensions, one could ask whether the Weyl and Majorana
conditions may be simultaneously imposed as independent conditions,
further reducing the components of a spinor. In order for this to be
possible, the two types of projections must be consistent with each
other. To find the consistency condition, we use ( B.22 ) and ( B.31 )
and we find the two alternative expressions @xmath and @xmath . These
must be equal and so we must have @xmath . On the other hand, Eqs. ( B.4
) and ( B.27 ) imply that, for even dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, we see that the two conditions may be simultaneously imposed if
@xmath . So, in @xmath , where both Majorana and Weyl conditions are
available, there exist Majorana-Weyl spinors . In a similar manner, one
finds that in @xmath there exist symplectic Majorana-Weyl spinors .

##### Irreducible spinors

We are now in a position to summarize the types of irreducible spinors
in various dimensions and their dimensions. The latter are immediately
found by recalling that the real dimension of a Dirac spinor is @xmath .
Since this is reduced by half for a Weyl or Majorana spinor, we find
that the real dimension of the minimal spinor for given @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) equals @xmath if the spinor is subject to a Weyl
(Majorana-type) condition and @xmath otherwise. The minimal spinors
available in diverse dimensions and their real dimensions are shown on
Table B.2. Here D, W, M, pM and SM refer to Dirac, Weyl, Majorana,
pseudoMajorana and symplectic Majorana spinors respectively. Also, the
entries on the table containing symplectic Majorana spinors describe the
decomposition of the minimal spinor into components related by the
symplectic Majorana condition. E.g. in @xmath Minkowski space, the
minimal spinor is a Weyl spinor with 8 real components which can also be
written as a pair of symplectic (pseudo)Majorana-Weyl spinors with four
real components each, related by ( B.33 ).

### b.3 Six-Dimensional Spinors

Since the bulk of this thesis is devoted to six-dimensional
supergravities, we find it useful to summarize some of the properties of
gamma matrices and spinors specific to six dimensions. These properties
are extensively used in Chapter 5.

In six dimensions, the gamma-matrix duality relation () takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, the first four of the gamma-matrix contraction identities () are
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In six dimensions, the minimal spinor is symplectic Majorana-Weyl. In
general, such spinors form a @xmath -dimensional multiplet @xmath ,
@xmath , of @xmath . In the @xmath case, the indices of such spinors are
lowered (raised) by the @xmath invariant tensor @xmath ( @xmath )
according to the “NW-SE” convention, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the inner product of two such spinors is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similar identities hold in the general @xmath case, with @xmath replaced
by the @xmath invariant tensor @xmath .

Finally, six-dimensional spinors satisfy the Majorana-flip property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, after contraction with @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix C Characteristic Classes and Index Theorems

### c.1 Characteristic Classes

#### c.1.1 Generalities

Consider a set @xmath , @xmath of @xmath complex matrices taking values
in the Lie algebra of a subgroup @xmath of @xmath . A symmetric
polynomial is a @xmath –valued linear function of the @xmath ’s which is
symmetric under interchange of any two @xmath ’s,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

An invariant or characteristic polynomial is a symmetric polynomial
which is in addition invariant under a @xmath –transformation of all the
@xmath ’s,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

These definitions can be extended to the case where each @xmath is also
a @xmath –form on a manifold @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the understanding that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The canonical example of an invariant polynomial is the symmetrized
trace

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, in the case of @xmath –forms, the symmetrization is only carried
out in the matrix part with the form part fixed. In the case where all
@xmath ’s are equal, @xmath , we define an invariant polynomial of
degree @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the canonical example is the ordinary trace

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us now take the matrix-valued form @xmath to be the curvature 2–form
@xmath associated with a connection @xmath on a fiber bundle @xmath over
@xmath ; the pair @xmath will be understood as @xmath in the case of a
gauge theory and as @xmath in the case of gravity. An invariant
polynomial @xmath is a @xmath –form on @xmath . This polynomial has the
following very important properties. First, it is closed

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, second, its integrals are topological invariants . The second
property is equivalent to the statement that the difference of two
polynomials @xmath and @xmath is exact, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some @xmath –form @xmath . The first property implies that @xmath
defines a cohomology class on @xmath . The second property further
implies that this cohomology class is independent of the connection.
Such a cohomology class is called a characteristic class .

The @xmath –form @xmath appearing in ( C.9 ) is explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

On a local chart where the bundle is trivial, we can set @xmath . Then (
C.9 ) turns into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The form @xmath thus defined is called the Chern-Simons form of @xmath .

Another quantity of interest is the @xmath , called the descent of
@xmath and defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. as the variation of @xmath when we vary @xmath keeping @xmath
fixed. An explicit expression for this form can be found by using the
so-called Cartan homotopy operator, and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### c.1.2 Characteristic classes of complex vector bundles

For a complex vector bundle the connection and curvature, denoted by
@xmath and @xmath respectively, take their values in @xmath . By a
suitable @xmath transformation, @xmath may be brought to the diagonal
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The characteristic classes relevant for complex vector bundles are the
following.

##### Chern class

The Chern class of a complex vector bundle is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term of order @xmath in the expansion is called the @xmath –th Chern
class of @xmath and is denoted by @xmath . A more explicit form of this
relation in terms of the @xmath ’s is provided by the so-called
splitting principle and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which provides an efficient method for computing Chern classes.

##### Chern characters

The Chern character of a complex vector bundle is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -th term of the expansion is called the @xmath –th Chern
character of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the @xmath ’s, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### c.1.3 Characteristic classes of real vector bundles

For a real vector bundle, the connection and curvature, denoted by
@xmath and @xmath respectively, are real antisymmetric matrices of
@xmath . Now, the curvature @xmath cannot be diagonalized but it can be
brought to a skew-diagonal form. In the cases of interest @xmath is an
even integer, @xmath , and we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The characteristic classes relevant for real vector bundles are the
following.

##### Pontrjagin classes

The total Pontrjagin class of @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the curvature @xmath is skew symmetric, this expression is even in
@xmath . Hence, the expansion of @xmath in powers of @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is of order @xmath in @xmath . Obviously, the series
terminates at @xmath . The quantity @xmath is called the @xmath –th
Pontrjagin class of the bundle. In terms of the @xmath ’s, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### @xmath-roof genus

The @xmath –roof genus (or Dirac genus) is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its expansion in terms of Pontrjagin classes reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the first terms of its expansion in terms of curvature invariants
has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### Hirzebruch polynomial

The Hirzebruch polynomial (or @xmath –polynomial) is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its expansion in terms of Pontrjagin classes reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the first terms of its expansion in terms of curvature invariants
has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### c.2 The Descent Equations

An important set of relations between Chern-Simons forms, their descents
and related quantities can be derived through the following formal
construction. We consider the space of Lie-algebra-valued gauge
transformations @xmath , which is characterized by a set of parameters
@xmath . These parameters can be thought of as extra coordinates which
can be “wedged” with the spacetime coordinates @xmath in the usual way.
Accordingly, we can define an appropriate exterior derivative @xmath
along the gauge orbits through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

By definition, this operator anticommutes with @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.33)
  -- -- -- --------

it is nilpotent,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it satisfies the usual rules of exterior differentiation. This
construction enables us to define generalized “forms” in the extended
space spanned by @xmath . The operator @xmath increases the degree of
forms in @xmath –space by one as does @xmath for the degree of forms in
@xmath -space. Also, the operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be thought of as the analog of @xmath in the extended space and is
also nilpotent.

Now, let @xmath and @xmath be a reference connection and its curvature,
independent of @xmath . We define a new connection @xmath and its
associated curvature @xmath through the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new connection depends on @xmath through the group element @xmath
and thus it makes sense to speak of the action of @xmath on it. From the
above, we easily find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

(which is a 1-form in @xmath –space and a scalar in @xmath –space), we
can write ( C.37 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we can easily find that the action of @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we find that @xmath implements a gauge transformation of
@xmath parameterized by the anticommuting parameter @xmath , which
itself transforms under @xmath . This is just the familiar BRS
transformation of Yang-Mills theory. For that reason, @xmath is referred
to as the BRS operator and @xmath is called the ghost . From the above,
we can easily verify that @xmath is nilpotent on @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , as expected.

To derive the relations of interest, we introduce yet another connection
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a 1–form in the extended space. The associated field strength
is defined by using the operator @xmath and is easily seen to be equal
to @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.42)
  -- -- -- --------

since both terms inside parentheses vanish. This tells us that, for any
invariant polynomial @xmath , we have @xmath . Expressing both sides of
this equation through Chern-Simons forms and using ( C.42 ), we find
@xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the form @xmath can be expanded in powers of @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscript and the subscript stand for the form degree in
@xmath –space and @xmath –space respectively. Plugging ( C.44 ) into (
C.43 ) and equating terms of the same degree in @xmath –space, we arrive
at the so-called Stora-Zumino descent equations ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

These relations play an important role in the discussion of
gauge/gravitational anomalies.

### c.3 Index Theorems

Index theorems are theorems relating the index of an elliptic operator
(an analytical quantity) with a certain invariant constructed from
characteristic classes (a topological quantity). As such, they provide a
direct connection between local properties of a manifold and its
topological properties. Here, we will give some general definitions and
we will present the relevant index theorems without proof. The original
work of Atiyah and Singer leading to theorems of this type is presented
in the series of papers [ Atiyah:1968mp , Atiyah:1968rj , Atiyah:1968ih
, Atiyah:1971ws , Atiyah:1971rm ] .

To define the index of a operator, consider two fiber bundles @xmath and
@xmath over @xmath . A differential operator @xmath can be defined as an
operator that maps sections in @xmath to sections in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

If both @xmath and @xmath are equipped with well-defined inner products,
denoted by @xmath and @xmath respectively, then, it is possible to
define the adjoint @xmath of @xmath as an operator mapping sections in
@xmath to sections in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfying the requirement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The index of @xmath is defined as the number of zero modes of @xmath
minus the number of zero modes of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to the Atiyah-Singer index theorems , for certain operators
@xmath , the index ( C.49 ) is actually a topological quantity expressed
in terms of characteristic classes related to the base manifold and the
fiber space. To state the Atiyah-Singer index theorem for the cases of
interest, we consider a curved @xmath –dimensional manifold @xmath on
which we define a field carrying a spinor index, extra indices of some
representation @xmath of @xmath with generators @xmath and internal
gauge indices of some representation @xmath of a gauge group @xmath . We
then introduce the generalized positive-chirality Dirac operator @xmath
appropriate for this type of spinor (here, chirality refers to the
explicit spinor index, not to possible extra @xmath spinor indices).
Denoting the spaces of positive- and negative-chirality spinors by
@xmath and @xmath respectively and the representation spaces of @xmath
and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath respectively, we see that @xmath defines
a mapping @xmath , while the adjoint operator @xmath defines a mapping
@xmath . The Atiyah-Singer index theorem states that the index of the
operator @xmath is given by the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

involving the @xmath -roof genus @xmath of the spacetime manifold and
the Chern character @xmath associated with the connection @xmath on the
bundle. Here, the subscript “ @xmath ” implies that only the term
proportional to the volume form should be retained.

In our study of anomalies, we will encounter three special cases of (
C.50 ). The first case occurs when the spinor in question is a usual
spin-1/2 field @xmath with no extra @xmath indices. Then, the relevant
operator is the usual Dirac operator @xmath where @xmath the connection
on the fiber. In this case, the exponential in () equals unity and the
Atiyah-Singer index theorem reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second case occurs where the spinor field is a spin @xmath gravitino
@xmath that carries an extra vector index and may be also coupled to the
gauge field @xmath . The appropriate operator is the Rarita-Schwinger
operator @xmath . In this case, the relevant representation of @xmath is
the vector representation in which @xmath . Thus, our index theorem
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we will also need to consider the case of a bispinor field
@xmath which carries an extra spinor index and does not couple to @xmath
. The corresponding operator is denoted by @xmath and the relevant
@xmath representation is the spinor representation where @xmath . Hence,
we arrive at the index theorem

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain a compact representation of this relation, one may choose an
appropriate basis for the gamma matrices and such that @xmath . Then,
the trace in ( C.53 ) is equal to @xmath and the integrand in ( C.53 )
is just the volume term of the Hirzebruch polynomial @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the index theorem can be written in the compact form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix D Anomaly Coefficients

### d.1 Second and Fourth Indices

The anomaly-related coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , introduced
in Chapter 5 , are computed in terms of the second and fourth indices of
the respective groups. To define them, we consider a simple group @xmath
and we let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be a generic representation, the
fundamental and the adjoint respectively. The @xmath –th index @xmath of
@xmath is defined in terms of the symmetrized trace of the product of
@xmath generators. In particular the second and fourth indices are
determined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the invariant symmetric tensors of @xmath subject to
the orthogonality conditions @xmath for @xmath ; their normalization is
determined by fixing the values of @xmath . The normalization of
second-order indices is irrelevant for our purposes while the
normalization of fourth-order indices can be fixed by setting @xmath for
all groups.

### d.2 Anomaly Coefficients

Using the above definitions, we turn to the computations of the anomaly
coefficients. Starting from the @xmath –coefficients, we consider an
algebra element @xmath and we use ( D.1 ) for the representations @xmath
and @xmath to find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we use the notation @xmath . So, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

To compute the @xmath – and @xmath –coefficients, we first consider the
case where @xmath has no fourth-order Casimirs so that @xmath . Then Eq.
( D.2 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and so, @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We next consider the case where @xmath possesses fourth-order Casimirs.
Then, using ( D.2 ) for the representations @xmath and @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Solving ( D.8 ) for @xmath , substituting in ( D.7 ) and using the
second of ( D.3 ), we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.10)
  -- -- -- --------

From these expressions, one may determine all the group-theoretical
coefficients of interest using the values of the indices @xmath and
@xmath which are tabulated e.g. in [ Slansky:1981yr ] , [ McKay ] , [
vanRitbergen:1998pn ] . The values of @xmath and @xmath for groups with
no fourth-order Casimirs are listed on Table D.1. The values of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath for groups having fourth-order Casimirs are listed on
Table D.2.