###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Why doing QFT in low dimensions
    -    1.2 About conformal covariance
    -    1.3 About this thesis
-    2 Preliminaries I: local nets
    -    2.1 Axioms for Möbius covariant local nets
    -    2.2 Connection with modular theory of von Neumann algebras
    -    2.3 Further structural properties and representation theory
    -    2.4 A first example: the @xmath current model and its
        derivatives
    -    2.5 More on examples
-    3 Preliminaries II: diffeomorphism covariance
    -    3.1 The Lie group @xmath and the Virasoro algebra
    -    3.2 Positive energy representations
    -    3.3 Virasoro nets and @xmath covariance
-    4 Towards the construction of diffeomorphism symmetry
    -    4.1 Motivations for using piecewise Möbius transformations
    -    4.2 Existence of piecewise Möbius symmetry
    -    4.3 Piecewise Möbius symmetry: conclusions
-    5 Stress-energy tensor on nonsmooth functions
    -    5.1 Why dealing with the nonsmooth case and how
    -    5.2 Proof of essentially self-adjointness
-    6 Applications and further results
    -    6.1 Uniqueness of the @xmath symmetry
    -    6.2 Conformal covariance of subnets
    -    6.3 Some consequences
    -    6.4 Positivity of energy in representations
-    A About the Möbius group
    -    A.1 Geometrical properties
    -    A.2 Representation theory of @xmath
-    B Piecewise Möbius transformations
    -    B.1 Definitions and properties
    -    B.2 Piecewise Möbius vector fields

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Why doing QFT in low dimensions

Quantum Physics, despite the mathematical, philosophical and
interpretational problems, is truly amazing and proved to be extremely
fruitful at the practical level (e.g. applications to semiconductors) as
well as at the theoretical level. Of course the expression “Quantum
Physics” is wide, and covers a variety of theories and models. Usually
it means only that the uncertainty principle is taken into account and
so a Quantum Probabilistic description is used. More specifically we
talk about Quantum Mechanics (QM), Quantum Thermodynamics, the Quantum
Theory of Fields (QFT), etc.

Quantum Mechanics at its birth — just like almost all new theories —
contained a large number of heuristic and (therefore) not too precise,
sometimes awkward looking calculations (involving Dirac’s delta
“function”, “noncommutative variables”, decomposition into the “sum of
generalized eigenvectors”, and many other things). Finally these
constructions were given a clear meaning and a completely new
mathematics was born: namely, the theory of Hilbert spaces and unbounded
operators.

One may compare this with the enormous inspiration that Newton’s
mechanics gave to differential and integral calculus. The physical
motivation had probably a key role in the development of the new
mathematics. Of course in the beginning the concept of the differential
was somewhat heuristic and involved considerations with “infinitesimal”
quantities. It was only much later that with the invention of limits it
became something mathematically rigorous.

In case of QM a good part of the new mathematics became clear almost
instantaneously. Indeed, it was in @xmath that von Neumann published his
work [ Neum ] about the mathematical foundation of QM; only some @xmath
years later that Heisenberg and Schrödinger independently from each
other proposed what at the time was called “matrix-” and
“wavemechanics”.

Similarly, at its birth QFT suffered from all sorts of problems. An
important step towards the solution was done with the invention of
renormalization , first introduced by Schwinger, Feynman, Tomonaga and
Dyson in the late @xmath s for the special case of Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED). It lead to a perturbation expansion whose lowest
order terms are in excellent agreement with experimental physics [ Weinb
] , e.g. the remarkable prediction of the electron’s anomalous magnetic
momentum. Nevertheless, from the theoretical point of view it gave rise
to new complications that till now, after more than fifty years have no
satisfactory solution.

So the current state is the following. Using renormalization and a
perturbative approximation (containing many mathematical obscurities)
these theories can be used to give results that are comparable with
experimental values. Yet at the mathematical level we do not know
whether these theories exist at all; so for examples that the formulas
involved really converge (even if their value with some heuristic
calculations or computer simulations was approximated).

Of course, in order to prove mathematically the existence of a certain
theory, first one needs to define what, in general, a QFT should be.
There are essentially two (accepted) axiomatic frameworks. The first of
the two (in the historical order) is essentially about fixing the notion
of a quantum field and postulating a set of required properties which
are usually called the Wightmann-axioms , see e.g. the book [ StWi ] .
The second one is based on the concept of the local structure of
observables which is described by a net of operator algebras. It is
usually called the framework of Algebraic Quantum Field Theory, for a
good introductory book see [ Haag ] .

Works done in these frameworks have greatly improved our understanding
of some general structural properties, such as for example the existence
of PCT symmetry, the correspondence between spin and statistics and the
existence of superselection sectors. However, while a solid base, an
axiomatic framework in which questions can be precisely formulated is
important to have, in itself it is not enough for solving all problems.
The frameworks are of course free from those “mathematical
uncertainties”: the problem appears in a different way. Namely, now the
difficulty lies in reconstructing within these frameworks such (only
heuristically described) theories as QED or QCD ( =  “Quantum
Chromodynamics”; the quantum field theory of strong nuclear
interactions).

In fact, the only type of models (so far) constructed in these rigorous
manners are the so-called free ones. From the physical point of view,
they have the most simple structure possible, as they describe
non-interacting fields and particles. Although these models deserve both
some physical and mathematical interests, they provide a very small
variety of examples.

Let us immediately make a correction: this is the current situation
concerning models “living” in the the usual @xmath -dimensional
spacetime. However, it turned out that in @xmath dimensions a great
variety of interesting models can be constructed! A key difference ---
at least for massless theories ¹ ¹ 1 In the massive case the conformal
structure does not have a direct influence. Nevertheless, the simple
geometry of the @xmath -dimensional spacetime still enables us to
exhibit interesting models. In fact, in @xmath dimensions there examples
of massive models with nonzero interactions (!), see e.g. [ GlJa ] and
also [ BuLe ] for recent developments. This is in some sense is even
“better” than what we have in the conformal case. — lies in the
conformal structure of the @xmath -dimensional Minkowski-spacetime (of
which more will be said in the next section) and the geometry of
lightcones. While in higher dimensions the future-like lightcone of a
spacetime point is connected, in @xmath dimensions it consists of two
disjoint halflines. To illustrate the importance of this with a
classical (i.e. not quantum physical) example, consider in coordinates
the wave equation of the free massless Klein-Gordon field in the @xmath
-dimensional Minkowski-spacetime:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

As it is well known, the general solution splits into two parts “living”
on the left and right lightcones:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

These one-dimensional parts are called the chiral components. In a
similar way, a massless QFT in @xmath -dimensions gives rise to two
chiral QFTs. This thesis is concerned with such chiral components in the
setting of Algebraic Quantum Field Theory.

This factorization in higher dimensions does not happen: there are no
nontrivial examples of fields in @xmath -dimensions that could be
factorized in any meaningful sense into lower dimensional ones. What is
the importance then of considering QFTs in low spacetime dimensions,
when certain things change so radically with the dimension? The direct
physical motivation is connected to @xmath spacetime dimensions.

Of course, the question whether it is, or is not worth to make research
in a certain direction is also up to one’s belief. Nevertheless, there
are several “justifications”; i.e. arguments indicating the importance
of the work done in this area.

@xmath These models provide a “playground” on which one can collect
experience — coming from calculations carried out in concrete models —
about such relevant mathematical objects as nets of operator algebras.
Later this could prove decisive in constructing @xmath -dimensional
models.

@xmath These models turned out to give examples for various interesting
mathematical phenomena, e.g. the so-called half-sided modular inclusion
of von Neumann algebras. Through these models one can directly use his
or her physical inspiration to do great mathematics. In some sense, to
many mathematical problems (especially in operator algebras) they are
like vision to geometry. While it is certainly possible to do geometry
completely formally (without actually having any kind of vision of what
we are doing), it is clear how much seeing the problem can help in
resolving it.

@xmath These models may turn out to have a more direct application to
“real physics”. As it was discovered [ BPZ ] , some of these models
correspond to the most important @xmath -dimensional statistical
mechanical models. Also, there are arguments showing that starting from
an (assumed) model in @xmath -dimensions, by some kind of projection or
restriction we can extract one-dimensional parts. By considering such a
one-dimensional part only , of course we probably loose information.
Still, we may be able to predict some properties of the original @xmath
-dimensional theory just by using our knowledge about chiral components.

### 1.2 About conformal covariance

Consider a physical system. If it is autonomous then, for example, a
translation or a certain rotation, should take a possible process of
this system into (another) possible process. In general, in the
mathematical description it means that a model of an autonomous physical
system should carry a representation (an action) of the symmetry group
of spacetime.

This idea proved to be fundamental in physics. Already in classical
models it can be used, for example, to find restrictions on possible
equations (that could govern the behaviour of some physical quantities)
written in turns of coordinates. Its importance became even more
significant when through Noether’s theorem the relation was discovered
between (the generators of) the symmetries (of flat spacetime) and
preserved quantities like total energy-impulse of the system.

In quantum physics by Wigner’s theorem [ Wig ] continuous symmetries
appear as projective unitary representations acting on the Hilbert space
of the physical model. By the mentioned connection between
energy-impulse and symmetries and by the fundamental concept of the
positivity of energy these representations are required to satisfy a
certain positivity condition. The classification of such positive energy
representations of the symmetry group of (the flat) spacetime gave
similar tools to find restrictions on possible quantum physical models
as for example the mentioned concept of “coordinate independence of
equations” in classical physics. For example, an immediate application
lead to the understanding of the possible values of the spin of
particles.

So far, everything said was about autonomous systems, in general, and
the word “conformal” appeared only in the title of the section. Let us
see now the particular case of massless systems.

In general a dilation is not a symmetry of a physical system. Consider
for example a classical system of masspoints with gravitation being the
only interaction between them. It is not hard to see that rescaling a
solution of the equations of motion will not give again a solution of
the same equations, but rather the ones obtained by a similar rescaling
of the masses of the masspoints. A dilation carries a possible process
of the system into a possible process of another system; so in this case
it is not a symmetry.

However, there are physical systems in which no specific masses appear.
The most common example in classical physics is the free electromagnetic
field (“free” =  no charges or currents). An electromagnetic wave is a
solution of the equations of the free electromagnetic system and indeed,
rescaling an electromagnetic wave gives another electromagnetic wave;
i.e. again, a solution of the same equations. One may say that the
Maxwell equations with zero charges and currents are scale invariant .

For such systems the symmetry group is larger and so it gives stronger
restrictions; in the same time it also reveals more. To put it in
another way: in general, using more symmetries, more can be established.

Actually, even more symmetries should be taken account. In fact, it is
expected that for a massless system all spacetime transformations
preserving the causal structure (the structure of past, future and
spacelike separation) should be a symmetry transformation, at least in a
certain slightly weaker sense ² ² 2 In Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
this “slightly weaker sense” means that such transformations are indeed
represented by unitary (or antiunitary) operators whose adjoint actions
indeed preserve the local structure of the theory (more precisely: act
in a covariant manner on the local algebras), but in general do not
preserve the vacuum state. . Such symmetries are called conformal .

An initial enthusiasm about conformal symmetries could be taken away by
the observation that in three or higher dimensional spacetime there are
no conformal transformations apart from the ones generated by the usual
symmetry transformations and the dilations. Allowing local
transformations (that may not extend to the full spacetime), too, in
addition one also finds the so-called special conformal transformations
(and of course everything that they, together with the already listed
transformations, generate). They indeed have some interesting
applications, but still, they only “enlarge” the symmetry group by a
finite many additional parameters.

The situation in dimension @xmath however, is completely different.
Consider the @xmath -dimensional Minkowski-spacetime with coordinates
@xmath (where the speed of light is @xmath ) and take two orientation
preserving diffeomorphisms of the real line @xmath . It is almost
evident that the transformation defined by the map @xmath where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

preserves the causal structure. (See what happens to the worldline of a
left and what happens to a wordline of a right light signal under this
transformation.) So now, apart from the usual symmetry transformations
we do not only have dilations but an infinite variety of diffeomorphism
as conformal transformations! To put it in another way: in a @xmath
-dimensional conformal theory we should have an action ³ ³ 3 It turns
out that not all diffeomorphisms give symmetries; certain groth
conditions at infinity must be satisfied. of the group @xmath .

In the “normal” (i.e. @xmath -dimensional) Minkowski-spacetime, the
number of parameters in the geometrical symmetry group of a system is
always finite. Assuming no characteristic masses, the symmetry group
“grows” as it becomes enriched for example by the dilations, but “not
much”: it will still have just a finite number of parameters. Contrary
to this situation, as we have seen, in @xmath -dimensions we can have
infinitely many geometrical symmetry parameters; in each light-direction
we can have a full diffeomorphism symmetry.

As it was already explained, a chiral theory is a one-dimensional part
of a two dimensional field theory (the part “living” on a worldline of a
light signal). Under some conditions such a theory can be “carried over”
to the one-point compactification of the line; that is, to the circle
@xmath . So by what was explained for such chiral QFT we should expect a
@xmath symmetry to appear.

Indeed, this is the case in many (although not all) examples. In fact,
one of the questions considered in this thesis: can we find a condition
that assures the existence of the diffeomorphism symmetry? Even more,
having found the right condition, can we somehow reconstruct the action
of the full conformal group on a given chiral model in case it was
originally “hidden for us”?

To the opinion of the author this question is not only of mathematical
interest. To give an example, consider a massless field theory in @xmath
dimensions. Compared with the massive case we have in “more” the
dilational covariance but certainly not an additional infinite number of
geometrical symmetry parameters. On the other hand, by taking an
appropriate restriction to a certain lower dimensional hyperplane we may
get a lower dimensional field theory possessing an infinite number of
conformal symmetry parameters. However, a priori we do not know whether
this is indeed the case and even if it is so there seems to be no direct
way of describing the corresponding action. The point is that these
symmetries are not coming from the original QFT (as it did not have
them), they are not inherited; they are not obtained simply by taking
restrictions.

Of course, the really interesting question would be the following.
Suppose we manage to construct such geometrical symmetries for a chiral
theory obtained by restriction. They are not present in the original
@xmath -dimensional field theory, they are not among the “visible”
geometrical symmetries. There are many interesting things which we can
calculate for a conformal chiral QFT relatively easily, exactly by
making use of the conformal symmetry. However, can we use the conformal
symmetry which only appears in the restriction to get some information
about the original field theory?

This problem is out of the scope of this thesis, though. This work is
concerned “only” with chiral QFT in itself and not in relation to QFT in
higher spacetime dimensions. It concentrates on the following questions.
@xmath Can we find conditions that could guarantee the existence of full
diffeomorphism symmetry? @xmath Is the action of the diffeomorphism
group unique? In fact, can we find a construction resulting this action
(if it exists at all)? @xmath What properties of a conformal chiral QFT
can we derive just by using diffeomorphism symmetry? (More precisely:
what new properties can we derive — as there are already many such
results.)

### 1.3 About this thesis

The aim of this section is twofold. First, to explain the structure of
this thesis and to give a short summary of its main results. Second, to
clarify what is the author’s own result, what is result of a joint work
with someone else, what is just a recollection of known results, and
finally, to acknowledge contributions from others.

After this introductory chapter where right now the reader is, two
preliminary chapters follow. They serve to give an overview of some well
known facts concerning the material. The first concerns general
structural properties and some examples of Möbius covariant local nets.
Apart from the known results, given with the appropriate references,
with Theorem 2.1.3 it will be shown that for any Möbius covariant local
net @xmath the set @xmath contains a core for every positive power of
@xmath (where @xmath and @xmath stand for what they usually stand for).
This affirmation is important for many (technical) reasons, and although
the proof relies on standard arguments similar to the ones used in the
demonstration of the Reeh-Schlieder property, to the knowledge of the
author, it has been not stated before.

The second chapter is a lengthy introduction to diffeomorphism
covariance, representation theory of @xmath and to the Virasoro algebra.
In many cases, statements are not only given with citing the original
articles as references, but with sketched or indicated proofs. Moreover,
it will be demonstrated that any positive energy representation of
@xmath is (equivalent to) a direct sum of irreducible representations
(Theorem 3.2.6 ). Again, the proof is almost just a copy of other
standard arguments (for example of those similar affirmations about
positive energy representations of @xmath ) but nevertheless, to the
knowledge of the author it has not appeared in previously published
works.

The remaining three chapters contain the research results achieved
during the PhD studies. All of these three chapters begin with a
“chapter summary” which is a similar abstract to the one given here,
except that it is specific to that chapter. It is only for helping
readability.

The first of these chapters is about the (possible) reconstruction of
diffeomorphism symmetry, or to put it in another way, about the
(algebraic) characterization of the existence of diffeomorphism
symmetry. It consists of results so far not yet published.

First, the group of (once) differentiable piecewise Möbius
transformations is introduced. Then with Theorem 4.2.6 it is shown that
the Möbius symmetry of a regular net @xmath (i.e. a net which is @xmath
-regular for every @xmath ) has an extension to this group of piecewise
Möbius transformations if and only if a certain (but purely algebraic)
condition is satisfied regarding the “relative position” of @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath are the intervals obtained by removing a point
from the nonempty, nondense open interval @xmath .

The group of piecewise Möbius transformations is indeed a large symmetry
group. For example, it is shown that any diffeomorphism can be uniformly
approximated by elements of this group; even in a stronger, local sense
(Corollary 4.1.2 ). Thus, although the symmetry is extended only to
these piecewise Möbius transformations and not to the group @xmath ,
assuming regularity this algebraic condition is conjectured to imply
diffeomorphism covariance.

The relation of this condition with others is investigated. First, it is
confirmed that conformal covariance implies this condition. However, the
point is that it can be checked in many cases without assuming conformal
covariance. In particular it is shown to be satisfied for a large class
of regular nets including the completely rational ones (Theorem 4.3.3 );
indicating that for example in case of complete rationality
diffeomorphism symmetry should be automatic.

The second of the last three chapters contains the essential estimates
of the joint work [ CW ] of the author of this thesis and S. Carpi. With
Theorem 5.2.3 and Prop. 5.2.4 it is shown that the stress-energy tensor
of a positive energy representation of @xmath can be continuously (in
the sense of strong resolvents) extended to functions of finite @xmath
norm. The fruits of the extension theorem are harvested only in the last
chapter, here the focus is on the extension itself. The crucial point of
the argument is a certain estimate involving the contraction semigroup
associated to the conformal Hamiltonian.

The last chapter contains several applications of the results of the
previous chapters as well as some new arguments. By the extension
theorem the stress-energy tensor can be directly evaluated on piecewise
Möbius vector fields. On the other hand, the piecewise Möbius symmetry
of a net is completely determined by the Möbius symmetry and the local
algebras. This can be used to give an elegant and short demonstration
for the uniqueness of the diffeomorphism symmetry, given that the net is
@xmath -regular (Theorem 6.1.2 ).

This was already stated in the mentioned joint work, although with a
slightly different proof. There the problem regarding the density of
piecewise Möbius transformations was cleverly avoided as by the
minimality of Virasoro nets a single non-trivial piecewise Möbius
transformation turned out to suffice for the proof. However, in order to
make that argument work, a separate proof was needed for the case of
Virasoro nets.

In this thesis minimality is not used, and nor there is a need for a
separate argument treating the case of Virasoro nets. Rather, the
question of density is directly approached. For example, it is proved
that for every @xmath a sequence of piecewise Möbius transformations
@xmath converging uniformly to @xmath can be constructed having the
property that @xmath strongly for any regular conformal local net @xmath
(Theorem 6.1.3 ). With the same technique it is also shown that a Möbius
covariant subnet of a conformal net is automatically a conformal subnet,
too, assuming again some regularity condition (Theorem 6.2.3 ).

In this thesis both the uniqueness and the conformality of Möbius
covariant subnets are demonstrated by a completely different argument,
too: in fact even without assuming any kind of regularity condition and
thus in full generality (Theorem 6.1.9 and Theorem 6.2.29 ). This
argument has not been published elsewhere. It is less related to the
idea of local algebras: in spirit it is closer Quantum Fields (and in
particular to Vertex Operator Algebras, as it is formulated at the level
of Fourier modes). It is based on the observation that there are only
few possibilities for commutation relations between fields of dimension
@xmath whose integral is the conformal energy. It is, in some sense, a
version ⁴ ⁴ 4 Although found independently, the argument employed — as
it was pointed out to the author by Karl-Henning Rehren — is essentially
a Fourier-transformed version of an old idea of Lüscher and Mack (see [
Mack , Sect. III.] for their argument). What seems to be really new
however, is the application in the algebraic setting, showing the
mentioned uniqueness property and the conformal covariance of Möbius
covariant subnets. Note that for such application one needs a careful
analyses involving the use of certain energy bounds and in particular
the relation of these bounds with the local structure. of the
Lüscher-Mack theorem.

About the conformality of Möbius covariant subnets an even stronger
statement is proved: namely, that the stress-energy tensor can be
decomposed into two in which one part belongs to the subnet while the
other part to the coset of the subnet (Theorem 6.2.31 ).

After solving these problems some applications are discussed. They are
mainly the same ones that appear in the mentioned joint work, too.
Namely, with Corollary 6.3.11 it is shown how new examples (even
strongly additive ones!) of nets admitting no @xmath symmetry can be
constructed. Also, a model independent proof is given for the
commutation of vacuum preserving gauge symmetries with diffeomorphism
symmetries (Corollary 6.3.3 ).

Finally, as a further application of the developed technique of
evaluating the stress-energy tensor on nonsmooth functions, it is proved
that every locally normal representation of a conformal net is of
positive energy (Theorem 6.4.6 ). This result is part of the
single-author work [ We05 ] accepted by Commun. Math. Phys.

The thesis is also “equipped” with two appendices. The first one is
about the Möbius group and its representation theory (so in fact about
the representation theory of @xmath ). It is “all-inclusive”: everything
is demonstrated rather then just referred to some articles. The
statements presented can be all found in basic textbooks. Nevertheless,
the author found it convenient to collect together all these facts and
reprove them directly in the formalism of local nets in which they are
then applied.

The second appendix is about the “geometry” of piecewise Möbius
transformations. It contains only elementary (but not necessarily short
and trivial) geometrical calculations, with no von Neumann algebras or
even functional analysis involved. So, in some sense a good high-school
student should be able to reproduce all that can be found there.
Nevertheless, as these facts are used when the Möbius symmetry of local
net is extended to the piecewise Möbius group, it is included for
“correctness”.

The author would like to thank Roberto Longo for introducing him to the
area of chiral conformal nets, for proposing problems (in particular,
about the existence and uniqueness of diffeomorphism symmetry) and for
the numerous inspirating discussions made during the four years of his
PhD studies. He would also like to thank Sebastiano Carpi for the
fruitful research made together. He is moreover grateful to all members
of the PhD committee for the careful reading of (an earlier version of)
his thesis, for finding and correcting several unprecise arguments, and
for the useful comments given. In particular, he would like to thank
Karl-Henning Rehren for pointing out the similarity between one of his
arguments and that of the Lüscher-Mack theorem.

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries I: local nets

### 2.1 Axioms for Möbius covariant local nets

#### §1.

We shall not dwell much more on the physical background. An excellent
introduction and general arguments about why and how QFT is to be
described as a net of operator algebras can be found in [ Haag ] ,
although the book does not discuss the special case of chiral theories.

A chiral (massless) QFT, as it was shortly explained in the
introduction, is a one-dimensional part of a two-dimensional theory; it
“lives” on the worldline of a light signal. Under some conditions it can
be carried over to the one-point compactification of the line which is
modelled by the unit circle @xmath . These conditions, together with the
connection between the theory on the line and on the circle, will be
shortly discussed in Sect. 2.3 . Although the setting on the line is
closer to the physical motivation, from the mathematical point of view
it is more convenient to consider and axiomatize chiral (massless) QFT
on the circle.

#### §2.

Throughout the thesis @xmath will stand for the set of open, nonempty
and nondense intervals of the unit circle @xmath . (The word “arc” would
be more appropriate but by now “interval” is a convention. It also
unites the terminology of field theory on the circle and that one on the
line.)

A Möbius covariant local net of von Neumann algebras on @xmath is a map
@xmath which assigns to every @xmath a von Neumann algebra @xmath acting
on a fixed complex, Hilbert space @xmath (“the vacuum Hilbert space of
the theory”), together with a given strongly continuous representation
@xmath of @xmath , the group of Möbius transformations ¹ ¹ 1
diffeomorphisms of @xmath of the form @xmath with @xmath , @xmath . See
more about the group @xmath and its representation theory in appendix A
. of the unit circle @xmath satisfying for all @xmath and @xmath the
following properties.

-    Isotony. @xmath

-    Locality. @xmath

-    Covariance. @xmath

-    Positivity of the energy. The representation @xmath is of positive
    energy type: the conformal Hamiltonian @xmath , defined by @xmath
    where @xmath is the anticlockwise rotation by an angle of @xmath ,
    is positive. Thus in particular @xmath .

-    Existence and uniqueness of the vacuum. Up to phase there exists a
    unique @xmath called the “vacuum vector” which is invariant for
    @xmath . Equivalently: the eigenspace of @xmath associated to @xmath
    is one-dimensional.

-    Cyclicity of the vacuum. @xmath is cyclic for the von Neumann
    algebra @xmath .

#### §3.

Suppose we drop the last axiom. Then by restriction to the Hilbert space
@xmath we get a Möbius covariant net satisfying all of the above axioms.
Thus point (vi) says that the Hilbert space is not “unnecessarily” too
big. We shall now see that it follows that the vacuum vector is cyclic
even for a single local algebra @xmath . This is a well-known general
phenomenon not specific to chiral QFT, although in order to prove it,
usually one needs to require some kind of additivity for the net. In our
case, due to the Möbius symmetry, we need no additional assumptions.

All through the thesis @xmath stand for the one-parameter group of
rotations, translations and dilations in @xmath , respectively. Their
precise definition can be found in appendix A.1 but the reader may also
look at the short explanation in the beginning of the next section. The
only thing to mention here is that the so-called infinite point in this
thesis is chosen to be the point @xmath , which is probably not the most
conventional choice, but has certain advantages when it comes to
coverings of @xmath . Regarding the scalar product @xmath on the Hilbert
space @xmath the physicist convention is used according to which it is
linear in the second and antilinear in its first variable.

###### Theorem 2.1.1.

[ FröG , FreJ ] “Reeh-Schlieder property”. @xmath is cyclic and
separating for each local algebra @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

By locality it is enough to prove cyclicity. It is also clear that by
covariance if cyclicity holds for a certain interval then it holds for
all as @xmath acts transitively on the set of intervals @xmath . So we
may assume that @xmath contains the point @xmath .

Suppose @xmath is an orthogonal vector to the set @xmath . Let us choose
a smaller open nonempty interval @xmath which has @xmath as one of its
endpoint and whose closure is still contained in @xmath . For an
operator @xmath consider the function @xmath defined on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is well known about positive energy representations of @xmath that
not only the self-adjoint generator of the rotations, but also that of
the translations is positive (see Theorem A.2.1 in the appendix).
Therefore @xmath has a unique continuous extension @xmath to the domain
@xmath which is holomorphic on @xmath . On the other hand, by the
geometric position of @xmath , there exists an @xmath such that if
@xmath then @xmath and thus @xmath as by covariance

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence the function @xmath is everywhere zero.

Suppose @xmath is an arbitrary interval. Depending on the sign of its
parameter a translation either increases or decreases the interval
@xmath . By choosing @xmath right, the length of @xmath can be made
exactly equal to the length of @xmath . Thus there exist two parameters
@xmath such that @xmath . By this, and the previous considerations about
the function @xmath one can easily show that @xmath for every interval
@xmath . This means that the subspace @xmath is independent of @xmath .
Hence the orthogonal projection @xmath to this subspace belongs to
@xmath as @xmath for each @xmath . Therefore the range of @xmath is
invariant for @xmath and as it contains the vector @xmath , by the
cyclicity axiom it must be the full Hilbert space @xmath and so @xmath .
∎

#### §4.

We shall now see that the set @xmath is not only dense for each interval
@xmath but it even contains a core for @xmath where @xmath is the
conformal Hamiltonian and @xmath is any positive number. For @xmath this
was shown in the appendix of [ Ca99 ] . But to the knowledge of the
author, for @xmath this has not been explicitly stated in the
literature, although it can be proved by standard arguments that were
already used in the demonstration of the Reeh-Schlieder theorem.

###### Definition 2.1.2.

For an interval @xmath let @xmath be the star-algebra of smooth elements
(with respect to the rotations) in @xmath ; i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is almost evident that @xmath for every interval @xmath . In fact, we
may choose a sequence of nonnegative smooth functions on the real line
@xmath such that @xmath and their support contracts to the point @xmath
. Then for @xmath and @xmath we have that the norm-convergent integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath large enough belongs to @xmath . Then by the density of
@xmath and the fact that @xmath as @xmath we can conclude that @xmath is
a dense subspace of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.3.

Let @xmath be a positive number. Then for every interval @xmath the
subspace @xmath is a core for @xmath .

###### Proof.

We may choose a @xmath so that @xmath . We know that both @xmath and
@xmath is a dense subset of @xmath . Suppose @xmath is orthogonal to the
set @xmath and @xmath . Then just like in the proof of the
Reeh-Schlieder theorem, there exists an @xmath such that if @xmath then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is equal to zero. Then, similarly to how we proceeded in the proof of
the mentioned theorem, we conclude that @xmath is everywhere zero. Using
this one can easily show that for @xmath the vector @xmath must be
orthogonal to @xmath , where @xmath is the orthogonal projection to the
eigenspace of @xmath associated to the eigenvalue @xmath . Thus by the
arbitrariness of @xmath , the uniqueness of the vacuum and the density
of @xmath in @xmath we find that @xmath must be a multiple of the vacuum
vector.

So let @xmath be a vector in the domain of @xmath . Then @xmath is
orthogonal to the vacuum vector and thus by our previous arguments it
belongs to @xmath . Hence there exists a sequence @xmath such that
@xmath as @xmath and evidently the sequence can be chosen so that @xmath
, which, considering the spectral properties of @xmath implies that as
@xmath we have @xmath . Then by the arbitrariness of @xmath we get
exactly what we wanted. ∎

### 2.2 Connection with modular theory of von Neumann algebras

#### §1.

We have seen that given a Möbius covariant local net, the vacuum vector
@xmath is cyclic and separating and for the local algebra @xmath for
every @xmath . Thus one can consider the modular one-parameter group
@xmath and the modular conjugation @xmath associated to the von Neumann
algebra @xmath and the cyclic and separating vector @xmath . For a
reference on the modular theory of von Neumann algebras see e.g. the
book of Takesaki [ Tak ] .

One of the most important recognitions in the study of local covariant
nets was that these modular objects have geometrical meaning. In order
to describe their geometrical meaning, we need to fix some one-parameter
subgroups of @xmath . The one-parameter subgroup of rotations @xmath was
already introduced. The one-parameter groups of @xmath generated by the
vector fields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

will be denoted by @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The first one is
called the one-parameter group of translations while the second one is
the one-parameter group of dilations . Their name becomes clear if one
identifies the circle with the one-point compactification of the real
line in a certain way with the point @xmath being the infinite point,
see more on these in Sect. A.1 of the appendix. The dilations scale the
translations: @xmath .

The introduced dilations will be also called the “dilations associated
to the upper circle @xmath ” as up to parametrization this is the only
one-parameter subgroup of @xmath preserving @xmath . If @xmath then
there exists a @xmath such that @xmath . The one parameter group @xmath
does not depend on the choice of @xmath and up to parametrization it is
the only one-parameter subgroup preserving the interval @xmath . It is
therefore called the dilations associated to the interval @xmath . For a
more detailed introduction on these notions see again the mentioned
section of the appendix.

#### §2.

The following result is of key importance in finding out the
“geometrical” meaning of these modular objects.

###### Theorem 2.2.1.

[ Bor ] Let @xmath be a Hilbert space, @xmath a von Neumann algebra,
@xmath a cyclic and separating vector for @xmath and @xmath a strongly
continuous one parameter group such that

-   @xmath for every @xmath

-    the self-adjoint generator of @xmath is nonnegative

-   @xmath for every @xmath .

Then @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath , where @xmath is the modular
operator and @xmath is the modular conjugation associated to @xmath .

Let us try to apply the above theorem for local nets. A translation with
negative parameter shrinks the upper half circle. So given a Möbius
covariant local net @xmath with vacuum vector @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and of course @xmath for every @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath is a
positive energy representation of @xmath , it follows that the
self-adjoint generator of the translations @xmath is positive (see Prop.
A.2.1 ). So by the above theorem the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath
is exactly the same as that of @xmath with the parameter of dilation
@xmath .

That the modular one-parameter group ‘‘scales’’ a certain one-parameter
subgroup of the geometrical symmetry group, is a general feature, not
specific to low dimensional QFT. What is nice about Möbius covariant
local nets, that in their case without any further assumption ² ² 2 On
the @xmath -dimensional Minkowski-spacetime, assuming that the local
nets are generated by Wightmann-fields, Bisognano and Wichmann [ BiWi ]
proved the geometrical nature of the modular objects associated to
wedges. one can prove that @xmath does not only scale the translations
like @xmath : the two operators actually coincide. Moreover, the modular
conjugation has a geometrical meaning, too. To describe this latter one,
for an @xmath we shall introduce the (geometrical) conjugation
associated to @xmath . First we define @xmath to be the conjugation
@xmath , and then set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . It is easy to check that the definition is “good”, see
the similar argument at Def. A.1.5 in the appendix. With these
conventions the following result can be established.

###### Theorem 2.2.2.

[ BGL , FröG ] “Bisognano-Wichmann property” Let @xmath be a Möbius
covariant local net with vacuum vector @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, for every @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are several consequences; some are immediate and some are less
immediate. Most of them were already stated in the mentioned aricles (so
where there is no reference given, one should look for [ BGL , FröG ] ).
To begin with: as @xmath is generated by the set of dilations
(associated to different intervals), it follows that the representation
@xmath is completely determined by the local algebras and the vacuum
vector (via modular structure).

By modular theory the modular conjugation of an algebra takes the
algebra into its commutant. So @xmath and hence by the above theorem we
find ³ ³ 3 Actually the real order of demonstration is rather vice
versa: first one proves Haag-duality by the theorem of Takesaki that is
later mentioned on this page, and then deduces the geometrical action of
the modular conjugation. that a Möbius covariant local net always
satisfies the property called Haag-duality :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for every @xmath where the following notation is used (and will be used
all through this thesis):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

(Note that while the complement of @xmath is not, @xmath is again an
element of @xmath ).

If a vector is globally invariant under the one-parameter group @xmath
then it is actually invariant under @xmath for every @xmath (see [ GL96
] ) and hence by the uniqueness of the vacuum it is a multiple of the
vacuum vector. So by the Bisognano-Wichmann property , the modular group
of @xmath with respect to @xmath , is ergodic, showing that @xmath is a
type @xmath factor. This property is called the factoriality of the
local algebras.

Actually, in the definition used earlier in the literature, a Möbius
covariant local net was not required to satisfy all axioms listed in
this thesis. The property “missing” was the uniqueness of the vacuum.

In [ GL96 ] it is proved that the vacuum is unique if and only if the
local algebras of the net are factors and that it is further equivalent
with the irreducibility of the net, that is, with the property that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

To distinguish between the two different set of axioms, when uniqueness
is not required, we shall talk about a “non necessarily irreducible”
Möbius local net.

Let us see more implications of the Bisognano-Wichmann property . By the
theorem of Takesaki concerning modular invariant subalgebras and
expectations (see e.g. [ Tak , Vol. II, Theorem 4.2] ), if @xmath is an
inclusion of von Neumann algebras, @xmath is a cyclic and separating
vector for @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking this into account, the Bisognano-Wichmann property turns out [ Jö
] to also imply the continuity of the local algebras of a Möbius
covariant local net. Indeed, suppose @xmath is a growing sequence of
intervals with @xmath . Then by isotony

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and by the Reeh-Schlieder property the vacuum vector @xmath is cyclic
and separating for both @xmath and @xmath . But it is also clear that by
the Bisognano-Wichmann property @xmath is globally invariant under the
adjoint action of @xmath and so actually @xmath . Likewise, if @xmath is
a decreasing sequence of intervals with @xmath being the interior of
@xmath then it follows that @xmath . (This second form of the continuity
we can get easily from the first form by considering Haag-duality , for
example.)

Another important structural property which can be shown by similar
arguments is the additivity of the net. This means that if @xmath is a
collection of intervals with @xmath completely covering an interval
@xmath then @xmath . We shall not overview the exact proof, but it is
based on similar ideas that were used above for showing the continuity
of the net.

#### §3.

So far we have discussed properties that automatically follow. In
relation to the last of them (additivity), we shall now introduce some
additional properties that are known to hold in many, but not all
models.

By additivity (and isotony), if @xmath are such that @xmath then @xmath
. As it was mentioned, the local algebras are continuous, one may wonder
whether @xmath holds even if @xmath does not cover @xmath but the closer
@xmath does. (So @xmath and @xmath are the connected components obtained
by removing a certain point from @xmath .) In many (but not all)
physically interesting models this stronger version of the additivity
property, called strong additivity , indeed holds. However, there are
counterexamples.

For an @xmath the net @xmath is said to be n-regular , if whenever we
remove @xmath points from the circle the algebras associated to the
remaining intervals generate the whole of @xmath . By isotony @xmath
-regularity is a stronger property then @xmath -regularity if @xmath ,
and by Haag-duality (and factoriality ) every Möbius covariant local net
is at least @xmath -regular. Strong additivity is of course stronger
than @xmath -regularity for any @xmath . Finally, if a net is @xmath
-regular for every @xmath , then we shall just simply call it regular .

Later on we shall discuss examples of Möbius covariant local nets
showing the existence of strongly additive nets, as well as nets that
are not strongly additive, @xmath -regular but not @xmath -regular nets,
and finally, a net which is not even @xmath -regular. So all these
properties are indeed “additional”.

#### §4.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net and suppose @xmath are two
intervals with a common endpoint and with @xmath . Depending on which
“side” they have a common endpoint, the dilations associated to @xmath
for positive (or negative) parameters shrink the interval @xmath and so
by the Bisognano-Wichmann property the modular group associated to
@xmath and @xmath , for positive (negative) parameters maps @xmath into
a smaller algebra. So for example by setting @xmath and @xmath where the
right upper half-circle @xmath , we have that @xmath and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This kind of “relative position” of the algebras @xmath , @xmath and the
vector @xmath , was given a special name.

###### Definition 2.2.3.

Let @xmath an inclusion of von Neumann algebras on a Hilbert space
@xmath with a common cyclic and separating vector @xmath . Then @xmath
is called a “ @xmath ” (“ @xmath ”) half-sided modular inclusion (in
abbreviation: a @xmath hsm inclusion) if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If further @xmath is cyclic even for @xmath then @xmath is called a
standard @xmath hsm inclusion.

Note that by the mentioned theorem of Takesaki if @xmath for all @xmath
then actually @xmath . So in some sense this is the most natural,
nontrivial situation the inclusion @xmath can have regarding the modular
group associated to @xmath and the common and cyclic and separating
vector @xmath . It turns out that in this case the modular group of the
smaller algebra has a certain commutation relation with the modular
group of the bigger one.

###### Theorem 2.2.4.

[ Wie93 , AZs ] Let @xmath be a @xmath hsm. Then, there is a unique
@xmath a strongly continuous unitary representation of the @xmath
-dimensional Lie group of transformations of @xmath of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that omitting the vector @xmath in the indices, for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, for this representation the self-adjoint generator @xmath of
@xmath is positive: @xmath , and @xmath .

The reason for citing two articles is the following. The original
argument of Wiesbrock contained an error, which was then noticed and
corrected by Araki and Zsidó.

An inclusion of von Neumann algebras @xmath is said to be normal if
@xmath where @xmath is the relative commutant. The inclusion is said to
be conormal if @xmath is generated by @xmath and @xmath (which is
equivalent with the normality of @xmath ).

Using the above theorem, Wiesbrock proved [ Wie94 ] that given a @xmath
hsm conormal inclusion @xmath one can construct a unique non-necessarily
irreducible, strongly additive Möbius covariant local net @xmath with
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath being the vacuum vector.

In [ GLW ] it is proved that a standard hsm inclusion @xmath is always
normal and conormal and that the center of @xmath and @xmath coincides.
So putting everything together, we have the following scenario.

-   Given a Möbius covariant local net @xmath with vacuum vector @xmath
    , the triple @xmath is a @xmath hsm inclusion of factors.

-   Given a @xmath hsm inclusion of von Neumann factors @xmath one can
    construct a unique strongly additive Möbius covariant local net with
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath being the vacuum vector.

Moreover, it is clear, that with the isomorphism defined in the natural
way, the above two constructions give a one-to-one correspondence
between isomorphism classes of strongly additive Möbius covariant local
nets and isomorphism classes of @xmath hsm inclusions of von Neumann
factors.

What about the Möbius covariant local nets that are not necessarily
strongly additive: how can they be described by modular inclusions? In [
GLW ] the notion of a @xmath hsm factorization is introduced. It is a
quadruple @xmath where @xmath are pairwise commuting von Neumann
algebras on a common Hilbert space and @xmath is a common cyclic and
separating vector such that @xmath is a @xmath hsm inclusion for each
@xmath .

Suppose we are given a Möbius covariant local net @xmath with vacuum
vector @xmath . Fix three (different) points on the circle and let
@xmath be the intervals obtained by the removal of these three points,
with the numbering corresponding to the clockwise order. Then by the
Bisognano-Wichmann property , @xmath is a @xmath hsm factorization.
Further, by the factoriality , all three von Neumann algebras involved
are factors.

So given a Möbius covariant local net we can construct such structures.
However, the real point is that by [ GLW , Theorem 1.2] , given a @xmath
hsm factorization @xmath with @xmath being factors, and @xmath three
intervals as before, there exists a unique Möbius covariant local net
@xmath with @xmath , and @xmath being the vacuum vector. So this is how
a general, not necessarily strongly additive, Möbius covariant local net
can be described by modular data.

### 2.3 Further structural properties and representation theory

#### §1.

So far everything was considered on the circle, although by the physical
motivation (“the restriction of a theory to the worldline of a light
signal”) one should work with nets on the real line. Also, by
restriction, it is only translation-dilation covariance, and not Möbius
covariance that we directly receive. (The translation-dilation group is
the group of transformations of @xmath of the form @xmath with @xmath .)

Denote by @xmath the set of nonempty, nondense open intervals of @xmath
. A map @xmath assigning to each @xmath a von Neumann algebra @xmath
acting on a fixed, complex Hilbert space, is called a local net of von
Neumann algebras on the real line, if it satisfies the usual isotony and
locality requirement. We shall further say that given a local net @xmath
on @xmath and a strongly continuous unitary representation @xmath of the
translation-dilation group (acting on the Hilbert space of @xmath ), the
pair @xmath is a translation-dilation covariant net on @xmath if the
following properties hold:

-   ( covariance ) @xmath for every element @xmath of the
    translation-dilation group and @xmath ,

-   ( existence and uniqueness of vacuum ) there exists an up to phase
    unique unit vector (called: the vacuum vector), which is invariant
    for @xmath ,

-   ( cyclicity of the vacuum ) the vacuum vector is cyclic for the von
    Neumann algebra @xmath .

Identifying @xmath with @xmath through the Cayley-transformation of Eq.
( A.7 ), the translations of @xmath become the one-parameter group
@xmath and the dilations the one-parameter group @xmath (which is
actually the explanation of the name of these one-parameter groups).
Moreover, as it was already mentioned (see [ GL96 ] ), if a vector is
globally invariant under the one-parameter group @xmath then it is
actually invariant under @xmath for every @xmath .

From what was said it is clear that given a Möbius covariant local net
@xmath , the map @xmath where the identification is defined by this
Cayley transformation, is a local net on @xmath , and that after
defining @xmath by a similar restriction, we have that @xmath (called
the “restriction onto @xmath ”) is a translation-dilation covariant
local net on @xmath . Of course @xmath can be completely restored from
its restriction to @xmath , since @xmath is completely determined by the
local algebras of @xmath and the vacuum vector via modular theory (for
the geometrical part of this statement consider for example Lemma A.1.6
.)

###### Theorem 2.3.1.

[ GLW , Theorem 1.4] A translation dilation covariant local net @xmath
is the restriction of a Möbius covariant local net (in which case it is
the restriction of a unique Möbius covariant local net) if and only if
it satisfies

-    the Reeh-Schlieder property: the vacuum vector is cyclic and
    separating for each local algebra @xmath ,

-    and the Bisognano-Wichmann property for @xmath : omitting the
    vacuum vector in the index, @xmath for every @xmath .

A translation-dilation covariant local net obtained by some kind of
restriction of a QFT generated by Wightmann-fields should of course
satisfy additivity (this is clear at the level of test functions on
which the fields are evaluated) and thus also the Reeh-Schlieder
property , but by [ BiWi ] it should also satisfy the Bisognano-Wichmann
property for half-lines. Thus the mentioned theorem essentially confirms
that it is indeed physically meaningful to consider chiral nets as
Möbius covariant local nets on the circle instead of
translation-dilation covariant local nets on the real line .

#### §2.

A (Möbius covariant) subnet of the Möbius covariant net @xmath is a map
@xmath assigning a von Neumann algebras acting on the Hilbert space of
@xmath to each @xmath such that for all @xmath and @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath .

We shall use the simple notation @xmath for subnets.

A subnet @xmath which is really smaller then @xmath is not a Möbius
covariant net in the precise sense of the definition because the vacuum
will not be cyclic for @xmath . However, this inconvenience can be
overcome by restriction to the so-called “vacuum Hilbert space of @xmath
”; that is to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the vacuum vector.

It is evident that @xmath is invariant for @xmath . The map @xmath
together with the restriction of @xmath onto @xmath is a Möbius
covariant net. Rather direct consequences of the definition and of the
properties of Möbius covariant nets (such as for example the
Reeh-Schlieder and Haag property ) are:

-   for any @xmath the restriction map from @xmath to @xmath is an
    isomorphism between von Neumann algebras,

-   the map @xmath where @xmath is the orthogonal projection onto @xmath
    and @xmath for a fixed @xmath defines a faithful normal conditional
    expectation from @xmath to @xmath , after identifying @xmath with
    @xmath using point (i),

-   @xmath for all @xmath .

#### §3.

A locally normal representation @xmath (or for shortness, just simply
representation) of a Möbius covariant local net @xmath consists of a
Hilbert space @xmath and a normal representation @xmath of the von
Neumann algebra @xmath on @xmath for each @xmath such that the
collection of representations @xmath is consistent with isotony :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows easily from the axioms and the known properties of local nets
listed in the last section that if @xmath then @xmath , if @xmath is a
covering of @xmath then @xmath , if @xmath is a covering of @xmath then
@xmath and finally, that for each @xmath the representation @xmath is
faithful. The representation @xmath is called irreducible , if @xmath .
Such an irreducible representation is sometimes also called a charged
sector of @xmath .

In this section, although it was not pointed out, we have already meat
with representations of local nets. Suppose @xmath is Möbius covariant
local net and @xmath is a subnet. As it was explained, the restriction
of @xmath onto its vacuum Hilbert space @xmath , is a Möbius covariant
local net. The restriction map from @xmath to @xmath is an isomorphism,
so in particular also its inverse, which we shall here denote by @xmath
, is an isomorphism. It is easy to see then that the collection @xmath
is a locally normal representation of the Möbius covariant local net
obtained by the restriction of the subnet @xmath onto its vacuum Hilbert
space @xmath .

A locally normal representation @xmath of @xmath on the Hilbert space
@xmath is said to be covariant , if there exists a strongly continuous
unitary representation @xmath of @xmath (i.e. the universal covering of
@xmath ) acting on @xmath such that for every @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath being the canonical covering map. In other
words, @xmath is covariant if the Möbius symmetry of the net is
implementable in the representation @xmath . A covariant representation
is said to be of positive energy , if the implementation of the Möbius
symmetry in the representation @xmath can be chosen to be a positive
energy representation of @xmath .

In the usual way, one can define for locally normal representations,
too, what is meant by equivalence, invariant subspace and direct sum .
It was a fundamental recognition of Doplicher, Haag and Roberts [ DHR1 ,
DHR2 ] (made in the @xmath -dimensional setting), that furthermore, a
certain product operation can be introduced, too.

We shall not enter into details as it will be not needed for the results
of this thesis. We shall only overview some of the most relevant points
in the setting of Möbius covariant nets.

Suppose @xmath is a locally normal representation of @xmath and @xmath
is an element of @xmath . Then, since @xmath is a type @xmath factor,
there must exists a unitary @xmath implementing @xmath .

By Haag-duality it is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an endomorphism of @xmath . Of course it depends on the choice of
@xmath , but a change in the implementing operator “modifies” this
endomorphism by an inner automorphism only.

For a local net @xmath one can introduce in a canonical way its
universal algebra @xmath (see e.g. [ Fre90 ] for precise definitions);
it is a @xmath algebra with given injective embeddings @xmath such that
every representation of @xmath factors through a representation of
@xmath in a unique way. (It is similar to the regular representation of
groups.)

The endomorphism defined previously can be interpreted as a localized
endomorphism of @xmath (with @xmath being the interval of localization);
that is, an endomorphism such that if @xmath then @xmath while if @xmath
then @xmath .

Then one can identify an equivalence class of representations with a
certain equivalence class of localized endomorphisms (with the
equivalence defined by the inner automorphisms). In this way, since
endomorphisms can be composed, we get a new operation on (the
equivalence classes) of representations. Moreover, using these localized
endomorphisms, for each representation something which is called “a
statistical operator” can be defined. In turn, this statistical operator
allows us to define the so-called statistical phase and the statistical
dimension of a representation.

As it was already said, these concepts (although they are fundamental)
will be not explained in this overview. Apart from the mentioned
original research articles, an excellent introduction to the theory of
charged sectors (in the @xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime) can be
found in [ Haag ] . There it is also explained, in what (physical) sense
such representations describe charges, and why the statistical phase is
indeed related to the “statistics” of particles.

The only point that is to be stressed here, is the following. If the
dimension of the spacetime is bigger or equal to @xmath , then — through
the statistical operator — a representation of a net always gives rise
to a representation of the permutation group @xmath for every @xmath .
This leads to the conclusion that (if the statistics is finite, then)
the statistical phase can be either @xmath or @xmath (corresponding to
particles following Bose- , and particles following Fermi-statistics ),
while the statistical dimension must be a positive integer.

In @xmath -dimensions and in the case of chiral nets, the situation is
completely different. Due to simple geometrical reasons, instead of the
permutation group, one has representations of the braid group @xmath for
every @xmath . These representations do not necessarily factor through a
representation of the permutation group. As a result, the statistical
phase is not necessarily @xmath but in general a unit complex number,
and neither the statistical dimension has to be an integer. So, in low
dimensions, apart from the usual bosons and fermions, we have more
exotical particles, too.

#### §4.

If @xmath is a covariant representation of the Möbius covariant local
net @xmath , then the Jones (minimal) index ⁴ ⁴ 4 For a general
reference on index theory see e.g. the book [ Tak ] . For the special
case of type III algebras, see also the lectures notes [ Kos ] of
Kosaki. of the inclusion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is independent of the interval @xmath . (In the vacuum sector, that is,
with @xmath being the identical representation, by Haag-duality this
inclusion is actually an equality. So this index measures “how much
Haag-duality is broken”.) It was a fundamental recognition that this
index is related to the statistical dimension @xmath of the
representation @xmath . By the works [ Lon98 , GL96 ] , if @xmath is of
positive energy, then @xmath is finite if and only if the mentioned
Jones index is finite and in this case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Actually, as a consequence of [ GL96 , Prop. 2.14] and [ BCL , Corollary
4.4] , the condition on the positivity of energy in the representation
@xmath can be dropped. More precisely, if @xmath is a covariant
representation with either finite index or finite statistics, then both
are finite, @xmath is automatically of positive energy and the above
relation between index and statistics holds. Moreover, in this case, by
[ GL96 , Prop. 2.2] the representation @xmath , implementing the Möbius
symmetry in the representation @xmath , is unique. Hence if @xmath is
further irreducible, then @xmath is a multiple of the identity. By the
Conformal Spin and Statistics Theorem [ GL96 , Theorem 3.13] , this
multiple is exactly the statistical phase of the sector.

#### §5.

As we shall later see, there are local nets possessing positive energy
sectors with infinite index/statistics, as well as nets with extremely
well-behaved representation theory: having only a finite number of
inequivalent sectors, each with finite index. As it was rather indicated
then explained, sectors can be composed resulting new representations.
It was not mentioned, but for a covariant sector @xmath of finite
statistical dimension one can also introduce its conjugate sector @xmath
, which is a covariant sector defined up to equivalence. The conjugate
of the conjugate is equivalent with the original sector and @xmath .
Moreover, the product of two finite dimensional covariant sectors is
finite dimensional, and can be decomposed into a finite sum of finite
dimensional covariant sectors, see [ GL96 ] .

So suppose our net is “well-enough” behaved: it has a finite number of
(equivalence classes of) covariant sectors, each of which is of finite
statistical dimension. Let @xmath be the equivalence classes of the
covariant sectors of such a net with @xmath being the vacuum
representation. For a @xmath define @xmath by @xmath . Then the
hyper-matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

defined by the multiplicities appearing in the decomposition of the
products, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

has only nonnegative integers in its entries, and satisfies certain
identities. Some of these are just direct consequences of the
commutativity and associativity of the product and some are consequences
of the definition of statistical dimension and conjugate sector. More
precisely, with @xmath standing for the statistical dimension of @xmath
, we have that (see e.g. [ FröG , Lemma 4.46] ) for all @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (2.22)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The hyper-matrix @xmath contains all informations about the category of
finite dimensional covariant representations of the net. It completely
determines the rules governing the algebraic structure of such
representations. These rules are also called the “fusion rules”. Note
that the third listed property is due to the fact that the statistical
dimension is indeed a kind of dimension: for direct sums it gets summed
up, for products it is to be multiplied together. This property
completely determines the dimensions of the sectors through the fusion
rules.

How do we know that a net is “well-enough” behaved? In the work [ KLM ]
, three properties were pinpointed. One is strong additivity, which was
already introduced in the last section. The second one is the so-called
split property which we shall introduce now.

Two disjoint intervals @xmath are said to be distant , if their distance
is positive; i.e. if @xmath . The net @xmath is said to be split if the
map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

extends to an isomorphism between the von Neumann algebra @xmath and the
von Neumann algebra @xmath , for every pair of distant intervals @xmath
. This property is known to hold if the @xmath for all @xmath , where
@xmath is the conformal Hamiltonian, cf. [ BD’AL , D’ALR ] .

Finally, consider the so-called @xmath -interval inclusion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the two distant intervals obtained by the removal of
the closure of the union of the two distant intervals @xmath . If the
net is strongly additive and split, and moreover the Jones index of this
inclusion is finite for a certain pair of distant intervals @xmath ,
then by [ KLM , Prop. 5] it is finite for all distant pairs and its
value is independent from the choice of the distant intervals. Thus it
is an invariant of the net @xmath ; it is usually called the “mu index
of the net” and denoted by @xmath . (Note that the independence from the
choice of the intervals does not follow from Möbius covariance; although
the Möbius group acts transitively on the set of intervals, it does not
act transitively on the set of pairs of distant intervals.)

A net is said to be completely rational , if it is strongly additive,
split, and has a finite @xmath -index. The main point of the mentioned
work [ KLM ] where complete rationality is introduced, is that under
this condition one can prove that the @xmath -interval inclusion is
isomorphic to the so-called Longo-Rehren inclusion , cf. [ LR ] .
Through this identification then it is shown that the net has finitely
many (equivalence classes) of sectors, each with finite index and that
in fact, using the previous notations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

(So actually there is even a bound on the number of inequivalent sectors
and their dimensions.) Moreover, in this case every representation of
the net is a direct sum of irreducible representations, the conjugate
sector exists for every covariant sector as it is automatically of
finite dimension, and so we have all previously described structures
regarding the fusion rules.

### 2.4 A first example: the @xmath current model and its derivatives

#### §1.

Given a Hilbert space @xmath the bosonic Fock-space is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (with the embedding being the natural one coming from the
above direct sum formula) is called the vacuum vector. The dense set of
vectors given by the above direct sum without taking closure is called
the finite particle space .

The point is of course not the construction of a new Hilbert space, but
that of a certain system of operators. Namely, in this Hilbert space one
can canonically construct a set of self-adjoint operators @xmath acting
on @xmath (see e.g. [ BR II , Sect. 5.2] ) satisfying the following
relations:

-   the finite particle space is a common invariant core for @xmath ,

-   on this core @xmath is real-linear and @xmath

-   the Weyl-operators @xmath @xmath satisfy the relation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.27)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   if @xmath is dense then the set @xmath is irreducible in the
    Fock-space; moreover, polynomials of @xmath applied to @xmath give a
    dense set in @xmath

-   if @xmath is a unitary operator acting on @xmath then by setting

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.28)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for the unitary acting on @xmath we have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

Let us consider now the positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath
with lowest weight equal to @xmath and its Hilbert space @xmath with
scalar product @xmath (see Sect. A.2 of the appendix), and let us apply
the above construction to get a set of self-adjoint operators @xmath and
a vacuum vector which we shall just simple denote by @xmath .

For an @xmath with Fourier coefficients @xmath @xmath , set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this thesis the Hilbert space @xmath is identified with @xmath (see
again the mentioned section of the appendix for details), so we shall
think of @xmath as an element of @xmath . Through this identification we
find the following relation of the above introduced element and the
representation @xmath : for every @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, by an easy calculation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

So if we set @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the current @xmath , then by Eq. ( 2.32 ) and by the already
mentioned Weyl-relations we see that @xmath satisfies locality (and
obviously also isotony). Moreover, by Eq. ( 2.29 ), for all @xmath and
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so the action of @xmath on @xmath is covariant. It is easy to see
that @xmath is indeed a vacuum vector for @xmath and that the uniqueness
of the vacuum is also satisfied. (The tensor products do not contain the
trivial representation since the lowest eigenvalue of the self-adjoint
generator of the rotations is bigger then @xmath in them.) Thus we have
a Möbius covariant local net: the so-called @xmath current model.

For a complex function @xmath we define @xmath to be the closure of
@xmath . Then the Fourier modes of the current can be introduced as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for the dense subspace of finite energy vectors of
@xmath ; i.e. the algebraic span of the eigenvectors of @xmath , where
@xmath is the self-adjoint generator of rotations in @xmath . (The
finite energy space @xmath is contained in the finite particle space.)
By Eq. ( 2.34 ) one finds that @xmath as in fact @xmath . Thus @xmath
“decreases the energy by @xmath ”; in particular, by the spectral
properties of @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, as the constant @xmath function @xmath , we have that @xmath so
also @xmath . Moreover, by the previously listed properties, on @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath , and by the self-adjointness of @xmath for a real
function @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### §2.

Let us discuss now some properties of the @xmath current model. First of
all, let us mention that by a simple argument [ BS ] , using essentially
just the Weyl-relations, shows that this net is strongly additive.

Let us see now the spectral properties of @xmath . From what was so far
said it is more or less evident that @xmath and the eigenspace
associated to @xmath is spanned by the vectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Actually, by the commutation relation of the Fourier modes of the
current and the fact that for positive @xmath the operator @xmath
annihilates @xmath , one can even see that the span of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

still gives the whole eigenspae. So the dimension of @xmath is less than
equal — actually it turns out that exactly equal — to the number of
partitions @xmath of @xmath . As it is well known, if @xmath then @xmath
is convergent and in fact equal to @xmath . Hence @xmath has a finite
trace for every @xmath . This shows that the @xmath current model is
also split.

#### §3.

For a fixed @xmath , the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

respects the Weyl-relations. We know that if @xmath is in particular an
element of @xmath , then this map is implementable. Actually, using the
theory of representations of the Weyl-algebra, it is possible to prove
that this map is implementable for every orientation preserving
diffeomorphism , see e.g. [ PrSe , Theorem 9.3.1] . The implementing
operator @xmath , up to phase, is unique, since the currents form an
irreducible set. So we find that in the projective sense @xmath . To put
it in another way, the representation of @xmath , given with the @xmath
model, can be extended to be a projective representation of @xmath
acting on the net in a covariant manner. Actually, one can prove that
the extension is strongly continuous with respect to the natural @xmath
topology of the set of diffeomorphisms. Moreover, if @xmath for a
certain interval @xmath , and @xmath , then by the above equation @xmath
commutes with @xmath and hence by Haag-duality @xmath . We say that the
representation of @xmath is compatible with the local structure of the
net.

What we have thus seen is that the @xmath current model is
diffeomorphism covariant. In the next chapter precise definitions will
be given and diffeomorphism covariance will be discussed at length.

Let us move on to representation theory. For a fixed @xmath the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

respects the Weyl-relations. One may wonder whether it is implementable.
If @xmath the answer is no; instead the map gives rise to a locally
normal, irreducible representation of the @xmath current model. Actually
it turns out that if @xmath then these representations are inequivalent
and that all irreducible representations are of this type, see [ BMT1 ,
BMT2 ] . So in particular the @xmath -index of the @xmath current model
is infinite.

#### §4.

With the Cayley transformation of Eq. ( A.7 ) one may identify @xmath
with the real line @xmath . Through this identification we may define
the current on the real line; in particular for an @xmath the
self-adjoint operator @xmath . The net defined by the formula (in which
“ @xmath ” stands for the @xmath derivative)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with a corresponding restriction of @xmath , is easily shown to
be a translation-dilation covariant net on the real line for which
additivity holds. Moreover, simple argument shows that for every @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

(For example, consider that all these algebras are invariant under
dilations centered at @xmath , and that such a dilation has a modular
origin with respect to @xmath .) This, by what whas said before (and in
particular by what was explained in Sect. 2.3 about the relation between
Möbius covariant nets and nets on the real line), shows that @xmath ,
together with a corresponding restriction of @xmath , extends to a
unique Möbius covariant local net @xmath , which is called the @xmath
derivative of the current .

These models are in some sense “pathological”, their real significance
is exactly that they provide counter-examples to many properties that
otherwise one could (wrongly) believe to be general features of Möbius
covariant local nets. In [ GLW ] it was proved, that @xmath is @xmath -
but not @xmath -regular, and for @xmath , @xmath is not even @xmath
-regular. In the mentioned article it was also proved, that these models
admit non-covariant sectors. Another interesting thing: it turned out [
Kö03 , GLW ] that these models have no diffeomorphism symmetry (this
will be explained with somewhat more details after diffeomorphism
covariance will be introduced in the next chapter.)

### 2.5 More on examples

#### §1.

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional connected Lie group with Lie algebra
@xmath . The loop group @xmath is defined to be @xmath , with the group
operation being the pointwise multiplication. It is an infinite
dimensional Lie group with Lie algebra identified with @xmath , where
the commutator is the pointwise commutator. A reference book on loop
groups and on their representation theory is [ PrSe ] .

The Lie algebra of @xmath can be naturally identified with @xmath and so
we may think of a real-valued smooth function @xmath on the circle, as
an element of the Lie algebra of the loop group @xmath . Thus, in case
of the @xmath current model, by the Weyl-relations, the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines a projective unitary representation of the connected part of the
loop group @xmath . This representation is strongly continuous, and in
this representation, the action of @xmath on the loop group,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the universal covering, is implementable by a unique,
inner, positive energy representation. (“Inner” = the representing
operators belong to the von Neumann algebra generated by the
representation of the loop group.) Thus we say that this representation
is a positive energy representation of @xmath .

One way of generalizing the @xmath current model is to replace @xmath by
other, non-necessarily commutative Lie groups. Such generalization is
usually called a loop group model . The most important ingredients of
the construction are the positive energy representations of the given
loop group. The previous example served exactly to give a sense of what
is such a representation; in this overview there will be no formal
definitions regarding positive energy representations. (For the detailed
treatment one should look for the mentioned book.)

The most studied case is that of @xmath with @xmath being an integer
bigger or equal to @xmath . Let us see a little bit more in detail, how
does the construction go in this case.

There are two important real invariants, that, given a positive energy
irreducible representation of @xmath one can introduce. One of them is
the lowest value of the energy, which, by definition, is a nonnegative
number. The other one is the so-called level . It is an invariant of the
representation, which, in some sense, measures, “how much” the
representation is not true (but projective). To explain how it appears,
consider the scalar product @xmath on @xmath defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and choose a base @xmath orthonormed with respect to the above scalar
product.

The functions @xmath @xmath form a (non-algebraic) base in the
complexification of the Lie algebra of @xmath . Via infinitesimal
generators, a projective representation of @xmath gives rise to a
representation of a central extension of @xmath . Thus, given a
projective representation, via infinitesimal generators, one can
introduce the Fourier modes of the currents ; the operators @xmath
@xmath corresponding to the above introduced base. (Although we deal
with a projective representation, and so the generators are only defined
up to additive constants, in this case there is a certain canonical way
to fix these additive constants. We shall not discuss this more in
detail. Also, one has to address the question of domains, etc. which
again, we shall not do in this short overview.) Then by the unitariness
of the representation, the Fourier modes of the (self-adjoint)
generators satisfy the hermicity condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the commutator @xmath , up to an additive constant, must be equal to
@xmath , where the structure constants @xmath of @xmath corresponding to
our base, are defined by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Actually, it turns out that there must exists a positive integer @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is not hard to see that this integer is independent from the chosen
orthonormed base @xmath , and thus it is an invariant of the
representation. This is the so-called level of the representation.

For a function @xmath with Fourier coefficients @xmath and @xmath , the
formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

is well defined (i.e. the sum converges and gives a closable operator)
and gives a self-adjoint operator. We may think of @xmath as an operator
valued functionals. It is usually called a current .

It is known, that for each @xmath there exists a unique positive energy
irreducible representation of @xmath with the level equal to @xmath and
lowest energy equal to zero. In this representation the eigenspace
corresponding to the zero energy is one-dimensional, and so up to phase
it contains a unique unit vector @xmath . Moreover, the net of algebras
@xmath @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with the zero energy vector @xmath , define a Möbius covariant
local net, which is actually also diffeomorphism covariant. It is called
the @xmath model at level @xmath . This net is strongly additive and
split; essentially for the same arguments, that were outlined for the
case of the @xmath current model. There is however, a significant
difference between these models and the @xmath current model. These nets
are completely rational . In fact, their @xmath index and representation
theory, so in particular, the fusion algebra, is known for all values of
@xmath and @xmath , see [ Wass , Xu00 ] .

#### §2.

There are some “abstract” methods, with which, starting from some
example, we can generate more examples. First of all, given two Möbius
covariant local nets, one can define, in an obvious way, their tensor
product, which is again a Möbius covariant local net. Actually, this
construction can be even generalized to infinite sequences of Möbius
covariant local nets.

Let @xmath , @xmath be a sequence of Möbius covariant local nets with
@xmath , @xmath being the corresponding sequence of vacuum vectors.
Consider the infinite tensor product Hilbert space defined with respect
to the infinite sequence of vacuum vectors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is fairly easy to show, that on this Hilbert space, the net defined
by the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with the representation @xmath is a Möbius covariant local net.
(Note that the above infinite tensor product representation indeed
exists as @xmath leaves invariant @xmath for every @xmath .)

It is not too hard to see that the tensor producty of a finite number of
diffeomorphism covariant and/or completely rational nets is again a
diffeomorphism covariant and/or completely rational net. For example, if
@xmath is the @xmath -index of @xmath @xmath , then one can show, that
the @xmath -index of the correponding tensor product net is simply
@xmath . This formula already indicates, that some properties may not
“survive” the infinite tensor product construction; in fact in this
thesis it will be shown that the infinite tensor product of a sequence
of nontrivial nets is never diffeomorphism covariant. Some properties of
course survive; for example the tensor product of a sequence of strongly
additive (resp. @xmath -regular) nets is easily shown to be strongly
additive (resp. @xmath -regular).

Another abstract construction was already described previously: given a
Möbius covariant subnet @xmath , by restriction to the vacuum Hilbert
space of @xmath , we get a Möbius covariant local net. However, there is
also a way, with which, starting from a subnet, we can get a new subnet
(and thus a new example). Consider the net of algebras defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, as usual, @xmath . It is not hard to see, that it is again a
Möbius covariant subnet. It is called the coset of the subnet @xmath .

In the previous point the @xmath models were introduced. If @xmath ,
then we have a natural embedding @xmath , which, in turn, gives the
natural embedding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the sense of Möbius covariant subnets. The coset of this, and other
similar, naturally arising embeddings in loop group models, are known to
provide interesting new examples for Möbius covariant local nets.

Finally, we shall discuss one more abstract construction. Suppose @xmath
is a Möbius covariant local net which is not strongly additive. Consider
its real restriction, @xmath , and set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is not hard to see, that @xmath is still a translation-dilation
covariant local net on the line, which fulfills the conditions explained
in Sect. 2.3 , ensuring the existence of a unique extension to a Möbius
covariant local net. (In fact, note that @xmath for any half-interval
@xmath , while if @xmath is a bounded interval, then the dual contains
the original algebra.) The resulting Möbius covariant local net is
called the dual of @xmath . It is not isomorphic to the original net, as
it is strongly additive , see [ GLW ] . (On the other hand, it is
evident, that the dual of a strongly additive net is itself.)

In the last section, the derivatives of the @xmath current models were
introduced. It was mentioned, that they not strongly additive, as in
fact, they are not even @xmath -regular. Thus by applying the dual
construction, we get a new net. However — as it was noticed there — by
the way these models were constructed, it is clear, that they can be
brought to the Hilbert space of the @xmath current model in such a way,
that they will have the same vacuum vector as the @xmath current model,
and on the real line, they will even have the same local algebra
associated to any half-interval @xmath . Hence it is clear, that the
dual of any of the derivatives is isomorphic to the @xmath current
model. Thus in this case we did not manage to generate interesting new
examples.

In what follows, some knowledge about diffeomorphism covariant local
nets (e.g. central charge, Virasoro nets) will be assumed, although they
will be only introduced in the next chapter. (This overview, in some
sense, is not causal.)

The Virasoro net with central charge @xmath is not strongly additive,
thus its dual is not just itself. Unlike in the previous example, in
this case (to the knowledge of the author) there is little known about
the dual. It is not known whether it is isomorphic with one of the
already known examples. In fact, it is not even clear, whether it will
be diffeomorphism covariant, and/or split.

#### §3.

A PhD thesis on the topic of local nets on the circle would be
incomplete without mentioning some of the classification results in this
area. We shall not go into details, as such results are not used in this
thesis.

Diffeomorphism covariant local nets on the circle with central charge
@xmath are completely classified, see [ KL ] . It turns out, that they
are all completely rational. The classification consists of two
“infinite sequences” (of which one of them is the sequence of Virasoro
nets), and four “exceptional models”.

Diffeomorphism covariant local nets on the circle with central charge
@xmath are partially classified, see [ Ca04 , Xu03 ] . This means, that
the classification is made assuming a certain property (so it could
happen, that there actually more models). An example for the @xmath case
is the @xmath current model. All models with @xmath are strongly
additive, but as it can be seen by the mentioned example, they are not
all completely rational.

In the region @xmath , little is known. There many known examples, for
example all @xmath model, and of course every Virasoro net with central
charge @xmath . From these latter examples we see, that such models are
not even necessarily strongly additive.

## Chapter 3 Preliminaries II: diffeomorphism covariance

### 3.1 The Lie group @xmath and the Virasoro algebra

#### §1.

We denote by @xmath the set of (smooth) vector fields on @xmath . We
shall think of a vector field symbolically written as @xmath as the
corresponding real function @xmath . Thus by this identification @xmath
. Moreover, we use the notation @xmath (calling it simply the
derivative) for the function on the circle obtained by differentiating
with respect to the angle:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is compact, a smooth function @xmath always gives rise to a
flow on the circle. We denote by @xmath the corresponding one-parameter
group of (orientation preserving) diffeomorphisms.

A @xmath diffeomorphism has an action on vector fields; this will be
denoted by @xmath . With the above identification we have that for a
vector field (function) @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We denote by @xmath the group of orientation preserving (smooth)
diffeomorphisms of the circle. It is an infinite dimensional Lie group
whose Lie algebra is identified with the real topological vector space
@xmath of smooth real vector fields on @xmath with the usual @xmath
topology [ Mil , Sect. 6] with the negative of the usual bracket of
vector fields. This choice of the sign is “compulsory” if we want the
“abstract” exponential — defined for Lie algebras of Lie groups — to
coincide with the exponential @xmath defined for vector fields through
generated flows. Thus in this thesis for two vector fields (functions)
on the circle @xmath and @xmath , we set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

An important property of the group @xmath is the following. For
references see the already cited survey [ Mil ] .

###### Theorem 3.1.1.

The group @xmath is simple (in the algebraic sense).

This is a truly remarkable result. It does not only assure that @xmath
has no nontrivial closed normal subgroups (which would be easier to
prove). It states that there are no nontrivial normal subgroups
regardless to their topological nature. We shall frequently use the
following simple consequence. In what follows we say that a vector field
is localized (somewhere), if its support is contained in an open
nondense interval of the circle.

###### Corollary 3.1.2.

@xmath is generated by exponentials: every element can be written as a
finite product of exponentials. In fact, every element can be written as
a finite product of exponentials of localized vector fields (in general,
however, with vector fields having no common interval of localization).

###### Proof.

The subgroup generated by the local exponentials is a normal subgroup
which also contains elements different from the identity. Hence by
simplicity it is the whole group. ∎

#### §2.

We shall use some finite dimensional Lie subgroups of @xmath . The case
of the subgroup @xmath was already discussed. We shall now introduce the
group @xmath for each positive integer @xmath as the subgroup of @xmath
containing all elements @xmath for which there exists a Möbius
transformation @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The group @xmath gives a natural @xmath -covering of @xmath . This group
has been already considered and successfully used for the analysis of
conformal nets, see e.g. [ Lok , SchWi ] and [ LX ] .

In @xmath , just like in @xmath , one introduces the one-parameter
subgroup of translations @xmath , which is defined by the usual
procedure of lifting: it is the unique continuous one-parameter subgroup
satisfying @xmath . Alternatively, one may define it directly with its
generating vector field @xmath . Similarly one introduces the notion of
rotations @xmath and of dilations @xmath . Of course the “ @xmath
-rotations”, apart from a rescaling of the parameter, will simply
coincide with the “true” rotations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As @xmath covers @xmath in a natural way, its universal cover is
canonically identified with @xmath . Note that if @xmath is the natural
covering map then @xmath for all @xmath , where the sign “ @xmath ”, as
always throughout the rest of this article, stands for the appropriate
lifts of one-parameter groups to @xmath .

#### §3.

Let us have now a closer look at the Lie algebra of @xmath . First, we
choose a suitable base in the complexification of this algebra, of which
we can think of as complex valued functions on the circle. We shall set
@xmath @xmath for the function defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

These functions form a (non algebraic) base. By Eq. ( 3.3 ) we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lie algebra formed by the (algebraic) span of @xmath is called the
De Witt algebra . Note that @xmath and that for any @xmath the span of
@xmath form a Lie subalgebra which is isomorphic to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lie subgroup of @xmath , generated by the real parts of the vector
fields @xmath is exactly @xmath .

#### §4.

As we are interested by projective (and not necessarily true)
representations of @xmath , what is of real interest for us is not the
De Witt algebra. For a projective representation @xmath , it is
possible, that the phases cannot be fixed in a way that would make it a
true representation; that is, with any choice of the phases in general
@xmath but @xmath where @xmath is a unit complex number. At the level of
Lie algebra and generators of representation, this means that the
generators can be introduced only up to additive constants and after
fixing these constants, in general @xmath but @xmath for some @xmath
(where @xmath is the generator for @xmath corresponding to the Lie
algebra element @xmath ).

For the explained reason we shall investigate what we can say at the
purely algebraic level if, in stead of Eq. ( 3.7 ) we only require the
following relations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a number and @xmath is a central element (so @xmath
behaves like the additive constant @xmath in our previous
consideration):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of course the possible dependence of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath is
strongly restricted by the requirement that the elements @xmath should
span a Lie algebra. For example, the antisymmetricalness of the
commutator implies that @xmath . The Jacobi identity gives further
equations.

As it was explained, for us the introduced elements @xmath have a
meaning only up to an additive central element. So let us choose the
following fixing of this freedom:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proposition 3.1.3.

With the above definition we have the following relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The first equation follows trivially. Also, the second equation clearly
holds up to an additive element from the center. Hence the commutator,
when it appears inside another commutator, can be indeed replaced by the
expression appearing in the statement. Thus if @xmath then, using the
Jacobi identity, the above remark and the fact that essentially by
definition @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We are left with the case when @xmath . It is clear that it is enough to
consider the case when @xmath is positive. For @xmath we have that
@xmath and essentially by definition @xmath , thus the relation holds.
For @xmath , again by definition, we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Finally, for @xmath one can proceed by induction using the Jacobi
identity and the (already justified) fact that @xmath and @xmath . ∎

The Lie algebra spanned by the operators @xmath and @xmath is called the
Virasoro algebra . What the above proposition essentially says is that
up to isomorphism there is only one non-trivial central extension of the
De Witt algebra, and it is the Virasoro algebra. By redefining the
central element, the normalizing factor @xmath could be changed (without
changing the isomorphism class of the algebra). However, from the point
of view of positive energy representations of @xmath , as we shall see
in the next section, the suitable choice is exactly the one made here.

### 3.2 Positive energy representations

#### §1.

In what follows @xmath stands for the set of complex numbers of unit
length. We consider the projective unitary group @xmath of a Hilbert
space @xmath as a topological group with the topology being induced by
the strong operator topology on @xmath . A strongly continuous
projective representation @xmath of a topological group @xmath on a
Hilbert space @xmath is a continuous homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
. Sometimes we think of @xmath @xmath as a unitary operator. Although
there are more than one ways to fix the phases, note that expressions
like Ad @xmath or @xmath for a von Neumann algebra @xmath are
unambiguous.

Unlike in case of true representations, in general we cannot consider
the direct sum of projective representations. On the other hand, we can
still introduce the concept of invariant subspaces (it is independent
from the choice of phases) and thus, that of irreducible
representations.

Note also that the self-adjoint generator of a one-parameter group of
strongly continuous projective unitaries @xmath is well defined up to a
real additive constant. This means that there exists a self-adjoint
operator @xmath such that Ad @xmath Ad @xmath for all @xmath , and if
@xmath is another self-adjoint with the same property then @xmath for
some @xmath .

A strongly continuous projective unitary representation @xmath of @xmath
is called a positive energy representation of @xmath if the self-adjoint
generator of the one-parameter group associated to the rotations @xmath
is bounded from below. Note that this fact does not depend on the fixing
of the additive constant in the definition of the self-adjoint
generator.

The restriction of @xmath to @xmath always lifts to a unique strongly
continuous unitary representation of the universal covering group @xmath
of @xmath (see Sect. A.2 in the appendix). By Prop. A.2.1 the
self-adjoint generator of rotations in this lift is not just bounded
below but actually positive . This explains the name “positive energy
representations”. From now on we always think of the self-adjoint
generator of rotations with the additive constant fixed in this way, and
we shall denote it by @xmath . Note that as @xmath is a multiple of the
identity, the spectrum of @xmath is contained in @xmath where @xmath is
the lowest point of @xmath .

#### §2.

By the previous observation the (algebraic) span of @xmath is a dense
subspace in the Hilbert space of the representation. The vectors in this
set are called the finite energy vectors of the representation.

If @xmath is a positive energy representation of @xmath , then its
restriction @xmath to @xmath lifts to a unique positive energy
representation @xmath of @xmath . Note that by Eq. 3.5 , the
self-adjoint generator of @xmath , up to an additive constant must be
equal to @xmath . Thus by Corollary A.2.6 the domain of @xmath is
contained in every self-adjoint generator of @xmath . Hence the
definition

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is meaningful for every @xmath , where @xmath is the set of finite
energy vectors for @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Of course it is clear that the operator @xmath , in some sense, is the
generator corresponding to the complex vector field @xmath introduced in
the last section. Indeed, as @xmath and @xmath , where the vector fields
@xmath and @xmath generate the @xmath -rotations and the @xmath
-dilations, respectively, and by considering, that the generator of the
@xmath -rotations is the constant vector field @xmath , we find that
@xmath should correspond to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

(We use the physicist convention, according to which the generator of a
one-parameter group of linear operators @xmath is minus @xmath times its
derivative at time equal zero.) Rather than introducing @xmath as “the
generator corresponding to @xmath ”, we made this complicated-looking
construction because in this way we fixed the additive constants and
ensured the existence of a common domain.

By the last section, we expect that the introduced operators satisfy the
Virasoro commutation relations with central element being just a real
number. Of course, by their definition and by Corollary A.2.7 , for
example we have already that @xmath and so in particular @xmath .
However, using only relations coming from the group @xmath will not give
information on commutators like @xmath .

Using the full group @xmath and not just the considered subgroups, it
can be proved that there exists a unique real number @xmath , called the
central charge of the representation @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proof can be found in [ Lok ] (although there an additional
condition is assumed, but that can be dropped; see the remarks made
before [ Ca04 , Prop. A.1] ).

By their commutation relation, the operators @xmath are called the
representation of the Virasoro algebra associated to @xmath . Note that
we usually think of @xmath as operators defined on @xmath , with the
exception of @xmath of which sometimes we think as a positive
self-adjoint operator and thus write expressions like @xmath for its
domain.

@xmath is self-adjoint and by Eq. ( 3.2 ) in general

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we say that the operators @xmath form a positive energy unitary
representation of the Virasoro algebra. The “unitariness” is the
condition that @xmath ; in some sense it is due to the fact that @xmath
is represented by (projective) unitary operators.

The self-adjoint generator of the “ @xmath -rotations” is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence by the positivity of @xmath (recall that since @xmath is bounded
from below it is actually positive; see Prop. A.2.1 ) and the
arbitrariness of @xmath we find that the central charge must be a
positive number . Also, using that @xmath is a positive energy
representation of @xmath we find that its self-adjoint generators
satisfy certain bounds with respect to @xmath . In fact, taking account
that @xmath , by Corollary A.2.6 we find (note that it is the operator
@xmath that corresponds to a restriction of the one there denoted by
@xmath ) the following energy bound for nonnegative @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

for every @xmath . Moreover, as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

for a general (not necessarily positive) @xmath we can derive for
example the following bound:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

for every @xmath . (See more on energy bounds in [ GoW , BS ] ).

As a consequence of the energy bounds, if @xmath with Fourier
coefficients @xmath then the operator @xmath is well defined (i.e. the
sum converges on @xmath ) and by Eq. ( 3.18 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus it is actually closable. Its closure is usually denoted by @xmath .
The operator valued functional @xmath is called the stress-energy tensor
associated to the representation @xmath . By the energy bound of Eq. (
3.23 ), @xmath and for every @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath norm is defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

By its definition @xmath and in general if @xmath are polynomials of the
variables @xmath , then @xmath are closures of finite sums of Virasoro
operators. Thus in this case @xmath and moreover by Eq. ( 3.17 ) we have
that on @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we set @xmath to be the constant @xmath function, then @xmath . Let
now @xmath be any smooth function (not necessarily a polynomial). Then
we can find a sequence of polynomials @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
in the @xmath norm. By the energy bound of Eq. ( 3.25 ) this implies
that on @xmath both @xmath and @xmath and so by the previous equation if
@xmath then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since also @xmath the above equation implies that @xmath and that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

To summarize, we have the following situation. By definition @xmath is a
core for the closed operators @xmath and by Eq. ( 3.24 ), @xmath . The
dense subspace @xmath is an invariant core for the nonnegative
self-adjoint operator @xmath and @xmath so the commutator @xmath is well
defined. Moreover, by the energy bound Eq. ( 3.25 ) and the previous
equation, setting @xmath we have that both @xmath and @xmath for every
@xmath . Thus by an application of Nelson’s commutator theorem [ Ne72 ,
Prop. 2]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, if @xmath is real then @xmath is self-adjoint and
moreover by the energy bounds it is essentially self-adjoint on any core
of @xmath .

If @xmath @xmath are real smooth functions with @xmath converging to
@xmath in the @xmath sense, then by the energy bound of Eq. ( 3.25 ) and
the previous remark, we have that the sequence @xmath converges to
@xmath on a common core and thus also in the strong resolvent sense. In
particular, we have that @xmath strongly as @xmath (see more on
convergence of self-adjoint operators in [ RS1 , Sect. VIII.7] ).

Essentially by definition, if @xmath is such that @xmath for a certain
positive integer @xmath , then in the projective sense @xmath . If both
@xmath are such functions (with possibly different values of @xmath ),
then as @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

strongly, as the Trotter product formula can be indeed employed by the
existence of a common core (see e.g. [ RS1 , Theorem VIII.31] ). On the
other hand, if @xmath and @xmath are sufficiently small, a similar
product formula holds at the level of diffeomorphisms (see [ Nel ,
Theorem 4.1] and the comment in [ Lok ] about the @xmath convergence in
the @xmath case). In this way one can prove that if @xmath for @xmath ,
then the same holds for @xmath . By taking sums we get all polynomials
of @xmath . Finally, if @xmath in the @xmath sense, then of course
@xmath which shows that @xmath . Thus one gets that for every @xmath ,
in the projective sense

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above equation can be considered as the meaning of the stress-energy
tensor. Note that by Corollary 3.1.2 , this also shows that the
following three objects: the representation @xmath , the representation
of the Virasoro algebra @xmath and the stress-energy tensor @xmath
completely determine each other.

#### §3.

Let us discuss some further important consequences of the fundamental
property of the stress-energy tensor mentioned above. First of all, if
@xmath is a smooth function and @xmath then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a certain @xmath . Indeed, if @xmath is real then @xmath for all
@xmath and hence the generators of the one-parameter groups of unitaries
@xmath and @xmath can only differ in an additive constant. (If @xmath is
not real, then first we can write it as a sum of its real part plus its
imaginary part, etc.) This in turn implies another important property
which is general to any positive energy representation of @xmath .
Although we shall give a self-contained argument, the reader should note
that this was proved in [ BS ] . We begin first with an observation
which is useful in its own.

###### Lemma 3.2.1.

Let @xmath be a stress-energy tensor with @xmath and @xmath . Suppose
@xmath are smooth functions. Then there exists an @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath we have already stated this property. One can proceed by
induction, the argument is straightforward with no difficulties, but for
clarity here only the case @xmath will be concerned. By the energy
bounds and by the commutation relations with @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , and the constants @xmath and @xmath are coming from the
energy bounds on @xmath and @xmath (and are independent from @xmath ). ∎

###### Corollary 3.2.2.

Let @xmath be a positive energy representation of @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath as before. Then @xmath and hence @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

By the transformation property of the stress-energy tensor we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a certain @xmath . By the previous polynomial energy bound if @xmath
then it is also in the domain of @xmath for @xmath and hence in the
domain of @xmath , too. Therefore @xmath and thus @xmath . Exchanging
@xmath with @xmath the same argument shows that actually @xmath ∎

#### §4.

We have seen that once we have a positive energy representation of
@xmath , we also have a positive energy unitary representation of the
Virasoro algebra. So now in turn we shall investigate such
representations of the Virasoro algebra with a certain central charge
@xmath . Our aim is to classify such representations and then to
“integrate them”, in order to get positive energy representations of
@xmath .

By a positive energy unitary representation of the Virasoro algebra we
shall mean a set of operators @xmath defined on a common invariant dense
domain @xmath in a Hilbert space @xmath , satisfying the following
properties:

-   @xmath is a positive diagonalizable operator on @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath .

The eigenspaces of @xmath are sometimes called the energy levels . As
@xmath it has a lowest eigenvalue; the corresponding eigenspace is the “
@xmath energy level”.

By the commutation relations if @xmath is from the eigenspace of @xmath
associated to the eigenvalue @xmath , then @xmath and so @xmath belongs
to the eigenspace of @xmath associated to the eigenvalue @xmath . Hence
we say that @xmath “decreases the energy by @xmath ”. It follows that if
@xmath is the lowest eigenvalue of @xmath and @xmath is an eigenvector
of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath then @xmath is annihilated by all
@xmath (that is, @xmath ) for @xmath . Hence using the commutation
relations and the unitariness condition — exactly like in Eq. ( 3.22 ) —
we find that @xmath for every @xmath . This, by the positivity of the
norm and the arbitrariness of @xmath , implies that @xmath cannot be
negative (which we have already noted in case the representation is
coming from a positive energy representation of @xmath ).

Since @xmath and diagonalizable on @xmath , it must have a lowest
eigenvalue @xmath and there must be a least one-dimensional eigenspace
associated to @xmath . We shall fix a unit vector @xmath in this space.
We can always consider the minimal invariant subspace for the
representation containing this vector; that is, the subspace

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where also @xmath is allowed (so the vector @xmath , with no operator
acting on it, is also included). It is an easy observation that due to
the commutation relations and the fact that @xmath , in reality, to
generate @xmath it suffices to use @xmath indexed with negative values
only, and that in fact one can even require an ordering. Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The simplest possible situation is when actually @xmath is the full
domain of the representation; @xmath . In this case the representation
is irreducible and it is called an irreducible lowest weight
representation (with the “lowest weight” being the value of @xmath ).

Indeed, suppose @xmath is an invariant subspace. Any vector of @xmath is
a finite linear combination of eigenvectors of @xmath . Thus if @xmath
then by the invariance under @xmath it follows that all eigenvectors
appearing as “components” of @xmath belong to @xmath . If @xmath then of
course @xmath . On the other hand, by the previous argument if @xmath
then it follows that @xmath is orthogonal to the vector @xmath .
Actually it is not hard to see, that by the unitariness condition and
the invariance of @xmath all vectors of the type @xmath are orthogonal
to @xmath and hence @xmath .

Let us see what we can say about the energy levels. At the @xmath level,
up to multiples there is a unique vector: it is @xmath . By Eq. ( 3.38
), the @xmath energy level, which is orthogonal to the @xmath level, is
spanned by @xmath . The @xmath energy level, which is orthogonal to both
the @xmath and the @xmath level, is spanned by @xmath and @xmath . In
general, one can see that to span the @xmath energy level (at most) we
need as many vectors as many partitions of @xmath we can find. Thus,
similarly to the case of the @xmath current model, we find that for such
a representation @xmath is trace class for every @xmath .

We have seen that the length of the vector @xmath , that is the scalar
product of this vector with itself, is completely determined by the
value of @xmath and @xmath . Actually one can easily convince him- or
herself, that in general, by the commutation relations, unitariness, and
the facts that @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , the scalar product of
@xmath with @xmath is completely determined by the sequences @xmath and
the value of @xmath and @xmath . Thus one can see that the
representation, up to unitary equivalence is completely determined by
the value of @xmath and @xmath .

The question which is to be answered: for what values of @xmath there
exists such an irreducible lowest weight representation? (We have seen,
that if it exists, then up to unitary equivalence, it exists uniquely.)
That not all values are possible, is sure. First of all, @xmath was
required to be positive. We have also seen, that @xmath must be
nonnegative. But are there more limitations?

As we have already noticed, the second energy level is spanned by the
vectors @xmath and @xmath . So if we assume that we indeed have such a
unitary representation, then by the positivity of the scalar product,
using the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, we find that

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.39)
  -- -- -- --------

must be a positive semidefinite matrix. As it was already explained, we
can calculate each matrix element in the above expression, in fact we
have already calculated that @xmath . By calculating the remaining
elements we find that the determinant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which immediately gives an inequality between @xmath and @xmath .
Similar inequalities using (higher order) determinants can be written
using generating vectors of the @xmath energy level. These determinants
give further restriction on the possible values of @xmath and @xmath .

We have seen that we can find couples of @xmath for which surely does
not exist an irreducible unitary lowest weight representation. Can we
find a couple for which it does? Of course for example for @xmath it
does, in fact it is not to hard to see that the corresponding
representation is trivial: the representation space is one-dimensional,
and all Virasoro operators are represented as multiplication by zero.
However, can we find a nontrivial example?

One of the last observations of the previous chapter was that the @xmath
current model is diffeomorphism covariant; in fact in this overview this
was the motivating reason to investigate positive energy representations
of @xmath . So studying that model surely gives a unitary lowest weight
representation of the Virasoro algebra. Indeed, on the finite energy
vectors of the @xmath current model the normal product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

is meaningful: on any given finite energy vector the expression results
a finite sum (any finite energy vector is annihilated by all terms
appearing in the expression of @xmath apart from a finite number of
them). Given the commutation relation Eq. ( 2.37 ) of the currents, it
is an exercise to calculate that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is @xmath satisfies the Virasoro relations with central charge
equal to @xmath . Moreover, since the current by Eq. ( 2.38 ) is
hermitian, we easily find that @xmath . Finally, by its definition
@xmath is a sum of positive expressions, and evidently on the vacuum
vector @xmath of the @xmath current model it acts as multiplication by
zero. So let @xmath be the minimal invariant subspace for @xmath
containing @xmath . Then by what was said, @xmath on @xmath gives an
irreducible unitary representation of the Virasoro algebra with lowest
weight equal to @xmath and central charge equal to @xmath .

To summarize: on one hand, as it was explained, we can find some
limitations on the possible values of @xmath and @xmath , on the other
hand, we can find some models providing examples for admissible pairs of
@xmath . It is a truly remarkable achievement though that the set of
admissible pairs was completely characterized . Namely, apart from the
case @xmath (in which case the representation is trivial) there exists
an irreducible unitary lowest weight representation of the Virasoro
algebra if and only if @xmath belongs to the continuous part @xmath or
to the discrete sequence @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

For references, and an explanation how these result was achieved (and by
who), see the book [ Kac ] . Note that the continuous part gives only
values @xmath for the central charge, while the discrete part gives a
discrete set for @xmath in the interval @xmath accumulating at the point
@xmath . Note also that the lowest possible nontrivial value for @xmath
is @xmath .

#### §5.

After finding all irreducible unitary lowest weight representation of
the Virasoro algebra, the next question we should ask: can we integrate
them to obtain a positive energy representation of @xmath ? Let us first
note, that given such a representation on a dense subset of a Hilbert
space @xmath , setting @xmath (where @xmath is the central charge of the
representation) and @xmath for a positive integer @xmath , the operators
@xmath and @xmath form a positive energy representation of the Lie
algebra of @xmath and thus (more precisely, by Prop. A.2.9 ) we have
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . So if @xmath is a smooth function on the circle with
Fourier coefficients @xmath , then the sum @xmath is well defined
(converges) and gives a closable operator. Setting in general @xmath for
its closure, we have that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath .
Moreover on @xmath we have that @xmath , and there exists a constant
@xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . Thus by Nelson’s commutator
theorem @xmath .

All this is verified exactly in the way as it was shown in the first
part of this section when the stress-energy tensor was introduced;
although there @xmath was defined by a positive energy unitary
representation of the Virasoro algebra associated to a positive energy
representation of @xmath . However, note that the fact that the positive
energy unitary representation of the Virasoro algebra is coming from a
representation of @xmath was never used directly: only through the
energy bound which we have in this case, too. So, also Eq. ( 3.27 )
holds, showing that the functional @xmath can be viewed as a
representation of the Lie algebra of @xmath (with a cocycle). Hence we
may expect the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

to define a positive energy representation of @xmath . (Recall that the
group @xmath is generated by the exponentials.) However, there are some
difficulties. The most serious is the following: unlike in case of
finite dimensional Lie groups, the exponential map between @xmath and
@xmath is not a local diffeomorphism. In fact, there is not even a
neighbourhood of the identity of @xmath in which the exponentials would
form a dense set: every element can be written as a product of
exponentials but there are only “few” elements that are exponentials.

After so much tension built up, it is time to reveal to the reader that
yet this problem was solved; the proof for the existence of the
corresponding positive energy representation of @xmath can be found in [
GoW ] . In this short overview however the argument of Goodman and
Wallach will be not discussed.

#### §6.

It is easy to prove that the positive energy representation @xmath
obtained by integrating the unique irreducible unitary lowest weight
representation of the Virasoro algebra with lowest weight @xmath and
central charge @xmath , is irreducible. There are two questions
remaining. First, is every irreducible positive energy representation of
@xmath is of this type? Second, what can we say about the
representations that are not irreducible? To answer, the following lemma
will be useful.

###### Lemma 3.2.3.

The group generated by @xmath is dense in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Taking account of the mentioned Trotter product-formula for the
exponential of a sum of vector fields, the statement is rather clear at
the Lie algebra level: the span of the functions @xmath is dense in
@xmath . All we need is an “exponential” version of this density, since
as it was mentioned in the previous section, every element in @xmath is
a finite product of exponentials. Thus, we want to know if @xmath is
continuous: so that for a sequence of real functions @xmath converging
to @xmath in the @xmath sense, wether it follows that @xmath in the
topology of @xmath . The answer is yes, for references see for example [
Mil ] . ∎

###### Corollary 3.2.4.

Let @xmath be a positive energy representation of @xmath with associated
representation of the Virasoro algebra @xmath and finite energy vectors
@xmath . Then if @xmath is invariant for @xmath then its closure is
invariant for @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Prop. A.2.9 the finite energy vectors are analytic for the
self-adjoint generators of @xmath . It follows that if @xmath then
@xmath . Hence the result follows by the previous density-lemma. ∎

We can now answer those two questions. We have seen that given an
irreducible positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath we can
construct a positive energy unitary representation of the Virasoro
algebra @xmath with a certain central charge @xmath . As @xmath is
nonnegative and @xmath , its spectrum has a minimum point @xmath and
there exists a unit vector @xmath such that it is an eigenvector of
@xmath with eigenvalue @xmath . Let @xmath be the minimal invariant
subspace for the Virasoro operators containing the vector @xmath . Then,
by Corollary 3.2.4 the non zero-dimensional closed subspace @xmath is
invariant for @xmath and hence it is the full Hilbert space. Moreover,
we have also seen that the operators @xmath on @xmath form a unitary
lowest weight representation of the Virasoro algebra which is
irreducible. Thus by the result of Goodman and Wallach it integrates to
an irreducible positive energy representation of @xmath , which must be
the original representation @xmath as it has the same associated
representation of the Virasoro algebra. Let us also note, that as the
values of @xmath and @xmath are constructed in an unambiguous way from
the representation, two positive energy irreducible representations are
equivalent if and only if they have the same central charge and the same
lowest weight.

Thus we have proved that a positive energy irreducible representation
@xmath of @xmath is equivalent to @xmath for a certain (unique)
admissible pair @xmath of the central charge and the lowest weight. (The
reader should note that this was first stated in [ Ca04 , Theorem A.2]
.)

Let us move onto the second question. Can we establish that a reducible
representation is necessarily a direct sum (or integral) of irreducible
ones? What does it mean, at all: direct sum of projective
representations? What is rather clear is the tensor product of
projective representations, but not their direct sum.

Suppose @xmath are projective unitary representations of a group @xmath
on the Hilbert spaces @xmath and @xmath , respectively. We can try to
fix the phases of @xmath and @xmath in such a way, that, after this
arrangement @xmath will give a projective unitary representation of
@xmath on @xmath . It is not clear that we can make such fixing of the
phases, but that is not a problem: in that case we shall simply say that
the direct sum of @xmath and @xmath does not exist. The real problem is
that different fixing of the phases of @xmath and @xmath can lead into
different (even inequivalent!) projective representations. If it is so,
the direct sum of @xmath and @xmath is not well-defined and thus in
general the decomposition of a reducible representation into irreducible
ones is also not well defined.

###### Lemma 3.2.5.

Suppose @xmath is a simple noncommutative group. Then the direct sum of
some of its projective representations, if exists, then exists uniquely.

###### Proof.

Suppose we have two representations @xmath and @xmath with some concrete
fixing of the phases with which the direct sum can be formed and suppose
@xmath is another choice of the phases with which, again, the direct sum
can be formed. Then we can easily show that there must exists an @xmath
such that @xmath for every @xmath and @xmath . Hence @xmath is a
character on @xmath and thus by the conditions of the lemma @xmath which
shows that the two direct sums result the same (not only equivalent!)
projective representation. ∎

As it was mentioned, @xmath is a simple noncommutative group. So by the
previous lemma, if a certain closed subspace @xmath is invariant for a
projective unitary representation @xmath of @xmath given on the Hilbert
space @xmath , then we can indeed write that @xmath . So given a
positive energy representation of @xmath , we can try to decompose it.
The next theorem is probably not an “original” one although the author
has not yet seen it stated in the literature.

###### Theorem 3.2.6.

A positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath is (equivalent) to a
direct sum of irreducible ones. Moreover, every representation appearing
in the direct sum decomposition has the same central charge as @xmath ,
and the difference of the lowest weights of two irreducible components
is always an integer.

###### Proof.

The affirmations about the values of the lowest weight and the central
charge are trivial. All we have to do is to prove the existence of a
decomposition into irreducible representations.

Let @xmath be the associated representation of the Virasoro algebra and
@xmath is the minimum point of the spectrum of @xmath . We can choose a
complete orthonormed system @xmath in @xmath , where @xmath is some
index set. Let @xmath be the minimal invariant subspace for the Virasoro
operators containing the vector @xmath . Then, by Corollary 3.2.4 for
every @xmath the closed subspace @xmath is invariant for @xmath .
Moreover, just like as we argued before, we can show that the
restriction of @xmath onto @xmath is irreducible and that the subspaces
@xmath are pairwise orthogonal. Let @xmath be the orthogonal in the
Hilbert space @xmath of the representation to @xmath . It is again a
closed invariant subspace for @xmath , but here the lowest point of the
spectrum is at least @xmath . Thus by choosing a complete orthonormed
system @xmath in @xmath we can repeat all what was said. Note that

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.47)
  -- -- -- --------

as @xmath is diagonal on @xmath for every @xmath . Then we take the
orthogonal of these subspaces in @xmath and we define @xmath , etc.
Continuing like this (it is clear how to make this “continuing like
this” more precise by Zorn’s lemma) we get for every @xmath an index set
@xmath and a collection of closed subspaces @xmath . From the
construction it is clear that the subspaces @xmath are pairwise
orthogonal minimal invariant closed subspaces and that their sum (even
their algebraic sum) contains every eigenvector of @xmath and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

Remark. We have not answered the question: what are the irreducible
positive energy representations of @xmath that can be added? We shall
not show in this overview, but actually the converse of the above
theorem is also true. Namely, if a collection of irreducible positive
energy representations of @xmath have all the same central charge and
the pairwise differences in their lowest weight are integers, then we
can form their direct sum.

Actually, once showing this, we can prove the above theorem without
using Corollary 3.2.4 about the invariance. In fact, we did not use that
lemma for the decomposition of the associated representation of the
Virasoro algebra into irreducible ones. After that we could have said,
that in (the closure of) each subspace we can integrate the
representation of the Virasoro algebra and we get a representation of
@xmath . If we know that these can be added, then by adding them we get
a positive energy representation of @xmath on the full Hilbert space
possessing the same associated representation of the Virasoro algebra as
the original representation of @xmath — so it is the original one. In
this way, the decomposition at the level of the Virasoro algebra can be
passed onto the level of the representation of the group, without the
need of showing that if a subspace is invariant for the Virasoro
operators then its closure is invariant for the representation.

#### §7.

Let us make a final remark. In general, if @xmath is a projective
representation of a group @xmath and @xmath , it is meaningful to ask
whether @xmath and @xmath commute or not. Indeed, although @xmath and
@xmath , as operators, depend on the choice of phases, whether they
commute or not is unambiguous. (One can also think about the von Neumann
algebras @xmath and @xmath , which are obviously well defined, and ask
if one is in the commutant of the other or not.) Note that the
commutation of @xmath and @xmath , unlike in case of a true
representation, does not necessarily follow from the commutation of
@xmath and @xmath .

Unless its central charge is zero (and thus, as it was already noticed,
the whole representation is trivial) a positive energy representation
@xmath of @xmath is genuinely projective: from the commutation relation
of the associated Virasoro algebra, there is no arrangement of the phase
factors that would make it a true representation. Thus, even if @xmath
are commuting elements. it does not necessarily follow that @xmath are
commuting operators. In order to generate local nets though, we shall
need to know, that nevertheless, in certain cases it does follow. The
following easy observation, not particular to @xmath but rather a
general fact about projective representations, will suffice.

Observation. Suppose @xmath is a projective projective representation of
a group @xmath and @xmath . Set @xmath for the centralizer of @xmath in
@xmath ; i.e. the subgroup of @xmath formed by the elements commuting
with @xmath . Then by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can see that @xmath is a well-defined (i.e. independent from the
choice of phases) character on @xmath . Hence if @xmath for some @xmath
then @xmath commutes with @xmath .

### 3.3 Virasoro nets and @xmath covariance

#### §1.

We say that a strongly continuous projective unitary representation
@xmath of @xmath extends the unitary (true) representation @xmath of
@xmath if in the projective sense @xmath for all @xmath . Note that by
considering @xmath only on @xmath one can reconstruct the original true
representation @xmath (due to the fact that there are no continuous
nontrivial characters on @xmath ). Thus we do not loose any information
if we “throw out” the true representation @xmath and keep only the
projective representation @xmath . Note also that if @xmath extends a
positive energy representation then it also must be of positive energy.
Let us now proceed to the notion of diffeomorphism covariance.

###### Definition 3.3.1.

A Möbius covariant local net @xmath is conformal (or diffeomorphism)
covariant if there is a strongly continuous projective unitary
representation of @xmath on @xmath extending @xmath (and by an abuse of
notation we shall denote this extension, too, by @xmath ), such that for
all @xmath and @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath .

Remarks. There are several important things to note here. First, it
seems that there is a slight ambiguity in the definition. When next time
we speak about a conformal net do we mean: with a given representation
of @xmath , or with the representation of the Möbius group only (with
diffeomorphism covariance meaning only the existence of such an
extension of the symmetry)? However, it will be proved that there is at
most one way the representation of the Möbius group can be extended to
@xmath with the given conditions. (In fact, this will be one of the
“highlights” of this thesis.) So there is no ambiguity. This also
explains the mentioned “abuse” in the definition.

Another important observation is that although we have required two
properties from the extension, it turns out that the second one implies
the first, as it was already noted in [ Ca04 , Prop. 3.4] . Let us see
why. As a consequence of Haag duality , if a diffeomorphism is localized
in the interval @xmath — i.e. it acts trivially (identically) elsewhere
— then, by the second listed property, the corresponding unitary is also
localized in @xmath in the sense that it belongs to @xmath . (Actually,
by the continuity of the net it is enough to assume localization in
@xmath ).

Assuming the second property, we want to show the first, namely, the
covariance of the net under the action of the diffeomorphism group. So
suppose @xmath and @xmath . Of course we know that in particular
covariance holds for Möbius transformations. Hence we can safely assume
that @xmath . With some elementary (but not trivial) geometrical
argument one can show that for every @xmath there exists a
diffeomorphism @xmath which is localized in the interval @xmath
“plus-minus @xmath ”, such that its action on @xmath coincides with that
of @xmath . Then @xmath is localized in @xmath and hence @xmath commutes
with @xmath . It follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

since by our assumption @xmath . As the above equation is true for all
@xmath , by the continuity of the net we conclude that @xmath .

This second property is usually called compatibility with the local
structure of the net @xmath . By what was explained, diffeomorphism
covariance means that the Möbius symmetry of the net can be extended to
@xmath in a way which is compatible with the local structure of the net.

#### §2.

So far we have seen the following examples of Möbius covariant local
nets: the @xmath current model and its derivatives. As it was noted, the
first one is diffeomorphism covariant. What about the derivatives? It
turns out that they do not admit diffeomorphism symmetry [ GLW , Kö03 ]
. One way to see this is the following. Using diffeomorphism covariance
it is possible to show that Möbius symmetry of a conformal net @xmath is
implementable in every locally normal representation of @xmath . As it
was already mentioned though, the derivatives of the @xmath current
model admit locally normal representations in which the Möbius symmetry
is not implementable.

One can of course say that the derivatives are not “nice” models; they
are not even @xmath -regular. In fact, it is expected that under some
conditions diffeomorphism covariance is automatic.

In the last section all positive energy irreducible representation of
the group @xmath were described. We shall now see that some of them can
be used to give new examples of local nets. Let @xmath be one of those
irreducible positive energy representations of @xmath with lowest weight
@xmath . (See the last section for the possible values of @xmath ).
Denote by @xmath the (up to phase) unique unit eigenvector of @xmath
with zero eigenvalue. As it was explained, the distance between two
eigenvalues of @xmath is always an integer and hence @xmath . This
implies that the phase factors of @xmath on the elements of @xmath can
be arranged in a unique way so that it will become a true representation
for @xmath .

Let @xmath be the associated representation of the Virasoro algebra. By
Eq. ( 3.22 ) @xmath and so @xmath is annihilated by both @xmath and
@xmath . Hence if @xmath then @xmath (if the phases are fixed in the
above explained way). We set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for a @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is, the stabilizer of the interval @xmath , or to put it in another
way, the diffeomorphisms localized in @xmath ( = acting nontrivially
only in the interval @xmath ).

It is clear that the net @xmath satisfies isotony and by the last
observation of the previous section also locality. Moreover, as it was
mentioned, the group @xmath is (algebraically) simple. As the subgroup
generated by the set of elements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

is normal and evidently contains elements different from the identity,
by the simplicity of @xmath it must be the whole group. Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so @xmath is cyclic for @xmath . Hence @xmath is a diffeomorphism
local covariant net; it is called the Virasoro net at central charge
@xmath . (Actually to check the compatibility condition one again needs
to use the last observation of the previous section.) By Haag-duality if
@xmath for a certain @xmath then @xmath , so it turns out that we could
have defined the net by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

(We have not done so because in this case to check locality would have
been not so straightforward.) In fact, by Corollary 3.1.2 we could have
defined the same net also by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the stress-energy tensor of @xmath .

The Hilbert space of a Virasoro net, by construction (see again the last
section), is separable. Moreover, as it was remarked, @xmath is trace
class for every @xmath so a Virasoro net is actually split .

#### §3.

The Virasoro nets are not just some new models: their real importance
lies in the fact that they are essential building blocks for any
conformal net. Indeed, suppose @xmath is a conformal net. Then by the
stress-energy tensor @xmath of @xmath we can define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is obviously a Möbius covariant subnet of @xmath . Actually,
@xmath is evidently covariant under the action of the full
diffeomorphism group, too. Moreover, its vacuum Hilbert space is
invariant for @xmath and the restriction of @xmath to this space is
irreducible. So by the classification of the positive energy irreducible
representations of @xmath (see the last section, or directly [ Ca04 ,
Theorem A.1] ), the restriction of this subnet to its vacuum Hilbert
space is isomorphic to the Virasoro net with central charge @xmath ,
where @xmath is the central charge of @xmath . Thus any conformal local
net can be viewed as an extension of a Virasoro net.

It is interesting to note that while every diffeomorphism covariant net
carries a natural embedding of a Virasoro net, there is no nontrivial
net that could be embedded in a Virasoro net (apart from itself). More
precisely, a Virasoro net has no nontrivial Möbius covariant subnets,
cf. [ Ca98 ] . So in some sense the Virasoro nets are minimal .

#### §4.

What other structural properties are known about the Virasoro nets? As
for their representations: it seems natural that the map for a fixed
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

— where @xmath is the stress-energy tensor of a positive energy
irreducible representation of @xmath with the same central charge, but
with lowest weight @xmath possible different from zero — should extend
to a normal representation @xmath of @xmath . (The central charge, by
Eq. ( 3.27 ) is locally detectable, but the lowest weight should not
be.) If it is so, then the collection @xmath is evidently a locally
normal representation of our Virasoro net.

What are the values of @xmath and @xmath (among those admissible ones,
for which there exists a positive energy representation), for which
@xmath is indeed known to be a locally normal representation? The answer
is that for almost all. More precisely, for all with the exception of
@xmath , @xmath .

One way local normality can be proved was already indicated in the
previous chapter. Namely, whenever we have a subnet of a net @xmath , it
can be considered as a representation of the restriction of @xmath to
its vacuum Hilbert space. Then such a representation, and all
subrepresentations of such a representation are automatically locally
normal. Moreover, if @xmath is a representation of @xmath , then it can
be considered as representation of @xmath , too. Of course, if it was
locally normal as a representation of @xmath , it will be locally normal
for @xmath , too. Again, all subrepresentations of such a representation
are automatically locally normal.

Without aiming completeness, let us see at least one example; let us
show the local normality of @xmath for the special case of @xmath . For
other values see the explanation in [ Ca04 , Sect. 2] with the
references given there.

We have seen that the @xmath current model is diffeomorphism covariant
and in fact we have even seen that the normal product of the current
with itself gives a positive energy representation of the Virasoro
algebra with central charge @xmath . We have not proved that it indeed
corresponds to a positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath which
makes the @xmath current model diffeomorphism covariant, but in fact it
is easy to show this; so just suppose that this is the case. Then, by
what was explained we have the natural embedding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , by the what was explained in the last section, in a
Virasoro net, the spectrum of @xmath does not contain the value @xmath .
On the other hand, as @xmath (in fact, by the commutation relation of
the current, the hermicity condition and the fact that @xmath one can
easily compute that @xmath ), it follows that that @xmath appears as a
subrepresentation of the representation given by the above embedding,
showing its local normality.

So, as it was explained, for many values of @xmath we know the existence
of a locally normal representation @xmath . As for the converse
direction, by [ Ca04 , Prop. 2.1] we know that an irreducible
representation of a Virasoro net @xmath must be (equivalent with) one of
those @xmath for a certain value of @xmath — given that the
representation is of positive energy. Actually in this thesis the
condition about positivity will be eliminated. So in fact all
irreducible representations are of the discussed type.

By looking at the admissible values of @xmath and @xmath and by what was
said, it is clear that @xmath , in case @xmath , has finitely many, and
in case @xmath has infinitely many inequivalent irreducible
representations. Thus the @xmath -index of @xmath is infinite if @xmath
and we have a strong indication that it should be finite if @xmath ; in
fact this is exactly the case, cf. [ KL ] .

Finally, we have not discussed strong additivity. Without further
explanation on how the result was achieved, let it be mentioned that
@xmath is known to be strongly additive for @xmath (see [ KL ] for the
case @xmath and [ Xu03 ] for the case @xmath ) and not strongly additive
for @xmath , cf. [ BS ] . Thus @xmath is an interesting “border” point:
if @xmath then the Virasoro net is completely rational. If @xmath then
its @xmath -index is infinite but at least it is still strongly
additive. Finally, if @xmath then it is not even strongly additive.

## Chapter 4 Towards the construction of diffeomorphism symmetry

Chapter Summary

The aim of this chapter is to pinpoint some (algebraic) conditions on a
Möbius covariant local net that could ensure the existence of @xmath
symmetry. After some motivating arguments, the group of (once)
differentiable piecewise Möbius transformations will be introduced. It
will be then shown that the Möbius symmetry of a regular net @xmath
(i.e. a net which is @xmath -regular for every @xmath ) has an extension
to this group of piecewise Möbius transformations if and only if a
certain (but purely algebraic) condition is satisfied regarding the
“relative position” of @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath are the
intervals obtained by removing a point from @xmath .

It will be shown that any diffeomorphism can be (for example uniformly)
approximated by them; even in a stronger, local sense. (Uniform topology
serves simply to illustrate that there are “many” such transformations —
even among the local ones. In a later chapter a more relevant statement
will be proved about their density). Thus, although the symmetry is
extended only to these piecewise Möbius transformations and not to the
group @xmath , assuming regularity, this algebraic condition is
conjectured to imply diffeomorphism covariance.

The relation of this condition with others will be investigated. First,
it will be confirmed that conformal covariance implies this condition.
However, the point is that it can be checked in many cases without
assuming conformal covariance. In particular it will be shown to be
satisfied for every completely rational net (which are in particular
also regular); indicating that in case of complete rationality
diffeomorphism symmetry should be automatic.

### 4.1 Motivations for using piecewise Möbius transformations

#### §1.

Suppose we have a Möbius covariant local net of von Neumann algebras on
the circle @xmath . We do not know whether our net is conformal. We
would like to find a way to construct — if it is possible — an extension
of the symmetry to a larger geometrical group; possibly to @xmath .

In order to go beyond the Möbius symmetry, we consider a (not
necessarily Möbius ) transformation @xmath and we try to implement it in
our model. In particular we try to find a unitary @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath . Of course for a @xmath we have such a unitary. The
problem is that in general we do not even seem to have a “candidate” for
the implementing operator.

Let us suppose for a moment that our net is actually a conformal net
with @xmath being the representation of the full diffeomorphism group.
If the diffeomorphism @xmath acts like a Möbius transformation on a
certain interval @xmath , that is @xmath , then @xmath and so @xmath .
Putting this into the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

we see that the adjoint action of @xmath on elements of @xmath is
completely determined by the representation of the Möbius group.

Let @xmath be the set of disjoint open intervals that we get by removing
@xmath points of the circle; so @xmath when @xmath and @xmath . Suppose
@xmath is a transformation of the circle that acts on each interval
@xmath like a certain Möbius transformation @xmath @xmath . In other
words @xmath is a transformation which is obtained by putting together
the action of @xmath (possibly different) Möbius transformations on
@xmath different pieces.

Of course if do not want @xmath to be simply a Möbius transformation, we
cannot require smoothness. But for this time let us not care about such
questions. What is important for us is that by equation ( 4.2 ) when
trying to implement @xmath we should look for a unitary @xmath whose
adjoint action @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . But if our net is at least @xmath -regular, then such an
@xmath — if it exists at all — is completely determined by the above
equation! So if exists, then up to phase there exists a unique unitary
@xmath satisfying our expectations. As it is uniquely determined (in the
projective sense) by the Möbius transformations, by an abuse of
notations we shall use the symbol @xmath and we shall forget the letter
“ @xmath ”.

#### §2.

It is clear that @xmath must satisfy some conditions more then just —
let us say — continuity. Indeed, take @xmath to be the continuous
transformation which acts on the upper half circle as a dilation with a
certain parameter @xmath , and acts identically on the lower half
circle. Consider the (projective) unitary operator associated to @xmath
in the sense of equation ( 4.3 ). Its adjoint action on @xmath should be
trivial. So by Haag duality this unitary should be localized in @xmath .
On the other hand, by the Bisognano-Wichmann property its adjoint action
on @xmath should be a modular automorphism with parameter @xmath . But
unless the net is trivial, this is impossible: we know that @xmath , if
not trivial, then it is a type @xmath factor whose modular automorphism
with nonzero parameter is never inner.

It is easy to check that in this little (counter)example although @xmath
was continuous, it was not differentiable. We shall now see that
starting with a conformal net @xmath , nonsmooth symmetries naturally
appear, but the ones we shall construct will all turn out to be (once)
differentiable. So suppose that @xmath is conformal, and take a @xmath
such that @xmath . Thus @xmath is an automorphism of the von Neumann
algebra @xmath and so we can consider its standard implementing unitary
¹ ¹ 1 Recall that if @xmath is a von Neumann algebra with a cyclic and
separating vector @xmath and @xmath , then there exists a unique unitary
@xmath whose adjoint action on @xmath is @xmath and leaves @xmath in the
natural cone @xmath ; see e.g. [ Tak , Vol. II, Theorem 1.15] . @xmath
automatically commutes with the modular conjugation @xmath . @xmath with
respect to the mentioned algebra and the vacuum vector. Omitting the
vacuum vector @xmath from the subscript of the modular conjugation, we
have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

But we know that the modular conjugation @xmath acts geometrically, more
concretely like the reflection @xmath . So by equation ( 4.4 ) if @xmath
is a subinterval of @xmath or @xmath , then

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.5)
  -- -- -- -------

which by assuming strong additivity, implies that the adjoint action of
@xmath is geometrical and corresponds to the transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This transformation is not smooth; it is easy to think of a @xmath for
which it will have no second derivative at the points @xmath . On the
other hand, evidently it will be always (once) differentiable. (If
@xmath is the restriction of a smooth function onto @xmath with @xmath ,
then by extending it to the negatives with the formula @xmath we get an
odd continuous function. Thus for the @xmath derivative at @xmath we
have the formula @xmath which shows the existence of the first
derivative even at @xmath and explains why in general we do not get a
twice differentiable function.)

#### §3.

Motivated by what was explained so far, we shall introduce the notion of
piecewise Möbius transformations as follows.

###### Definition 4.1.1.

A @xmath bijection is said to be a piecewise Möbius transformation if it
is (once) differentiable and there exist a finite number of intervals
@xmath @xmath and Möbius transformations @xmath @xmath such that

-   @xmath for @xmath ,

-   @xmath .

We shall denote by Pcw @xmath (Möb) the set of all piecewise Möbius
transformations. As a Möbius transformation is in particular
differentiable, by definition @xmath .

One can prove various geometrical properties of @xmath . First of all,
with respect to the composition it is a group and every element of it is
an orientation preserving transformation (Prop. B.1.1 ). Second, if
@xmath and @xmath are two sets of @xmath (different) points in @xmath
where @xmath is any positive integer and the numbering of the points
corresponds to the anticlockwise order, then there exists a @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In fact, an even stronger version of this statement is true. For two
points of the circle @xmath denote by @xmath the closed interval whose
first point (in the anticlockwise direction) is @xmath and last point is
@xmath . (If @xmath then set @xmath to be the set containing the single
point @xmath .) Then if both @xmath and @xmath are contained in a
certain interval @xmath , then the transformation @xmath in equation (
4.7 ) can be chosen to be localized in @xmath ; i.e. can be chosen so
that @xmath (Theorem B.1.6 ).

The proofs of these statements are not completely trivial. Nevertheless
in some sense they are “elementary” and have nothing to do either with
the theory of von Neumann algebras or with Quantum Field Theory. Thus
the author of this thesis postpones the proofs and refers to the
appendix where these questions are treated in detail.

There is a rather trivial but nevertheless suggestive (in relation with
the construction of diffeomorphism symmetry for a local net) consequence
of the above mentioned Theorem B.1.6 , which is probably worth to state
on its own.

###### Corollary 4.1.2.

Let @xmath . Then there exists a sequence of piecewise Möbius
transformations @xmath converging uniformly to @xmath . Moreover, if
@xmath is localized in the interval @xmath then the sequence can be
chosen so that every element of it is localized in @xmath .

### 4.2 Existence of piecewise Möbius symmetry

#### §1.

Recall that two intervals @xmath are said to be distant , if @xmath .
Recall also that for each interval @xmath there is an associated
one-parameter group @xmath which is called the one-parameter group of
dilations associated to @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be two distant intervals. The interior of the complement of
@xmath is again the union of two distant elements of @xmath which we
shall call @xmath and @xmath . Then for each @xmath we define @xmath to
be the transformation given by the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the appendix it is shown that @xmath is once differentiable (but if
@xmath it is not twice differentiable: @xmath does not exists exactly at
the four points that are the endpoints of the intervals @xmath and
@xmath ) and so @xmath is a one-parameter group of piecewise Möbius
transformations (Lemma B.1.2 ). The importance of such transformations
is that @xmath is actually generated by the elements @xmath (with @xmath
ranging over all real numbers @xmath all distant intervals of @xmath )
and the Möbius group (Theorem B.1.4 ).

#### §2.

Observation. Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net which is at
least @xmath -regular. Suppose @xmath and @xmath are two distant
intervals with @xmath where @xmath . Consider an automorphism @xmath of
the algebra of all bounded operators of @xmath , whose action on the
four algebras @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then if there exists such an automorphism, it must be unique. Indeed, by
@xmath -regularity the algebras associated to the intervals @xmath and
@xmath generate the algebra of all bounded operators of @xmath and thus
the action of the automorphism by the above equation is fixed on a
generating set.

###### Corollary 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net which is at least @xmath
-regular. Suppose @xmath extends to a projective unitary representation
@xmath of the group @xmath which is compatible with the local structure
of the net @xmath ; i.e. for all @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then such an extension is unique (and so we may omit the symbol @xmath
and by an abuse of notation denote the extension, too, by @xmath ).

###### Proof.

It is a consequence of the observation made above and the fact that the
elements in question, together with the Möbius transformations generate
the whole group of piecewise Möbius transformations (Theorem B.1.4 ). ∎

#### §3.

We shall now see that if the piecewise Möbius transformations @xmath are
implementable, then — given that the net is regular (i.e. @xmath
-regular for any positive integer @xmath )— such an extension of @xmath
always exists: i.e. the group relations are automatically satisfied. ² ²
2 By using only a set of defining group relations rather than checking
the “full” multiplication table of @xmath it is possible that one can
weaken the regularity condition. In fact the author spent some time
trying to give a proof using only @xmath -regularity rather than
complete regularity, but then decided to not do so as it would make
everything much more complicated without resulting a statement of really
more use. In any case, regularity is expected to hold in every
diffeomorphism covariant net and to the knowledge of the author there
are no known examples or general situations where the existence of
diffeomorphism covariance is unknown and regularity cannot be easily
checked while @xmath -regularity can be. Moreover, it turns out that
such an extension acts always in a covariant way on the net, which is
not at all a trivial statement. Take for example, the adjoint action of
@xmath . If @xmath is a subinterval of @xmath , then by definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath and the restriction of the adjoint action of the unitary in
question to @xmath by Eq. ( 4.8 ) coincides with that of @xmath . But if
@xmath does not lie in any of the “pieces” because for example it
contains one of the endpoints of @xmath , then Eq. ( 4.10 ) — as we did
not assume strong additivity — does not immediately follow from the
definitions.

###### Proposition 4.2.3.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net which is regular and admits
an implementation of the transformation @xmath in the sense of Eq. ( 4.8
) for every @xmath and @xmath distant elements of @xmath . Then @xmath ,
as a projective unitary representation, extends to @xmath in a unique
manner which is compatible with the local structure of @xmath ; i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, this extension acts in a covariant way on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By Corollary 4.2.2 , the extension, if exists, is unique. By the
condition of the proposition we are given with the unitaries @xmath and
for each such unitary we know its action on certain local algebras.

Since by Theorem B.1.4 the transformations @xmath generate the group of
piecewise Möbius transformations, if @xmath then there exists a
decomposition @xmath where each transformation @xmath @xmath is either a
Möbius transformation or of the mentioned kind. Thus we can try to
define the unitary associated to @xmath by the formula @xmath . However,
we need to assure that @xmath is well-defined (in the projective sense)
by this procedure and that the thus extended @xmath is indeed a
(projective) representation.

For all this what we need to check is that @xmath is a multiple of the
identity whenever @xmath . But it is rather clear, that we can find a
set of disjoint intervals @xmath @xmath whose union equals to @xmath
minus a finite set of points and satisfy for every @xmath the following
requirement: @xmath is smooth on @xmath , @xmath is smooth on @xmath ,
@xmath is smooth on @xmath , etc. Then it follows that the restriction
of the adjoint action of @xmath to @xmath is trivial for every @xmath .
Thus by the regularity of @xmath the unitary @xmath must be a multiple
of the identity.

We shall now show the compatibility with the net. That is, the property
that if @xmath is such that it acts identically on the complement of a
certain interval @xmath then the restriction of the adjoint action of
@xmath is trivial on @xmath .

By the consideration made before it is clear that we can find a finite
set of points such that @xmath is trivial on the algebras associated to
the subintervals of @xmath obtained by the removal of these points. This
in itself though is not enough as we did not assume strong additivity.
Suppose @xmath is one of those nonempty open subintervals of @xmath for
which @xmath acts trivially on @xmath . We may choose @xmath so that it
has a common endpoint with @xmath . Then we can find an interval @xmath
which is distant from @xmath such that also @xmath has a common endpoint
with @xmath (of course on the “other side” with respect to where @xmath
is). Then for every @xmath the transformation @xmath is identical on
@xmath and thus commutes with @xmath , showing that in the projective
sense

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand @xmath and the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath
coincides with that of @xmath . Then, since by Möbius covariance we have
@xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, together with Eq. ( 4.11 ), shows that the action of @xmath is
trivial on @xmath . But the parameter @xmath was arbitrary and by the
continuity of the net @xmath generates @xmath . Thus in fact we have
verified that @xmath acts trivially on @xmath showing that the extension
of @xmath to the piecewise Möbius group is compatible with the local
structure of @xmath .

We are left only with the part regarding the covariance of the action of
the extension. Let @xmath and @xmath . We can safely assume that @xmath
; even if it was originally not so we can modify @xmath by a Möbius
transformation so that it holds (and of course a Möbius transformation
acts in a covariant way). For the moment we shall further assume that
@xmath acts identically on a certain @xmath where @xmath . We would like
to show that @xmath . By Haag-duality and the compatibility which we
have just proved it is clear that @xmath . Then by the same trick which
we have just employed for the demonstration of the compatibility, for
any @xmath we can find another piecewise Möbius transformation @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath acts identically on @xmath . Then it follows
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for every parameter @xmath . Thus by the additivity of the net @xmath we
can conclude that @xmath .

Finally, we need to remove the condition on the existence of a nonempty
open interval @xmath on which @xmath is identical. Of course we can
choose an interval @xmath such that @xmath is smooth and @xmath has a
common endpoint with @xmath . Then there exists an @xmath such that
@xmath and therefore the restriction of @xmath to @xmath is a dilation
associated to @xmath with a certain parameter @xmath . We may choose
another open nonempty interval @xmath which is distant from @xmath and
which also has a common endpoint with @xmath . Then by what was said

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus the adjoint action of @xmath preserves the algebra @xmath . But as
@xmath by the geometrical position of @xmath and by the definition of
@xmath , we have that also the adjoint action of @xmath (and of course
that of @xmath , too) preserve the algebra in question showing that
@xmath . This concludes the proof of the covariance of the action. ∎

#### §4.

When considering diffeomorphism symmetry, apart from compatibility with
local structure we also require continuity of the representation. Having
seen the that the one-parameter groups of the type @xmath generate the
extension to the piecewise Möbius group, we shall fix the notion of
continuity exactly by these. Afterwards we shall also fix what we mean
by piecewise Möbius symmetry.

###### Definition 4.2.4.

A projective unitary representation @xmath of @xmath is called
continuous if its restriction to Möbius group as well as its restriction
to any of the one-parameter groups @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
distant elements of @xmath , is strongly continuous.

###### Definition 4.2.5.

A Möbius covariant local net on the circle @xmath is called piecewise
Möbius covariant if @xmath extends to a continuous projective unitary
representation of the group @xmath which is compatible with the local
structure of the net and acts in a covariant manner on it; i.e. for all
@xmath and @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath .

#### §5.

Assuming regularity, we shall now establish the sufficient and necessary
algebraic condition (on the local algebras) of the existence of
piecewise Möbius symmetry. As in general a Möbius covariant local net
can be given by a +hsm factorization involving three von Neumann factors
(see in the preliminary Sect. 2.2 ), one wishes to find a condition that
concerns the “relative position” of three local algebras. In the
particular case of strong additivity, the condition should be simplified
and expressed in a way that involves only two local algebras, in
agreement with the fact that a strongly additive Möbius covariant local
net can be characterized as a +hsm inclusion of two von Neumann factors
(see again in the preliminary Sect. 2.2 ).

###### Theorem 4.2.6.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net and @xmath the two connected
subintervals obtained by removing a point from the interval @xmath .
Then

-    if @xmath is regular then it is piecewise Möbius covariant if and
    only if there exists a continuous one-parameter group @xmath
    preserving both @xmath and @xmath such that the restriction of
    @xmath to @xmath @xmath is a modular automorphism with parameter
    @xmath ;

-    if @xmath is strongly additive then it is piecewise Möbius
    covariant if and only if there exists an unbounded expectation ³ ³ 3
    Note that in the mathematical literature it is usually called a
    “normal, semifinte, operator valued weight”. In this thesis the name
    “unbounded expectation” is used, to stress that a (usual)
    expectation is a special case of such an unbounded one. from @xmath
    to @xmath .

In any of these cases with the given algebraic condition satisfied, the
extension of the symmetry from the Möbius group to @xmath is unique.

###### Proof.

Uniqueness is ensured by Corollary 4.2.2 . First we shall treat the more
general case of a regular net. Let @xmath be the modular conjugation
associated to the algebra @xmath and the vacuum vector and set @xmath
and @xmath for the intervals obtained by applying the geometrical part
of the conjugation to @xmath and @xmath ; i.e. @xmath for @xmath .

Suppose the net is piecewise Möbius covariant. Then the one-parameter
group @xmath trivially satisfies the required properties. In the
converse direction, suppose @xmath is the continuous one-parameter group
appearing in the condition of the theorem. By the Bisognano-Wichmann
property and the cocycle theorem (see e.g. [ Tak , Vol. II, Theorem
3.19] ) of Connes it is clear that we may assume @xmath to be not just
any modular automorphism group of @xmath @xmath but in fact the one
coming from the vacuum-state. Then setting @xmath @xmath for the
standard implementing unitary (with respect to the vacuum) of the
automorphism @xmath , we have that @xmath is a strongly continuous
one-parameter group of unitaries whose adjoint action on @xmath , by
definition, coincides with that of @xmath . Moreover, as @xmath we also
have the “right” action on the algebras @xmath and @xmath . Nevertheless
we still cannot apply Prop. 4.2.3 . If @xmath and @xmath are the two
intervals obtained by removing a point from @xmath , then — if the
numbering of the intervals is made in the right way — there exists a
Möbius transformation sending @xmath into @xmath and then of course we
can repeat everything with @xmath replaced by @xmath . The problem is
that we cannot get any pair of distant intervals as @xmath with some
choice of @xmath and the removed inner point. The Möbius group does not
act transitively on the set of pairs of distant intervals.

However, we have already managed to extend the symmetry to some
piecewise Möbius transformations, as we already have the operator @xmath
. It is not claimed that these transformations generate the group @xmath
. Nevertheless, they are already many enough to move any pair of distant
intervals into any other pair.

Suppose @xmath are four disjoint intervals numbered in an anticlockwise
manner whose union equals to @xmath minus four points. Again, by the
Bisognano Wichmann property and Connes’ cocycle theorem it is clear that
whether the one-parameter group of transformations @xmath is
implementable in the sense of Eq. ( 4.8 ), in a strongly continuous way,
is an algebraic property; i.e. a property which depends only on the
relative position of the four algebras @xmath and @xmath but does not
depend on the vacuum state. We know that this property holds for @xmath
. All we need to show is that by “moving” this quartet of algebras
repeatedly with the adjoint action of @xmath with @xmath being either a
Möbius transformation or @xmath for some @xmath , we can obtain the
quartet associated to @xmath .

By Möbius covariance we can safely assume that @xmath and @xmath . Then
@xmath and in fact their union is @xmath minus a point. Moreover, there
exists a Möbius transformation @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Then
it follows that @xmath and that also in this case their union is @xmath
minus a point. So it is easy to see that there must exist a certain
parameter @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Then the action of @xmath
sends

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have used that @xmath , by its construction, preserves both
@xmath and @xmath , and its adjoint action on @xmath coincides with that
of @xmath . This shows that @xmath is implementable in the sense of Eq.
( 4.8 ). Thus by Prop. 4.2.3 , @xmath extends to a projective
representation of @xmath which is compatible with the net and whose
action on the net is covariant. Thus, since the one-parameter groups in
question are continuous, the net is piecewise Möbius covariant.

We are left with the part of the theorem regarding the strongly additive
case. The existence of an unbounded expectation is equivalent with the
fact that there is a modular automorphism group of the bigger algebra
(in general associated to a weight and not necessarily to a state) that
leaves the smaller algebra globally invariant and its restriction to the
smaller algebra is again modular, see e.g. [ Tak , Vol. II, Theorem
4.12] . Again, by Connes’ cocycle theorem, it then follows that any
modular automorphism group of the smaller algebra extends to a
continuous one-parameter automorphism group of the bigger.

If @xmath is strongly additive and there exists an unbounded expectation
from @xmath to @xmath then the modular group of @xmath associated to the
vacuum state extends to a continuous one-parameter automorphism group of
@xmath . Using the standard the standard implementing unitary with
respect to @xmath and the vacuum vector, it is easy to see that what we
get is a strongly continuous one-parameter group @xmath whose adjoint
action on @xmath coincides with that of @xmath , while on @xmath with
that of @xmath . Set

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.16)
  -- -- -- --------

By strong additivity @xmath and @xmath generates @xmath and hence the
adjoint action of @xmath preserves @xmath . Then by what was said we can
apply the first part of the statement (which we have already proved) to
@xmath and thus we can conclude that our net is piecewise Möbius
covariant.

As for the converse direction, suppose our net is strongly additive and
piecewise Möbius covariant. Then the restriction of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

to @xmath is an inverse-parameterized modular automorphism group. As
@xmath is a factor in its standard form it follows that the restriction
to @xmath is a modular automorphism group. But of course, by its very
definition, also the restriction to @xmath is a modular automorphism
group. Therefore there exists an unbounded expectation from @xmath to
@xmath and then of course, by Möbius symmetry also from @xmath to @xmath
. ∎

### 4.3 Piecewise Möbius symmetry: conclusions

#### §1.

Using piecewise Möbius transformations one can move any @xmath
consecutive points into @xmath other consecutive points. So, for example
one can prove that the @xmath -index of a piecewise Möbius covariant net
is well-defined. Using only Möbius transformations we cannot move any
pair of distant intervals into any other pair of distant intervals.
(Even without diffeomorphism covariance, by [ KLM , Prop. 5] the @xmath
-index is independent of the choice of intervals but only with the
assumption of split property and strong additivity.) However, the author
does not think that such a use of piecewise Möbius transformations (i.e.
to show something which follows obviously from diffeomorphism
covariance) is of real importance. Piecewise Möbius symmetry is
introduced to derive diffeomorphism symmetry. Assuming that sooner or
later this will be indeed carried out, there is of course no point in
using piecewise Möbius symmetry for something that diffeomorphism
symmetry can be easily used for.

The piecewise Möbius symmetry was easily shown to be unique. By
establishing a connection between piecewise Möbius symmetry and
diffeomorphism symmetry (at least in the case when both are assumed to
exist), this can serve to show the uniqueness of the latter one. Also,
it is almost obvious that a strongly additive Möbius covariant subnet of
a piecewise Möbius covariant net is automatically piecewise Möbius
covariant. Indeed, a piecewise Möbius transformation is “put together”
by Möbius transformations, and the action of a Möbius transformation —
by definition — preserves the subnet. So again, in case both piecewise
Möbius symmetry and diffeomorphism symmetry exist, this observation can
be used to show the conformal covariance of a subnet.

However, for the moment we shall suspend discussing how these new,
nonsmooth symmetries can be exploited. The mentioned ideas will be
developed in a later chapter. In this section the only question we shall
investigate is: when can we establish that a Möbius covariant local net
admits piecewise Möbius symmetry. Of course in some sense we have a
complete characterization (Theorem 4.2.6 ) of the existence of such
symmetry. But it is worth to investigate the relation of the condition
there given with such “more traditional” assumptions as for example
complete rationality. Does complete rationality imply piecewise Möbius
covariance? Another interesting question is the following. Consider a
Virasoro net with central charge @xmath . As it was mentioned, it is not
strongly additive. Thus by taking its dual (see Sect. 2.5 ), we obtain a
new (Möbius covariant) net. Unfortunately, at the moment there is no
direct description of this new net and there seems to be no easy way of
establishing the existence of diffeomorphism symmetry. So can we prove
at least that it admits piecewise Möbius symmetry? We shall answer both
questions positively.

#### §2.

Let us first see what can we say if we assume conformal covariance.

###### Lemma 4.3.1.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net and @xmath two intervals obtained by
removing a point from @xmath . Then there exists a continuous
one-parameter group @xmath preserving both @xmath and @xmath such that
the restriction of @xmath to @xmath @xmath is a modular automorphism
with parameter @xmath .

###### Proof.

We can assume that @xmath and that the point removed is its “middle”
point. Then the one-parameter group of @xmath -dilations preserves both
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus the corresponding one-parameter
unitary group preserves the three local algebras @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover, the actions on @xmath and @xmath , with right
parametrizations, are modular, since the geometrical part of the action
on each piece is conjugate to a dilation; see also [ LX , Prop. A.1] .
Thus the automorphism group implemented by this one-parameter group
satisfies all that was required. ∎

###### Corollary 4.3.2.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net. Then its dual is piecewise Möbius
covariant.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be two intervals obtained by removing a point @xmath from the
interval @xmath . By choosing the infinite point to be @xmath , we may
assume that @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is dual net. By the
previous lemma there exists a continuous one-parameter group @xmath
preserving both @xmath and @xmath such that the restriction of @xmath to
@xmath @xmath is a modular automorphism with parameter @xmath . But by
the strong additivity of the dual net @xmath , hence @xmath preserves
@xmath , too. Thus by Theorem 4.2.6 the statement is proven. ∎

Consider the three requirements of complete rationality. There are no
known examples of diffeomorphism covariant nets not satisfying split
property. Strong additivity does not always hold, but the weaker
assumption of regularity again seems to be a general feature of
diffeomorphism covariant nets. Finally, once assuming regularity, the
two-interval inclusion is irreducible. If this inclusion is expected
(i.e. there exists an expectation from the bigger algebra to the
smaller) then by covariance so is the inclusion obtained by going over
the commutants. Thus by a theorem of Longo (see [ Lon98 , II, Theorem
4.4] ) it follows that the two-interval inclusion is of finite index.
The contrary, of course, is true essentially by definition: if the
two-interval inclusion is of finite index then it is expected. However,
as we know not all diffeomorphism covariant nets have a finite @xmath
-index. So instead let us consider the weaker assumption that the
two-interval inclusion is expected in the unbounded sense . By a similar
argument that was employed in the first lemma of this section, using
@xmath -dilations it is easy to show that this condition is always
satisfied in case of diffeomorphism covariance. (One has to use what was
already mentioned in the last section, namely, that the existence of an
unbounded expectation is equivalent with the fact that there is a
modular automorphism group of the bigger algebra — in general associated
to a weight and not necessarily to a state — that leaves the smaller
algebra globally invariant and its restriction to the smaller algebra is
again modular.)

###### Theorem 4.3.3.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net. Suppose

-   @xmath is split,

-   @xmath is regular,

-    the two-interval inclusion in @xmath is expected at least in the
    unbounded sense.

Then it follows that @xmath is piecewise Möbius covariant.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be four disjoint intervals, numbered in the anticlockwise
direction, whose union is @xmath minus the four endpoints. By the
isomorphism @xmath we can consider the tensor product @xmath of the
modular automorphism groups of @xmath and @xmath with the state being
the vacuum state. Similarly we have @xmath . Since @xmath is a modular
automorphism group of @xmath , by the third listed property it extends
to a modular automorphism group @xmath of @xmath . This algebra is in
its standard form, and therefore @xmath can be implemented by a strongly
continuous one-parameter unitary group @xmath . Then the adjoint action
of @xmath preserves the algebra @xmath and in fact by the inverse of the
cocycle theorem (see e.g. [ Tak , Vol. II, Theorem 3.21] ), it is easy
to see that its action on @xmath is modular with inverted
parametrization. Thus, using the Connes’ cocycle theorem there exists a
strongly continuous unitary cocycle @xmath such that the adjoint action
of @xmath on @xmath is exactly @xmath . So the following is true about
the adjoint action @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then by Prop. 4.2.3 @xmath preserves the algebra @xmath where @xmath is
the interior of @xmath , which in turn, by Theorem 4.2.6 implies that
the net is piecewise Möbius covariant. ∎

## Chapter 5 Stress-energy tensor on nonsmooth functions

Chapter Summary

In this chapter it will be shown that the stress-energy tensor,
associated to a positive energy representation of @xmath , can be
naturally extended from the smooth functions to functions of finite
@xmath norm. To this extension Nelson’s commutator theorem cannot be
directly used to show that the operators involved are self-adjoint.
However, an estimate will be found involving the contraction semigroup
associated to the conformal Hamiltonian, which allows to demonstrate
self-adjointness.

The possibility of evaluating the stress-energy tensor on nonsmooth
functions has various use. In particular, one can directly construct the
nonsmooth symmetries discussed in the previous chapter by evaluating the
stress-energy tensor on nonsmooth functions. In the next chapter this
will serve both for showing the uniqueness of the diffeomorphism
symmetry and for the automatic conformal covariance of subnets.

### 5.1 Why dealing with the nonsmooth case and how

#### §1.

In the previous chapter it was shown by abstract arguments that in a
large class of models, the Möbius symmetry of the net can be extended to
the piecewise Möbius group. One may wonder whether in case of conformal
covariance the construction of nonsmooth symmetries could be directly
done by evaluating the stress-energy tensor on some nonsmooth functions.
Since the estimates in the paper of Goodmann and Wallach [ GoW ] are not
sufficient for our purpose, we need a more detailed analysis. We shall
use ideas coming from the paper [ Ne72 ] of E. Nelson. Essentially all
presented results of this chapter are extracted from the joint work [ CW
] of the author of this thesis with S. Carpi.

Evaluating the stress-energy tensor on nonsmooth functions can give
advantages in various calculations and provides new tools for proofs. In
particular, since the piecewise Möbius symmetry of the net is unique,
the direct construction of this symmetry from the stress-energy tensor
gives a way to demonstrate the uniqueness of the diffeomorphism
symmetry. It also turns out to be the key for showing that a locally
normal representation of a conformal net is always of positive energy.
All these results will be derived in the next chapter, in this chapter
we shall consider only the problem of evaluating the stress-energy
tensor on nonsmooth functions.

#### §2.

Recall that for a real continuous function @xmath on the circle with
Fourier coefficients

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

we have set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Suppose that @xmath is the representation of the Virasoro operators
associated to the positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath . If
@xmath is a smooth function, then — as we have seen in the preliminaries
(Sect. 3.2 ) — the stress-energy tensor @xmath of @xmath evaluated on
@xmath can be defined as the closure of the operator @xmath . In the
next section we shall show that if @xmath then even if @xmath is
nonsmooth, the above sum is meaningful (i.e. convergent) and results an
essentially self-adjoint operator. To do so we shall find (by a rather
straightforward calculation) an @xmath -independent bound on the norm of
the commutator @xmath where @xmath .

#### §3.

Let us return for a second to piecewise Möbius transformations and
introduce the notion of piecewise Möbius vector fields.

###### Definition 5.1.1.

A function @xmath is said to be a piecewise Möbius vector field if it is
(once) differentiable and there exist a finite number of intervals
@xmath @xmath and Möbius vector fields @xmath @xmath such that

-   @xmath for @xmath ,

-   @xmath .

We shall denote by @xmath the set of all piecewise Möbius vector fields.
As a Möbius vector field is in particular differentiable, by definition
@xmath .

The following lemma is useful for checking the finiteness of the
relevant norm.

###### Lemma 5.1.2.

Let @xmath be a (once) differentiable function on the circle. Suppose
that there exists a finite set of intervals @xmath and smooth functions
@xmath on the circle @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

The conditions imply that @xmath , which is everywhere defined apart
from a finite set of points, has Fourier coefficients @xmath and is of
bounded variation. Therefore @xmath (see [ Kn , Sect. I.4] ), from which
the claim follows easily. ∎

###### Corollary 5.1.3.

Every piecewise Möbius vector field has finite @xmath norm.

It is also important to investigate the density of the smooth functions
among the functions of finite @xmath norm.

###### Lemma 5.1.4.

Let @xmath with @xmath . Then there exists a sequence of smooth
functions @xmath converging to @xmath in the @xmath norm. Moreover, if
@xmath for a certain interval @xmath and/or @xmath then the sequence can
be chosen so that @xmath and/or @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof follows standard arguments relying on convolution with smooth
functions. Clearly, it is enough to prove the part of the statement
concerning the case when @xmath is localized and nonnegative. Let @xmath
be a sequence of positive smooth functions on @xmath with support
shrinking to the point @xmath such that for all @xmath @xmath . Then the
convolution @xmath defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a nonnegative real smooth function whose support, for @xmath large
enough, is contained in @xmath . Moreover we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

as @xmath since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . ∎

Let @xmath be the space of real valued continuously differentiable
functions on the circle. We shall think of this space as a normed space,
equipped with the norm defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for every @xmath . It is evident, that every continuous real functions
with finite @xmath norm belongs to this space, as in fact

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, it is clear that every element of @xmath is actually globally
Lipschitz, and thus, by the compactness of @xmath , one can consider its
exponential, defined by the generated flow. The following is an
important observation about the continuity of the exponential.

###### Lemma 5.1.5.

Let @xmath be a sequence converging to the function @xmath . Then the
sequence @xmath converges uniformly to @xmath .

###### Proof. ¹ ¹ 1 The argument here given was indicated to the author
by S. Carpi.

In stead of working on the circle, we can obviously transfer the problem
to the real line, with @xmath being periodic functions. Then for any
fixed point @xmath , the real function defined by the map @xmath , is
differentiable. In fact,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Since @xmath , we have that @xmath , which by applying the above
estimate, results, that if @xmath then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus by an application of the Gronwall-lemma (see e.g. [ HiS , Sect.
8.4] ) we find that @xmath . The statement then follows trivially. ∎

#### §4.

In the next section, as it was mentioned, we shall prove that @xmath can
be defined as a self-adjoint operator (which is essentially self-adjoint
on the finite energy vectors) even when @xmath is not smooth but at
least @xmath (Theorem 5.2.3 ). We shall also prove that the thus
extended @xmath has the following continuity property: if @xmath in the
@xmath norm as @xmath , then @xmath in the strong resolvent sense (Prop.
5.2.4 ). Taking these two statements granted for the rest of the section
(we shall not use in the next section anything of what will follow now),
we have the following picture:

-   if @xmath @xmath are real smooth functions on the circle and @xmath
    in the @xmath sense then @xmath converges to @xmath in the strong
    resolvent sense,

-   if @xmath @xmath is a Cauchy sequence of real smooth functions with
    respect to the @xmath norm then @xmath converges to a self-adjoint
    operator in the strong resolvent sense, which is essentially
    self-adjoint on the finite energy vectors,

-   the real smooth functions form a dense set among the real continuous
    functions with finite @xmath norm.

Thus one can really think of this extension of @xmath as an extension by
continuity. As a last thing in this section, we shall state some
important properties of this extension of the stress-energy tensor in
relation with conformal nets.

###### Proposition 5.1.6.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net with stress-energy tensor @xmath and
further let @xmath of finite @xmath norm. Then for every interval @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Moreover, if @xmath and @xmath where @xmath stands for the action of
@xmath on vector fields, then up to phase factors @xmath .

###### Proof.

Of course for a smooth function by definition we have all the required
properties. As for the first assertion, by Lemma 5.1.4 we can take a
sequence @xmath of smooth functions converging to @xmath in the @xmath
norm. Then, by Lemma 5.1.5 , @xmath uniformly. Thus, since by Prop.
5.2.4 @xmath , the result is obtained by the strong convergence of
@xmath to @xmath (which follows from the strong resolvent convergence,
see e.g. [ RS1 , Sect. VIII.7] ) and the continuity of the net @xmath .

The proof of the rest of the statement is similar. For the second
assertion, by the continuity of the net it is enough to prove that if
@xmath (and not only in its closure) then @xmath is affiliated to @xmath
. Then by Lemma 5.1.4 , there exists a sequence of smooth functions
@xmath @xmath converging to @xmath in the @xmath norm whose support is
contained in @xmath . Thus again, the result follows from the strong
resolvent convergence of @xmath to @xmath . Similarly, the proof of the
last part of the statement is obtained by taking appropriate limits. ∎

Let @xmath be two distant intervals. In the appendix (Lemma B.2.1 ) it
is proven that the map @xmath is differentiable at @xmath for every
@xmath and that denoting by @xmath its derivative at @xmath we have that
@xmath . As an implication of the previous proposition we have the
following.

###### Corollary 5.1.7.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net and @xmath two distant intervals.
Then the unitary @xmath is an implementation of the transformation
@xmath in the sense of Eq. ( 4.8 ).

###### Proof.

We shall show that the restriction of the adjoint action of @xmath to
@xmath coincides with that of @xmath . The case of the other three
remaining intervals can be dealt with in a similar manner.

By the previous proposition the adjoint action of both unitaries
preserves @xmath . Set @xmath for the generating Möbius vector field of
@xmath . Then @xmath is zero on @xmath , thus by the previous
proposition (the closure of) @xmath is affiliated to @xmath . Then by an
application of the Trotter product-formula (since both the sum and the
operators involved have a common core: the set of finite energy vectors,
the strong convergence of the formula indeed follows, see e.g. [ RS1 ,
Theorem VIII.31] ) one can easily finish the proof. ∎

### 5.2 Proof of essentially self-adjointness

Throughout this section @xmath will be a (fixed) positive energy
representation of @xmath with associated representation of the Virasoro
algebra @xmath defined on the dense subspace @xmath of its finite energy
vectors. We shall denote by @xmath the stress-energy tensor
corresponding to @xmath .

Recall the energy bound given by equation 3.23 , according to which by
setting @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.2.1.

If @xmath is such that @xmath then

-    the operator @xmath with domain @xmath is well defined, (i.e. the
    sum strongly converges on the domain);

-   @xmath where @xmath is the constant appearing in the energy bound
    given by equation ( 5.2 ) and @xmath ;

-   @xmath is an extension of the operator @xmath . (This again is
    understood as an operator with domain @xmath .)

###### Proof.

Since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

claim (i) and (ii) holds. Finally, the last claim follows, since @xmath
for every integer @xmath . ∎

We now consider for every @xmath the operator @xmath with domain @xmath
. (Note that @xmath so it is indeed well defined on the finite energy
vectors.) The following proposition gives an estimate on the norm of
this commutator which is independent of @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.2.2.

There exists a constant @xmath independent of @xmath and @xmath such
that @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath the statement is trivially true as @xmath commutes with any
bounded function of itself. As the operators in question all preserve
the finite energy vectors and moreover @xmath and @xmath is self-adjoint
it follows that @xmath . Thus it suffices to demonstrate the statement
for negative values of @xmath .

Let therefore be @xmath , @xmath and for every @xmath let @xmath be the
component of the vector @xmath in the eigenspace of @xmath associated to
the eigenvalue @xmath . To not to get confused about positive and
negative constants, in the calculations we shall use the positive @xmath
rather than the negative @xmath . As @xmath raises the eigenvalue of
@xmath by @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mapping

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a positive smooth function on @xmath which goes to zero both when
@xmath and when @xmath . Therefore @xmath has a maximum on @xmath . But
the only solution of the equation @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which then must correspond to the point of maximum. Then by direct
substitution we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now return to the question of the norm of the commutator.
Equation ( 5.10 ) shows that the vectors @xmath are in particular
pairwise orthogonal. Using this and the fact that only for finitely many
values of @xmath the vector @xmath we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used the inequality ( 5.13 ) and the constant @xmath is
the one appearing in equation ( 5.2 ). ∎

###### Theorem 5.2.3.

If @xmath is such that @xmath then @xmath is closable and @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath considered as operators with domain @xmath . In
particular, if @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath is essentially
self-adjoint on @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Prop. 5.2.1 the operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
indeed well defined on the finite energy vectors. By using Prop. 5.2.2
with its constant @xmath appearing in it and the condition on the
sequence @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that @xmath is bounded by a constant independent of @xmath .
Obviously, the same is true for @xmath . Thus for example, taking
account of the fact that @xmath (see Prop. 5.2.1 ) we have that @xmath
is the closure of both @xmath and of @xmath .

If @xmath is an eigenvector of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath then as
@xmath tends to zero,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the operators @xmath on @xmath strongly converge to zero as @xmath
. Then since their norm is bounded by a constant independent of @xmath ,
also the everywhere defined bounded operators @xmath converge strongly
to zero as @xmath .

Finally, remarking on Prop. 5.2.1 let us observe two more things. First,
that the operator @xmath is closable (as its adjoint is an extension of
the densely defined operator @xmath ). Second, the smooth energy vectors
@xmath are in the domain of its closure (as @xmath is energy bounded).

From here the proof of the theorem continues exactly as in [ Ne72 ] ,
but for self-containment let us revise the concluding argument. Suppose
@xmath is a vector in the domain of @xmath . Then, since @xmath , we
have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

As @xmath tends to zero of course @xmath , but now Eq. ( 5.17 ) shows
that also @xmath strongly. Therefore @xmath . ∎

With this we have proved the main theorem of this section on which the
previous section was essentially based. The result ensures, that if the
continuous function @xmath with Fourier coefficients @xmath @xmath has a
finite @xmath norm then @xmath is an essentially self-adjoint operator
on @xmath . As in the case of smooth functions, we denote by @xmath the
corresponding self-adjoint operator obtained by taking closure. We
finish by showing the continuity property of the stress-energy tensor
@xmath which too, was mentioned (and used) in the previous section
without proof.

###### Proposition 5.2.4.

For every @xmath with @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the positive constant appearing in the energy bound Eq.
( 5.2 ). Moreover, if @xmath and @xmath are continuous real functions on
@xmath of finite @xmath norm, and in this norm @xmath as @xmath , then
@xmath in the strong resolvent sense. In particular, @xmath strongly.

###### Proof.

The claimed inequality is an immediate consequence of the inequality in
Eq. ( 5.2 ), the definition of @xmath and that of the @xmath norm. It
follows then that @xmath converges to @xmath for every @xmath — in fact,
for every @xmath . Since @xmath is a common core for these self-adjoint
operators, the conclusion follows (see e.g. [ RS1 , Sect. VIII.7] ). ∎

## Chapter 6 Applications and further results

Chapter Summary

In this chapter, by a direct application of the piecewise Möbius
transformations discussed before, a short proof will be given to
demonstrate the uniqueness of the diffeomorphism symmetry assuming
@xmath -regularity. The argument relies on the density of piecewise
Möbius transformations, so it will be also shown that for every @xmath a
sequence of piecewise Möbius transformations @xmath converging uniformly
to @xmath can be constructed with the property that @xmath strongly for
any regular conformal local net @xmath (so they are dense in the “right”
sense). Still with the same method it will be shown that a Möbius
covariant subnet of a conformal net is always conformal, assuming again
some regularity condition.

Then a completely different argument will be presented to prove again
these two results. This second argument will be somewhat longer but on
the other hand it will work without any regularity assumption. It will
also show that given a subnet, the stress-energy tensor can be split
into a part belonging to the subnet and another part belonging to the
coset of the subnet.

Afterwards some applications, such as the construction of new examples
of Möbius covariant nets admitting no @xmath symmetry, will be
discussed. Finally with the technique of evaluating the stress-energy
tensor on nonsmooth function it will be shown that every locally normal
representation of a diffeomorphism covariant net is of positive energy.

### 6.1 Uniqueness of the @xmath symmetry

#### §1.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net and suppose @xmath can be
extended to be a projective representation of @xmath in a compatible way
with the local structure of @xmath . Such an extension makes the net
diffeomorphism covariant (see the remark after Def. 3.3.1 on the
automatic covariance of the action). The problem we shall consider is
whether such an extension of the Möbius symmetry is unique.

Two different proofs will be presented for the uniqueness of the
diffeomorphism symmetry. The first one will be a direct application of
the previous considerations regarding local algebras and nonsmooth
symmetries, but requires @xmath -regularity. The second one will be an
argument that, in its spirit, is closer to Quantum Fields (and in
particular, to Vertex Operator Algebras as it is carried out at the
level of Fourier modes) than to local algebras. It relies on exploiting
restrictions on possible commutation relations coming from the fact that
the stress-energy tensor is a so-called dimension @xmath field whose
integral is the total conformal energy. Although found independently, it
is — as it was pointed out to the author by Karl-Henning Rehren —
essentially a Fourier-transformed version of an old idea of Lüscher and
Mack (see [ Mack , Sect. III.] for their argument). However, as it was
mentioned in the introduction, what seems to be really new is the
application in the algebraic setting discussed in this and the next
section. Note also — as it will be clear later on — that for such
application a detailed analyses is needed involving the use of energy
bounds and in particular the relation between local structure and energy
bounds.

The first proof is contained in the joint work [ CW ] of the author with
S. Carpi, although with some differences which will be later explained.
The second one is the author’s own but also takes ideas from the
mentioned work; in particular from the way the uniqueness was there
proved for the special case of Virasoro nets.

#### §2.

Throughout this section @xmath will be a Möbius covariant local net and
@xmath and @xmath two strongly continuous projective unitary
representations of @xmath both extending @xmath and making @xmath
conformal covariant. Of course by definition the restrictions of these
two representations to @xmath , coincide (as both restrictions result
@xmath ). Our aim is to prove that @xmath must coincide with @xmath on
the whole group of @xmath .

The two representations @xmath and @xmath give rise to two stress-energy
tensors @xmath and @xmath and also two associated representations of the
Virasoro algebra @xmath and @xmath . By our assumptions, @xmath for
@xmath .

#### §3.

Let @xmath be two distant intervals. Recall the the one-parameter group
of piecewise Möbius transformations @xmath introduced by Def. 4.2.1 ,
and its generating (piecewise Möbius ) vector field @xmath (see Lemma
B.2.1 ).

###### Lemma 6.1.1.

If the net @xmath is at least @xmath -regular then @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Corollary 5.1.7 , in the sense of Eq. ( 4.8 ) both @xmath and @xmath
are implementations of the one-parameter group of transformations @xmath
in @xmath , and by the observation made before Corollary 4.2.2 , if the
net is @xmath -regular, then in the projective sense, such an
implementation is unique. Thus up to an additive constant @xmath and
@xmath must coincide. But since the vacuum expectation of both of them
is zero, this additive constant is actually zero. ∎

Remark. The operator @xmath is localized in @xmath and it equals to
@xmath . This shows that the local intersection of the two Virasoro
subnets (defined by @xmath and @xmath ) is not trivial. Then by the
minimality of the Virasoro net (cf. [ Ca98 ] ) it follows that the two
subnets coincide. Together with a separate argument treating the case of
the Virasoro net, this gives a proof of the uniqueness for the general
case of a @xmath -regular conformal net. In the mentioned joint work [
CW ] that is how the result is achieved. Thus the problem regarding the
density of piecewise Möbius transformations was cleverly avoided as, by
minimality, a single non-trivial piecewise Möbius transformation was
sufficient for the proof. Here the argument given will be different.
Minimality will be not used, and nor will be need for a separate
argument treating the case of the Virasoro net. Rather, we shall
directly address the question of density.

###### Theorem 6.1.2.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net which is at least @xmath
-regular and let @xmath and @xmath be two strongly continuous projective
unitary representations of @xmath both extending @xmath and making
@xmath a conformal covariant local net. Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath are distant intervals then by the previous lemma we have that
@xmath . The two stress-energy tensors also coincide on any Möbius
vector field. Moreover, it is clear that if the stress-energy tensors
coincide on some functions then in fact they coincide on any linear
combination of those functions (the set of finite energy vectors is a
common core so there is no problem with taking sums). Thus @xmath for
every piecewise Möbius vector field, since, as it is proved in the
appendix (Theorem B.2.3 ), the functions @xmath (where @xmath run
through all pairs of distant intervals) together with the Möbius vector
fields span the space of piecewise Möbius vector fields. But it is also
proved in the appendix (Theorem B.2.5 ), that the piecewise Möbius
vector fields are dense among the functions of finite @xmath norm. Thus
by Prop. 5.2.4 we can conclude the equality of the two stress-energy
tensors. As it was mentioned, @xmath is generated by exponentials; hence
by the equality of the stress-energy tensors @xmath . ∎

Remark. We have used the density of the piecewise Möbius vector fields,
but it is worth discussing the density of piecewise Möbius
transformations. By Lemma 4.3.1 and Theorem 4.2.6 if a conformal net
@xmath is regular it is also piecewise Möbius covariant and its
piecewise Möbius symmetry is unique. Thus we can safely write
expressions like @xmath where @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.1.3.

Let @xmath . Then there is a sequence of piecewise Möbius
transformations @xmath converging uniformly to @xmath such that @xmath
strongly for any conformal, regular, local net @xmath .

###### Proof.

We can assume that @xmath for a certain smooth function @xmath , since
@xmath is generated by the exponentials. Consider this statement for all
such @xmath with @xmath being of finite @xmath norm. If it is true for
@xmath and any multiples of them, then it is also true for @xmath .
Indeed, since @xmath and @xmath are globally Lipschitz, and since the
circle is compact, by an application of [ Nel , Theorem 4.1] we find
that @xmath converges uniformly to @xmath , while by the Trotter
product-formula (as the operators involved have a common core) we have
that @xmath converges strongly to @xmath . Of course the statement is
clearly true for @xmath where @xmath are two distant intervals and
@xmath . Also, it is by definition true for any Möbius vector field.
Thus by the above argument, taking into account the already mentioned
generating property of the listed functions, we have justified the
statement for any piecewise Möbius vector field.

If @xmath is a smooth function, then by the density of piecewise Möbius
vector fields we can take a sequence @xmath of piecewise Möbius vector
fields converging to @xmath in the @xmath norm. Then by Prop. 5.2.4 we
have that @xmath converges strongly to @xmath while by Lemma 5.1.5 ,
@xmath uniformly. This, by what was explained, proves the theorem. ∎

Remark. Note that this theorem really gives a way to “create”
diffeomorphism symmetry. The piecewise Möbius transformations are
constructed by the local algebras and the representation of the Möbius
group. On the other hand, a general diffeomorphism (and the unitary
associated to it) we can obtain by taking limits. So if we have a net
for which it is not known whether it does or does not have
diffeomorphism symmetry, but we do know that it is piecewise Möbius
covariant — and as we have seen, this can be established in many cases
and concrete examples even when the existence of conformal covariance is
not known — then we have a “formula” for @xmath : it should be the
strong limit of @xmath . For this reason the author conjectures the
piecewise Möbius symmetry implies diffeomorphism symmetry.

#### §4.

We shall now make a completely different proof, which is slightly less
related to the idea of local algebras but has the advantage that it does
not require @xmath -regularity. So we still assume that we have two
representations of @xmath . The notations will be those that were fixed
in the beginning of this section. By our assumptions @xmath for @xmath .
In particular the dense subset of the finite energy vectors @xmath is
unambiguous (i.e. it is the same for both representations) and any
polynomial expression of the operators @xmath and @xmath are
well-defined on it. As usual @xmath will stand for the vacuum vector.

###### Proposition 6.1.4.

@xmath for every integer @xmath .

###### Proof.

The operator @xmath annihilates @xmath . As the vector @xmath is a
vector of zero energy (i.e. an eigenvector of @xmath with eigenvalue
@xmath ), we have that @xmath . Moreover, using the commutation
relations we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Therefore, as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and of course also @xmath . Thus the statement for @xmath is true. We
shall continue by induction. Assume that the statement holds for a
certain integer @xmath . Then for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where in the third line we have used the inductive assumption. ∎

Recall that the function @xmath for each integer @xmath was defined by
the formula @xmath and that on the finite energy vectors @xmath (and
also @xmath ). For a smooth function @xmath the set of smooth vectors
@xmath is an invariant core for both @xmath and @xmath . Thus any
polynomial expression containing the two stress-energy tensors evaluated
on some smooth functions is well-defined on @xmath (and hence also on
the smaller subspace @xmath ).

###### Lemma 6.1.5.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle with @xmath where @xmath
are the Fourier coefficients of the function @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It is a simple consequence of our previous proposition. As @xmath is
smooth its Fourier coefficients are fast decreasing and by a simple use
of the energy bounds it is easy to see that the operators @xmath and
@xmath can be brought behind the summation when applied on sums like
@xmath . Thus by Prop. 6.1.4 ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

as in the summations @xmath whenever @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 6.1.6.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle with @xmath and suppose
that @xmath for a certain @xmath . Then on the set of finite energy
vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We can choose a bigger interval @xmath and a smooth function @xmath
which is constant @xmath on the interval @xmath and zero outside @xmath
. Then on the smooth energy vectors @xmath , and since @xmath is
affiliated to @xmath while @xmath is affiliated to @xmath , (still on
the smooth energy vectors) we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and similarly @xmath . Thus if @xmath then by our previous lemma

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have also used that the operators @xmath and @xmath are
affiliated to @xmath and thus they commute with @xmath .

We have proved the desired equality on a dense set of vectors but not
exactly on @xmath . In order to finish the demonstration we must take
limits. To do so we need something better then just the “simple” energy
bound on the stress-energy tensor, since a commutator involves dealing
with quadratic expressions. However, by the polynomial energy bound of
Lemma 3.2.1 there exists a positive constant @xmath such that for all
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As it was shown in the preliminaries (Theorem 2.1.3 ), the set @xmath is
a core for every positive power of @xmath . Thus by using the constant
@xmath of the quadratic energy bound of Eq. ( 6.8 ) on the commutators
and the fact that on the mentioned set we have already verified the
desired equality, one can easily finish the proof. ∎

###### Lemma 6.1.7.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle with @xmath . Then there
exist two intervals @xmath and two smooth functions @xmath and @xmath
such that
@xmath . @xmath ,
@xmath . @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath . @xmath

###### Proof.

If @xmath then the statement is clearly true. If @xmath is not the
constant @xmath function then we can choose two intervals @xmath for
which @xmath and @xmath . We can also take a smooth function @xmath such
that it is constant @xmath on @xmath and constant @xmath on @xmath .

It is clear that by setting @xmath and @xmath property @xmath and @xmath
are satisfied. However, it can happen that @xmath . So consider the
function @xmath . Its support coincides with that of @xmath so by our
conditions it cannot be that every real smooth function supported in
@xmath is orthogonal to it in the @xmath sense. Thus there exists a real
smooth function @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

But the right hand side is nothing else than @xmath . Thus by setting

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we have the desired decomposition. ∎

###### Corollary 6.1.8.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle with @xmath . Then on the
set of finite energy vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

According to our previous lemma there exists a decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which both @xmath and @xmath satisfy the conditions of Prop. 6.1.6 .
Therefore on the set of finite energy vectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

∎

###### Theorem 6.1.9.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net and let @xmath and @xmath be
two strongly continuous projective unitary representations of @xmath
both extending @xmath and making @xmath a conformal covariant local net.
Then it follows that @xmath .

###### Proof.

The two representations @xmath and @xmath give rise to two stress-energy
tensors @xmath and @xmath and also two corresponding representations of
the Virasoro algebra @xmath and @xmath .

As @xmath , by Corollary 6.1.8 on the set of finite energy vectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

But on the finite energy vectors the left hand side equals to @xmath
while the right hand side is @xmath . Hence @xmath . Then by taking
commutators with @xmath and @xmath we find that @xmath for every
positive integer @xmath and thus in fact for all integers since both
representations are unitary. ∎

### 6.2 Conformal covariance of subnets

#### §1.

Let @xmath be diffeomorphism covariant local net on the circle. As
usual, we shall denote the stress-energy tensor of @xmath by @xmath ,
the corresponding representation of the Virasoro algebra by @xmath , its
central charge by @xmath , the vacuum vector by @xmath and the dense set
of finite energy vectors by @xmath . Suppose @xmath is a Möbius
covariant subnet of @xmath . In particular it means that @xmath for
every Möbius transformation @xmath . However, a priori we do not know
whether this invariance holds also for a diffeomorphism @xmath . In what
follows we shall prove that in fact this follows.

Just like in the previous section, two different arguments will be
presented. The first, again, will be a direct application of those
nonsmooth symmetries. The point here is the following. We know that the
subnet is Möbius covariant. Suppose the subnet is strongly additive. (In
fact a weaker assumption will be enough.) Then the unitary associated to
a piecewise Möbius transformation leaves the subnet invariant as it is
piecewise “put” together of Möbius transformations and the subnet is
generated by the local algebras associated to those pieces. This
argument is conceptually very clear and it is expressed in terms of
local algebras. However it needs some regularity assumption of the
subnet: we need to know that the subnet is generated by its local
algebras associated to intervals that cover the circle only after taking
closures. The other argument, just like in the previous section, does
not need any assumption. It is however less related to the idea of local
algebras; it is again about the restrictions on possible commutation
relations coming from the fact that the stress-energy tensor is a
dimension @xmath field.

#### §2.

We shall shortly discuss the first argument. We shall need the notion of
strong regularity.

###### Definition 6.2.1.

A Möbius covariant local net @xmath is called strongly @xmath -regular
if it remains regular even in representations; i.e. if @xmath are the
intervals obtained by removing @xmath points of the circle, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any locally normal representation @xmath of @xmath .

Obviously a strongly additive net is also strongly regular (i.e.
strongly @xmath -regular for every @xmath . If @xmath is a subnet of
@xmath with vacuum vector @xmath , then its restriction to @xmath is a
Möbius covariant local net. We shall say that @xmath is strongly @xmath
-regular if this Möbius covariant local net is so. Note that it follows
that @xmath for any intervals @xmath obtained by removing @xmath points
of the circle, since @xmath can be considered to be a representation of
@xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.2.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net with stress-energy tensor @xmath and
@xmath a Möbius covariant, strongly @xmath -regular subnet. Further, let
@xmath two distant intervals. Then @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is a trivial observation. By Corollary 5.1.7 the adjoint action of
@xmath is an implementation of @xmath in the net. So for example, this
adjoint action on @xmath coincides with that of @xmath and hence
preserves it. Of course we may repeat this argument with any of the four
intervals obtained by removing the endpoints of @xmath and @xmath from
the circle. Thus by the strong @xmath -regularity of @xmath , the
statement is true. ∎

###### Theorem 6.2.3.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net with stress-energy tensor @xmath and
@xmath a Möbius covariant, strongly @xmath -regular subnet. Then @xmath
.

###### Proof.

We shall prove that if @xmath is a real function of finite @xmath norm
then @xmath for every @xmath . This is clearly enough as @xmath is
generated by exponentials.

The statement is true for Möbius vector fields and by our previous lemma
for the functions of the type @xmath . Just like in the proof of Theorem
6.1.2 , by an application of the Trotter product-formula we get that
then it is also true for any sum of such functions and hence by Theorem
B.2.3 for all piecewise Möbius vector fields. But by Theorem B.2.5 for
any real continuous function @xmath with @xmath there exists a sequence
of piecewise Möbius vector fields @xmath converging to @xmath in the
@xmath norm. Then taking into account the strong convergence of the
corresponding unitaries (Prop. 5.2.4 ) one can easily finish the proof.
∎

Remark. We could now go on and for example deduce that the stress-energy
tensor can be split into a sum. However we shall not do so as in any
case we will obtain all these results by the other argument.

#### §3.

We shall now proceed to the second proof. Since for our purposes it is
important to distinguish between the Möbius symmetry and the conformal
symmetry, we shall denote the representation of the Möbius group whose
extension is @xmath by @xmath . As it was explained in the
preliminaries, the subspace @xmath is invariant for both @xmath and
@xmath and denoting the restrictions by @xmath and @xmath we have that
@xmath is a Möbius covariant net on the Hilbert space @xmath . Note that
@xmath , the set of finite energy vectors for this Möbius covariant net
is just simply @xmath .

###### Definition 6.2.4.

For every @xmath let @xmath where @xmath is the orthogonal projection
from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.5.

@xmath , @xmath , the operators @xmath and @xmath are generators of the
representation @xmath (in particular @xmath is the self-adjoint
generator of rotations for @xmath ) and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, @xmath for every @xmath , and
there exists an @xmath such that for every @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It is a rather trivial consequence of the definition of @xmath , the
well-known energy bounds on the Virasoro operators of @xmath and the
fact that @xmath preserves @xmath (and thus in particular @xmath for
every @xmath ). ∎

###### Proposition 6.2.6.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle with Fourier coefficients
@xmath . Then the operator @xmath is well-defined (i.e. the sum
converges on the finite energy vectors and gives a closable operator),
@xmath and the set of smooth vectors @xmath form an invariant core for
@xmath . On this core @xmath and for every positive integer @xmath and
smooth functions @xmath there exists a @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath . Thus @xmath .

###### Proof.

Again, everything is essentially trivial (in the sense that it is an
exact copy of the standard arguments used for establishing the
properties of the stress-energy tensor, see the preliminary Sect. 3.2 );
the proposition serves only to clearly state what we know. In
particular, for the polynomial energy bound see Lemma 3.2.1 while for
the last assertion the idea (explained in the mentioned section) of
Goodmann and Wallach of using Nelson’s commutator theorem. ∎

Remark. Note that the subindex of @xmath is indeed “right” in the sense
that @xmath was defined by the original stress-energy tensor @xmath and
by the subspace @xmath and not (directly) by the subnet @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.2.7.

If @xmath for a certain interval @xmath then the operator @xmath is
affiliated to @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose indeed @xmath for a certain interval @xmath and take an element
@xmath and other two smooth elements @xmath . Clearly, due to its
definition and the existence of energy bounds, @xmath for every smooth
vector @xmath . Then identifying @xmath with @xmath by the isomorphism
given by the restriction we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used that @xmath is affiliated to @xmath . By Theorem
2.1.3 the set @xmath forms a core for @xmath and thus it is also a core
for @xmath and @xmath . Hence by the arbitrariness of @xmath the above
equation shows that @xmath is in the domain of @xmath and @xmath . Then,
this time by the arbitrariness of @xmath , we can conclude that @xmath
and thus — since @xmath is just any element of @xmath — that the
operator @xmath is affiliated to @xmath . ∎

#### §4.

What we have so far established is that starting from the original
stress-energy tensor by restricting and projecting onto @xmath we get a
well-behaved local field. That is, a field which satisfies linear energy
bounds, for real test-functions gives an operator which is essentially
self-adjoint on the finite energy vectors and for a local test function
gives an operator which is affiliated to the corresponding local
algebra. Moreover, by the commutation relation of its Fourier modes
@xmath with the generators of the Möbius symmetry, given in Lemma 6.2.5
, it is a so-called “dimension @xmath ” field and its @xmath Fourier
mode is exactly the conformal Hamiltonian. The main observation of Sect.
6.1 , which enabled the second proof given for the uniqueness of the
diffeomorphism symmetry, was that such a field can have only a certain
type of commutation relation. We can now repeat the whole argument with
almost no change.

###### Proposition 6.2.8.

By setting @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For @xmath the statement is trivial as then all operators involved in it
annihilate the vacuum. For @xmath the equation holds by the definition
of @xmath and by the fact that due to the uniqueness of the vacuum
@xmath must be a scalar multiple of @xmath . Finally, the proof of Prop.
6.1.4 shows that it is also true for @xmath as we carefully avoided the
use of the Virasoro algebra relations there, too. All we did was the
application of the commutation relations with the generators of the
Möbius group and the exploitation of the fact that “any of the @xmath
operators” (with or without tilde or index “ @xmath ”) annihilates the
vacuum for @xmath , and of course these two properties we have in this
case, too. ∎

###### Corollary 6.2.9.

Recall that @xmath and let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle
with Fourier coefficients @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 6.2.10.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle and suppose that @xmath
for a certain @xmath . Then on the set of finite energy vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The argument is essentially a copy of the proof of Prop. 6.1.6 but for
the convenience of the reader let us briefly recall the main points. We
can choose a bigger interval @xmath and a smooth function @xmath which
is constant @xmath on the interval @xmath and constant @xmath outside
@xmath . Then @xmath , and since @xmath is affiliated to @xmath while
@xmath is affiliated to @xmath , on the smooth energy vectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus if @xmath then by our previous corollary we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used that since the support of the functions @xmath and
@xmath is contained in @xmath , the operators @xmath and @xmath are
affiliated to @xmath and so they commute with @xmath .

We have proved the desired equality on a dense set of vectors but not
exactly on @xmath . To finish the demonstration we must take limits,
which can be done since the commutators admit a polynomial energy bound
and @xmath is a core for any positive power of @xmath ; see again Prop.
6.1.6 where exactly the same problem was dealt with. ∎

###### Corollary 6.2.11.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on the circle (but not necessarily
local). Then on the set of finite energy vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Any smooth function @xmath can be decomposed into a sum @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath are smooth functions localized in two different
intervals. Thus applying our previous proposition to @xmath and @xmath
we have the desired result. ∎

###### Theorem 6.2.12.

@xmath for every integer @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath the relation reduces to that which has been already stated in
Lemma 6.2.5 . For @xmath it is exactly the previous corollary that by
setting @xmath shows that the claim holds. For @xmath we proceed by
induction. Suppose the commutation relation holds for a certain @xmath .
Then for @xmath we have @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (6.17)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the first line we used the Jacobi-identity, in the second and
the third line we used the inductive assumption, the known commutation
relation with @xmath and the fact that the identity operator falls out
from the commutator, and finally, in the last line we collected the
terms taking account of the Kronecker-delta @xmath which permits us to
exchange @xmath with @xmath . Dividing by @xmath (remember that @xmath
so indeed we do not divide by zero) we finish the inductive argument and
thus conclude the statement for all @xmath . Finally, for negative
values, the commutation relation can be easily justified by taking
adjoints and using that @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 6.2.13.

The operators @xmath form a positive energy representation of the
Virasoro algebra. The positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath
given by @xmath is an extension of @xmath which makes @xmath
diffeomorphism covariant and so the formula

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

defines a Möbius covariant subnet of @xmath whose restriction to its
vacuum Hilbert space is a Virasoro net.

###### Proof.

The fact that @xmath is a positive energy representation of the Virasoro
algebra and so that it integrates to a positive energy representation
@xmath of @xmath has been already stated by the last theorem. Evidently
@xmath will be an extension of @xmath . Moreover, by Prop. 6.2.7 it is
also clear that the given formula indeed defines a Möbius covariant
subnet of @xmath whose restriction to its vacuum Hilbert space is a
Virasoro net.

As it was explained after Def. 3.3.1 , all we have to show for
diffeomorphism covariance is compatibility. Of course by the mentioned
proposition, the compatibility of the action of exponentials follow.
However, although every diffeomorphism is a finite product of
exponentials, to the knowledge of the author the question whether every
local diffeomorphism can be written as a product of exponentials of
vector fields localized in the same interval is unsolved. Fortunately,
we do not really need to know this; the proof can be also concluded by [
Ca04 , Prop. 3.7] . ∎

A finite energy vector in @xmath is in particular also a finite energy
vector in @xmath . Therefore the expression @xmath is well defined.

###### Lemma 6.2.14.

@xmath for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath the statement is trivially true. Let us consider the case
@xmath . Then both sides are vectors of zero energy, so by the
uniqueness of the vacuum they are both multiples of @xmath . This
multiple for the left hand side is equal to the scalar product @xmath in
which @xmath can be safely replaced by @xmath as both @xmath and @xmath
are vectors of @xmath . This shows the equality of the two sides.

Finally, for @xmath we can proceed by induction using that on vectors of
@xmath we have the equality @xmath , exactly like in Prop. 6.1.4 (and
Prop. 6.2.8 , so note that in fact this is third time we employ the same
trick). ∎

###### Lemma 6.2.15.

@xmath for every @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

This time we shall do induction by @xmath . For @xmath the statement is
trivially true, while for @xmath it is exactly the previous lemma.
Finally, for @xmath exactly the same inductive argument that was
employed in the proof of Theorem 6.2.12 applies. ∎

#### §5.

With the above lemma we have just begun to return to the vacuum Hilbert
space @xmath of the original net @xmath . For any interval @xmath the
restriction map from @xmath to @xmath is an isomorphism. Hence locally
the restriction map can be inverted and thus one can lift the subnet
@xmath defined in Corollary 6.2.13 to the vacuum Hilbert space of @xmath
. Denoting this lift by @xmath we have the following chain of Möbius
covariant subnets: @xmath . Of course the restriction of the lifted
subnet to its vacuum Hilbert space remains unchanged. Thus we can still
look upon @xmath as a locally normal representation of a Virasoro net.

As the following regards only normal representations of a Virasoro net,
it will be stated in general. If @xmath is a locally normal
representation of the Virasoro net @xmath with central charge @xmath
then by [ D’AFK , Theorem 6] there exists a unique strongly continuous
representation @xmath of @xmath on the Hilbert space of the
representation such that @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and @xmath with @xmath where @xmath is the covering map.
In a later section of this thesis it will be actually proved (Theorem
6.4.6 ) that @xmath is always a positive energy representation.

###### Proposition 6.2.16.

Let @xmath be a locally normal representation of the Virasoro net @xmath
with central charge @xmath . Then if @xmath is a factor then in fact
@xmath is unitary equivalent to a multiple of one of those irreducible
representations which we get by integrating a positive energy unitary
lowest weight representation of the Virasoro algebra corresponding to
the same central charge.

###### Proof.

By [ D’AFK , Lemma 3] , taking account of the factoriality of @xmath and
the fact that @xmath is generated by exponentials of local vector fields
(localized in different intervals), it is clear that there exists a
unique strongly continuous projective representation @xmath of @xmath
such that for all @xmath and smooth function @xmath localized in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

By Theorem 6.4.6 the representation @xmath is of positive energy
(although this Theorem is presented later in this thesis, note that in
that section we shall make no use of results made in this section), and
by Theorem 3.2.6 it follows that @xmath is a direct sum of irreducible
representations. As @xmath is a factor, @xmath can contain only one type
of irreducible representation. However, by [ Ca04 , Theorem A.1] , a
positive energy irreducible representation of @xmath is unitary
equivalent to one of those we get by integrating a positive energy
unitary lowest weight representation of the Virasoro algebra. Finally,
the central charge of @xmath must be equal to @xmath as it can be
calculated by local commutation relations of the stress-energy tensor,
see Eq. ( 3.27 ). ∎

For the following proposition note, that if @xmath is a locally normal
representation of a Möbius covariant local net @xmath , and @xmath then
there exists a unitary @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . The
operator @xmath for a closed operator @xmath affiliated to @xmath is
independent from the choice of @xmath . Thus the expression @xmath (with
@xmath not necessarily bounded!) is well defined.

###### Proposition 6.2.17.

Let @xmath be a locally normal representation of the Virasoro net @xmath
with central charge @xmath and stress-energy tensor @xmath . Further,
let @xmath be the unique strongly continuous inner implementation of the
Möbius symmetry in the representation @xmath with @xmath being the
self-adjoint generator of rotations. Then @xmath and @xmath for every
@xmath and smooth function @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath . Moreover,
on this invariant set @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

The Hilbert space of @xmath is separable and so we can safely consider
the direct integral decomposition (see more on at the comments before
Theorem 6.4.6 and in [ Kad , Chapter 14.] about generalities regarding
direct integral decompositions) along the center of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a von Neumann factor for almost every @xmath .
Correspondingly, by [ Dix , Lemma 8.3.1] (see again the mentioned
comments) the representation @xmath can be decomposed into the direct
integral of representations @xmath where @xmath is a locally normal
representation of our Virasoro net with @xmath for almost every @xmath .
(There is a little abuse of the word “representation” as in reality it
covers an infinite collection of representations. However, evidently one
can choose a countable set of intervals such that a collection of normal
representations associated to these intervals and compatible with the
isotony with respect to a certain, countable set of inclusions ,
uniquely extends to a locally normal representation of the net. Thus the
cited Lemma, which is stated for a single representation, can be indeed
applied.) So the previous proposition applies, and thus we can write the
representation as a direct integral of irreducible ones. But the
irreducible representations we know well (they are exactly the ones
coming from irreducible positive energy representations of @xmath , see
the preliminary Sect. 3.2 ) and so in each irreducible representation
the stated properties are trivially satisfied. The rest is then an
exercise. ∎

Still in the same setting, with @xmath being a locally normal
representation @xmath , we shall introduce the corresponding
stress-energy tensor. In what follows we shall denote by @xmath the set
of smooth vectors defined by the Hamiltonian of the unique inner
implementation @xmath of the Möbius symmetry in @xmath .

###### Definition 6.2.18.

For a smooth function @xmath , let @xmath be the closure of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is a partition of the unity with @xmath @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.19.

The above definition is good, i.e. @xmath is independent of the choice
of the partition of the unity and the operator whose closure is
considered is indeed closable. @xmath , the set @xmath is invariant for
@xmath and @xmath is an operator valued linear functional. If @xmath is
localized in @xmath then @xmath and hence @xmath is affiliated to @xmath
. Moreover, for every positive integer @xmath and smooth functions
@xmath there exists a @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us consider another partition of the unity @xmath with @xmath @xmath
where @xmath . Then, with everything meant on @xmath and for shortness
setting @xmath , we have that @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

The rest of the statement is rather trivial, it is just a copy of the
standard arguments used to derive properties of the stress-energy
tensor, e.g. Lemma 3.2.1 for the polynomial energy bound. ∎

Finally, we shall make some more affirmations. Like the ones just
stated, also these are all essentially trivial: they say that @xmath has
the usual properties of an energy stress-tensor. (Even if it does not
necessarily integrate to a representation of @xmath , but only to its
cover.)

###### Lemma 6.2.20.

For any smooth function @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the star stands for action on vector fields.

###### Proof.

The equality can be easily checked locally (using that by Corollary
A.2.8 the smooth vectors for the rotations form an invariant set for the
positive energy representation of @xmath ) and then globally using
partitions of unities. ∎

###### Lemma 6.2.21.

On the invariant core of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

###### Proof.

Again the equality can be easily checked locally and then globally using
partitions of unities. ∎

###### Lemma 6.2.22.

With @xmath being a smooth function, @xmath a real smooth function,
setting @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the star stands for action on vector fields and @xmath is some
complex number. Moreover @xmath for every real Möbius vector field
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Again, the first property can be easily checked locally and then
extended to global result using partitions of unities and the Trotter
product-formula (there is no problem with convergence as we have a
common core). The fact that @xmath can be obtained by integrating @xmath
follows from the uniqueness of the inner implementation of the Möbius
symmetry. Finally the fact that @xmath can be shown exactly as in the
proof of Corollary 3.2.2 . ∎

#### §6.

After this somewhat longer intermezzo let us return to our concrete
situation. Recall that we had a Möbius covariant local net @xmath with
conformal Hamiltonian @xmath and a Möbius covariant subnet @xmath , and
that there was a representation @xmath of @xmath given making @xmath
diffeomorphism covariant. Recall further how the subnet @xmath was
introduced. By our previous considerations, since this subnet when
restricted to its vacuum Hilbert space gives a Virasoro net, we can
introduce the lifted stress-energy tensor @xmath which is affiliated to
@xmath and has all the properties that were discussed.

###### Proposition 6.2.23.

@xmath and @xmath for every smooth function @xmath . Further, there
exists a constant @xmath independent of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath . Moreover @xmath is a core for the closed operator
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We know that @xmath is a Möbius covariant local net and @xmath is a
Möbius covariant subnet. Thus by the result of [ Kö02 ] , there exists a
unique pair of commuting positive energy representations @xmath of
@xmath on the vacuum Hilbert space of @xmath such that @xmath and

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath

for all @xmath with @xmath being the covering map. Note that @xmath is
the representation that was denoted by @xmath in the general setting.

Let us denote by @xmath and @xmath the two commuting conformal
Hamiltonians corresponding to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Then
@xmath and since we deal with commuting positive operators @xmath .
Thus, taking account of the properties of the stress-energy listed
before, we have immediately half of the statement. (Smoothness for
@xmath imply smoothness for @xmath , etc.)

Using that @xmath is positive, commutes (in the sense of its spectral
resolution) with the closed operator @xmath , and that @xmath for any
positive exponent @xmath , it is easy to show that if @xmath then @xmath
as in fact

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

using that @xmath , which was already shown in the general setting. The
second inequality is obtained by a repeated use of the already proved
energy bound, just like in Lemma 3.2.1 . Finally, by Nelson’s commutator
theorem (as in the proof of Goodman and Wallach, see also in the
preliminary Sect. 3.2 ) any core for @xmath is also a core for @xmath
and thus the proof is finished. ∎

###### Lemma 6.2.24.

@xmath is a Möbius covariant field:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath smooth function, where @xmath is the action of
@xmath on vector fields.

###### Proof.

Follows from the factorization of the Möbius symmetry into two parts in
which one commutes with @xmath , since for the other, inner part we have
already shown this in the general setting. ∎

For the next proposition recall that @xmath @xmath is the function
defined by the formula @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.2.25.

Let @xmath be an interval and @xmath a smooth function localized in
@xmath . Then on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

On the vacuum vector @xmath and so by Lemma 6.2 the claim is justified.
Then by exactly the same argument as in the proof of Prop. 6.1.6 , by
appealing to locality, the derived energy bounds and formulae (with
which we can show that expressions like @xmath admit a quadratic energy
bound) and the fact that @xmath is a core for @xmath the proof is
straightforward. ∎

###### Corollary 6.2.26.

For every smooth function @xmath , on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It follows from the previous proposition by using partitions, taking
adjoints and summing; due to the energy bounds all such calculations are
justified. ∎

###### Proposition 6.2.27.

Let @xmath be two real smooth functions. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and consider the vector valued function on the real line
given by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is indeed well defined: by Corollary 3.2.2 @xmath and we know that
@xmath plus a certain number times the identity where @xmath . In fact,
it is not hard to see then that this function is differentiable and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which by the previous corollary is zero. Thus @xmath and hence the
equality is justified as @xmath is a core. ∎

###### Proposition 6.2.28.

The Möbius covariant subnet @xmath is diffeomorphism covariant: @xmath
for all @xmath . More specifically, if @xmath is a real smooth function
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the operator @xmath is essentially self-adjoint on @xmath and its
closure is affiliated to @xmath and if further @xmath is supported in
the interval @xmath then it is in fact affiliated to @xmath .

###### Proof.

We shall use the trick of moving the operators with unknown commutation
relation into disjoint intervals. Let @xmath be two intervals, @xmath
and @xmath a real smooth function with support in @xmath . It is clear
that we can find an interval @xmath containing @xmath and another smooth
function @xmath supported in @xmath such that @xmath is disjoint from
@xmath . Further, we can consider @xmath as a locally normal
representation @xmath of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used that by Corollary 6.2.13 , @xmath is a conformal net.
Therefore, setting @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath and @xmath . So now we can calculate the action of @xmath
on the element @xmath . We have that @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (6.28)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used our previous equation. We shall now separately
calculate @xmath . Using Prop. 6.2.27

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

So finally, putting everything together we get that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have also used that @xmath and @xmath are localized in disjoint
intervals. Thus we have proved the desired formula for some @xmath and
@xmath : namely when both are localized somewhere (but not necessarily
in the same interval). Of course, as @xmath is generated by local
elements, the localization requirement on @xmath can be dropped.
Finally, if @xmath is not local then by using a partition and the
Trotter product-formula (again, there is no problem with convergence: we
have a common core) we can easily justify the equality.

The rest of the statement follows easily. Since @xmath is affiliated to
@xmath , by our formula that we have just derived, @xmath for every
exponential and hence for every @xmath as @xmath is generated by
exponentials.

Finally, the fact that @xmath is essentially self-adjoint on @xmath
again follows from the energy bounds, the commutator relations (with
@xmath ) and Nelson’s commutator theorem. By using our formula for the
action of @xmath on @xmath which we have just verified and the Trotter
product-formula we get that its closure is affiliated to @xmath . If
further @xmath is localized in the interval @xmath , then both @xmath
and @xmath are affiliated in @xmath and its easy to see that it follows
that (the closure of) their difference, too, is affiliated to the same
algebra (again, using that @xmath is a common core). ∎

What we have proved is that given a subnet @xmath , the stress-energy
tensor can be “split” into a sum of two commuting parts. One of them is
the “part of the stress-energy tensor in @xmath ”. The remaining part
belongs to the so-called coset of @xmath , and it is also positive as
@xmath .

One can also define the Virasoro operators @xmath and reformulate what
we have obtained in terms of “splitting the representation of the
Virasoro algebra”. The exponential relation of Prop. 6.2.27 and the
integrated commutation relation of Lemma 6.2.21 is then turned into the
formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although everything has been stated and proved, it is worth to recollect
(and to reformulate) the main results of this section. We have shown the
followings.

###### Theorem 6.2.29.

Let @xmath be a diffeomorphism covariant local net on @xmath and @xmath
a Möbius covariant subnet. Then, setting @xmath

-   @xmath for all @xmath ;

-   @xmath admits a conformal structure.

###### Definition 6.2.30.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net with @xmath denoting the set
of finite energy vectors and @xmath the standard generators of @xmath .
The operators @xmath with domain @xmath are said to be Fourier modes of
a dimension @xmath Möbius covariant field , if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover @xmath is said to be hermitian , if @xmath for all @xmath .

Note that if @xmath is hermitian then @xmath is closable for every
@xmath .

###### Theorem 6.2.31.

Let @xmath be a diffeomorphism covariant local net on the circle with
corresponding representation of the Virasoro algebra @xmath on the set
of finite energy vectors @xmath , and central charge @xmath . Suppose
@xmath is Möbius covariant subnet. Then there exists a unique
decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

-    both collection of operators are Fourier modes of dimension @xmath
    Möbius covariant hermitian fields,

-   @xmath is affiliated to @xmath where @xmath and @xmath .

It follows that @xmath , where @xmath , are positive energy unitary
representations of the Virasoro algebra with central charges @xmath ,
and that the operators @xmath where @xmath with @xmath , are
well-defined (i.e. the sum exists and closable). Moreover, we have

-   @xmath for all @xmath ,

-   @xmath and similarly, @xmath ,

-   @xmath is affiliated to @xmath while @xmath to @xmath ,

-   @xmath is affiliated to @xmath while @xmath to @xmath whenever
    @xmath is supported in the interval @xmath ,

-   @xmath for all @xmath ,

-   @xmath is the stress-energy tensor that gives conformal structure to
    the Möbius covariant local net @xmath , where @xmath .

###### Proof.

We have made an explicit construction resulting a decomposition @xmath
that satisfies all listed properties and consequences.

Suppose we have another decomposition @xmath satisfying those first
listed two conditions. Then @xmath is still a Fourier mode of a Möbius
covariant dimension @xmath hermitian field whose closure is affiliated
to @xmath . On the other hand, as @xmath we have that @xmath which shows
that the closure of @xmath is affiliated to @xmath . It is then easy to
show that on the finite energy vectors @xmath commutes with @xmath for
every @xmath . Then by Möbius covariance @xmath which shows that @xmath
if @xmath . Finally, appealing again to Möbius covariance we find that
@xmath which concludes the proof. ∎

### 6.3 Some consequences

#### §1.

We shall discuss some consequences of the uniqueness of the
diffeomorphism symmetry and the splitting of the stress-energy tensor
given by a subnet. We begin with two rather obvious but nevertheless
important affirmations made in the joint work [ CW ] of the author with
S. Carpi.

###### Corollary 6.3.1.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant net and suppose the representation
@xmath of @xmath makes it diffeomorphism covariant. Then the
representation class of @xmath , and in particular its central charge
@xmath is an invariant of the Möbius covariant net @xmath . In
particular two Virasoro nets as Möbius covariant nets are isomorphic if
and only if they have the same central charge.

Note that before the uniqueness result, there was no trivial invariant
to distinguish between two Virasoro nets with central charges bigger
than @xmath . (Of course when @xmath , we have several meaningful
invariants, most prominently the @xmath -index.)

The other interesting thing to note here is the model-independent proof
for the commutation between internal symmetries and diffeomorphism
symmetry.

###### Definition 6.3.2.

Let @xmath be a Möbius covariant local net. A unitary @xmath on the
(vacuum) Hilbert space of the net is an internal symmetry of @xmath if
for every @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath where @xmath is the vacuum vector of @xmath .

It is an easy consequence of the Bisognano-Wichmann property that @xmath
commutes with the representation of the Möbius group (see [ FröG ] ). By
uniqueness we can now extend this result.

###### Corollary 6.3.3.

Let @xmath be an internal symmetry of the diffeomorphism covariant local
net @xmath . Then @xmath commutes with @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath commutes with the Möbius symmetry, the projective
representation @xmath of @xmath still makes the net @xmath
diffeomorphism covariant. Hence by uniqueness it must coincide with
@xmath . It follows that for every @xmath the unitary @xmath is a
multiple @xmath of the identity, and in fact it turns out that the
complex valued function @xmath is a character of the group @xmath . But
as it was already noted, the latter is a simple noncommutative group,
and hence @xmath is trivial. ∎

#### §2.

We shall now consider subnets and cosets. In [ Kö04 ] Köster proved that
a coset can be obtained by local relative commutants, given that a
certain condition is satisfied. According to the condition, the subnet
@xmath , when restricted to its vacuum Hilbert space, should admit
diffeomorphism symmetry and the corresponding representation of @xmath
should be possible to extend to the vacuum Hilbert space of @xmath in
such a way that it will be compatible with the local structure of @xmath
and affiliated to @xmath .

In the last section we have seen that given a subnet @xmath we can
introduce @xmath , the part of the stress-energy tensor which belongs to
@xmath . It was not proved though (and maybe it is not even true) that
@xmath integrates to a representation of @xmath . (It could integrate to
a representation of @xmath .) However, looking at the mentioned article
we see that this not essential for the argument. We shall now make the
necessary rearrangements. Recall that given a locally normal
representation @xmath of a Virasoro net we have introduced the
stress-energy tensor @xmath in the representation.

###### Lemma 6.3.4.

Let @xmath be a locally normal representation of a Virasoro net @xmath .
Suppose @xmath are elements of @xmath and @xmath is a smooth function
which is zero on @xmath . Then @xmath is affiliated to the von Neumann
algebra @xmath .

###### Proof.

First of all, it is enough to consider two intervals @xmath with
non-dense union in @xmath . (This case implies the general one which we
can see by considering small enough partitions and/or appealing to
additivity.) Second, the statement is essentially about Virasoro nets
and not about representations, since in this case the statement involves
only operators localized in a certain (common) interval. So dropping the
index “ @xmath ” from the stress-energy tensor we shall consider
everything in the vacuum representation.

If @xmath and @xmath are either distant or overlapping, then the
statement is trivial as then we can find a decomposition @xmath where
@xmath are smooth and @xmath (the fact the we have a closure does not
course any problem, since the local algebras are “continuous”, see also
the proof of Prop. 5.1.6 ). So let us consider the case when @xmath have
a common endpoint, which we can safely assume to be the point @xmath .
Then by our assumption @xmath . If also @xmath , then the decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the characteristic function of @xmath @xmath , is a
decomposition into (once) differentiable functions. Moreover it is clear
that the conditions of Lemma 5.1.2 are satisfied and thus these
functions are of finite @xmath norm. Then again, by the results
concerning evaluation of the stress-energy tensor on nonsmooth functions
we are finished. Thus it is enough to demonstrate the statement in a
single example when @xmath .

We shall use the idea appearing in the proof of [ Kö04 , Lemma 11] . For
the generating vector field @xmath of the dilations we have @xmath . Let
@xmath be a real smooth function which coincides with @xmath in some
small neighborhood of @xmath but has its support in @xmath . Further,
with the star standing for actions on vector field, set @xmath @xmath .

Let @xmath distant from both @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath the support
of @xmath is contracting and thus for @xmath remains disjoint from
@xmath . Hence for any @xmath and vector of the Hilbert space @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

since @xmath is orthogonal to the vacuum. As a dilation leaves invariant
its generating vector field, in a sufficiently small neighborhood of
@xmath the function @xmath will remain equal to @xmath . Hence @xmath is
affiliated to @xmath . Thus if @xmath and @xmath then by our previous
equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The set @xmath is a core for @xmath since by Theorem 2.1.3 it contains a
core for @xmath . Then by the above equation it is easy to show that the
self-adjoint operator @xmath commutes with @xmath which concludes the
proof. ∎

###### Lemma 6.3.5.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net, @xmath a subnet and @xmath the part
of the stress-energy tensor that belongs to @xmath . Suppose @xmath is a
real smooth function with @xmath @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are the
endpoints of the interval @xmath . Then the adjoint action of @xmath
preserves the algebra @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose we prove this for all functions localized somewhere. Then by
taking partitions and using the Trotter product formula we can justify
the statement for all functions. But once we fix an interval @xmath , we
can use the isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath . Therefore for any
diffeomorphism @xmath localized in @xmath we have a unique decomposition
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath . (Note that we did not integrate @xmath
into a global representation of @xmath : that may be impossible. We have
only integrated it locally.) Then using the (local) representation
@xmath the argument of the proof of [ Kö04 , Lemma 2] can be essentially
repeated. ∎

###### Corollary 6.3.6.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net, @xmath a subnet. Then @xmath for
every @xmath .

###### Proof.

Our first lemma replaces [ Kö04 , Lemma 11] and our second lemma
replaces [ Kö04 , Lemma 2] . Thus [ Kö04 , Theorem 12] holds, which —
although with a slight difference — is exactly what we have claimed. ∎

#### §3.

Another interesting observation is that the subnet generated by the
stress-energy tensor must be the smallest among the irreducible subnets.

###### Corollary 6.3.7.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net and @xmath a subnet. If @xmath for
an interval @xmath then it follows that @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Möbius covariance it is clear that if the commutant in question is
trivial for a certain interval then it is trivial for elements of @xmath
. So consider the stress-energy tensor @xmath and the part @xmath
belonging to @xmath . If @xmath is a function localized in a certain
interval @xmath then by Theorem 6.2.31 (the closure of the restriction
to the finite energy vectors of) @xmath is affiliated to @xmath , so it
is a complex number. As the expectation of this difference in the vacuum
state is zero, we have that @xmath . Thus we are finished as @xmath is
generated by exponentials of local vector fields. ∎

Suppose we have a chain of subnets. If the local relative commutants are
nontrivial, then at each step we “loose” a part of the stress-energy
tensor. As the smallest positive value for the central charge is @xmath
, this means that at each step the central charge of the subnet must
decrease at least by @xmath . Hence we get a restriction on the possible
length of this chain. In turn, if we have an infinite chain of such a
subnets then the net cannot admit diffeomorphism symmetry. This is
exactly the case of a net obtained by taking an infinite tensor product
(see Sect. 2.5 about tensor products). Hence in this way we can
construct new examples of Möbius covariant local nets that do not admit
diffeomorphism symmetry.

The observation that the infinite tensor product net cannot be
diffeomorphism covariant, first appeared in the joint work [ CW ] of the
author with S. Carpi. There it is the uniqueness of the diffeomorphism
symmetry, which is exploited to show that the central charge of the
tensor product must be the sum of the central charges of the nets
appearing in the product, and hence in case of infinite tensor product
it should infinite (if the product was diffeomorphism covariant). Hence
the argument applies in case of taking tensor products of diffeomorphism
covariant nets. However, by the results of the last section we can
consider a more general situation.

###### Definition 6.3.8.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net and @xmath a subnet. The central
charge of the subnet @xmath is the central charge of the diffeomorphism
covariant local net which we get by restriction to its vacuum Hilbert
space.

###### Corollary 6.3.9.

Let @xmath be a conformal local net and @xmath a subnet. Then @xmath
where @xmath is the central charge of @xmath and @xmath are the central
charges of @xmath and the coset @xmath , respectively.

If a conformal net (or subnet) is not trivial, then neither the
corresponding representation of @xmath can be trivial. But for a
nontrivial positive energy representation of @xmath the lowest possible
value of the central charge is @xmath . Hence by Theorem 6.2.31 we make
the following observations.

###### Corollary 6.3.10.

Let @xmath be a chain of subnets in the conformal local net @xmath with
@xmath for every @xmath , @xmath . Then @xmath and hence @xmath .

###### Corollary 6.3.11.

Let @xmath , @xmath be a sequence of nontrivial Möbius covariant local
nets. Then the infinite tensor product net @xmath cannot admit
diffeomorphism symmetry.

###### Proof.

@xmath is an infinite chain of subnets with nontrivial local relative
commutants, so by the previous corollary the full net cannot have a
finite central charge. ∎

Previously the only examples of nets not admitting diffeomorphism
symmetry (at least to the knowledge of the author), were the ones coming
from the derivatives of the @xmath current model (see Sect. 2.4 ). They
are not strongly additive, in fact they are not even @xmath -regular. In
the presented new way we can construct examples that are strongly
additive. However, on the other hand — although it is not proven — it is
likely that they are not going to be split. (In fact if the infinite
sequence contains an infinite subsequence of isomorphic nets then by [
DL , Theorem 9.2] it is easy to show that they are indeed not.) So it
could be that split property and @xmath -regularity are necessary for a
net to admit diffeomorphism symmetry.

### 6.4 Positivity of energy in representations

#### §1.

The positivity of energy is one of the most important selection criteria
for a model to be “physical”. In almost all treatments of Quantum Field
Theory it appears as one of the fundamental axioms. As an axiom, one may
say that it is “automatically” true, but in a concrete model it is
something to be checked. In particular, to see what are the charged
sectors with positive energy for a model given in its vacuum sector may
be difficult (as calculating the charged sectors can already be a hard
problem).

As it was already discussed in the preliminary sections, in the setting
of local nets charged sectors are described as irreducible
representations of the net and their general theory was developed by
Doplicher, Haag and Roberts [ DHR1 , DHR2 ] . They proved, among many
other things, that if a covariant sector has a finite statistical
dimension then it is automatically of positive energy. In [ GL92 ] Guido
and Longo showed that under some regularity condition the finiteness of
the statistics even implies the covariance property of the sector.

In case of chiral theories the question of positivity of energy in a
sector with finite statistics is more or less completely understood [
GL92 , GL96 , BCL ] . If a conformal net is completely rational, then —
as in this case every sector of it is automatically covariant and has
finite statistics — we have positivity of energy in every sector. Yet,
although these conditions cover many of the interesting models, as it
was already discussed there are interesting (not pathological!) models
in which it does not hold and, what is more important in this context,
indeed possessing sectors with infinite statistical dimension (and yet
with positivity of energy). This is clearly in contrast with the
experience coming from massive QFTs (by a theorem of Buchholz and
Fredenhagen [ BFre ] , a massive sector with positive energy is always
localizable in a spacelike cone and has finite statistics).

The first example of a sector with infinite statistics was constructed
by Fredenhagen [ Fre95 ] . Rehren gave arguments [ Re ] that even the
Virasoro model, which is in some sense the most natural model, should
admit sectors with infinite statistical dimensions when its central
charge @xmath and that in fact in this case “most” of its sectors should
be of infinite statistics. This was then actually proved [ Ca03 ] by
Carpi first for the case @xmath and then [ Ca04 ] for many other values
of the central charge, leaving open the question only for some values of
@xmath between @xmath and @xmath . Moreover Longo and Xu proved [ LX ]
that if @xmath is a split conformal net with @xmath then @xmath has at
least one sector with infinite statistical dimension, showing that the
case of infinite statistics is indeed quite general.

Recently D’Antoni, Fredenhagen and Köster published a letter [ D’AFK ]
with a proof that diffeomorphism covariance itself (in the vacuum
sector) is already enough to ensure Möbius covariance in every (not
necessary irreducible) representation: there always exists a unique
(projective, strongly continuous) inner implementation of the Möbius
symmetry. (In Prop. 6.4.2 we shall generalize this statement to the
@xmath -Möbius group.) Thus the concept of the conformal energy, as the
self-adjoint generator of rotations in given representation, is at least
well-defined. (Without the assumption of diffeomorphism covariance it is
in general not true: recall the examples discussed in Sect. 2.4 .) What
remained an open question until now, whether this energy is
automatically positive or not. The author of this thesis, using the
tools previously developed and explained, gave a proof for the
positivity (Theorem 6.4.6 ). This will be the main result presented in
this section. Everything that here follows is part of the single-author
work [ We05 ] accepted by Commun. Math. Phys.

#### §2.

The idea behind the proof is simple. The total conformal energy @xmath
is the integral of the energy-density; i.e. the stress-energy tensor
@xmath evaluated on the constant @xmath function. So if we take a finite
partition of the unity @xmath on the circle, we may write @xmath as the
sum @xmath where each element is local . Thus each term in itself
(although not bounded) can be considered in a given charged sector.
Moreover, it has been recently proved by Fewster and Hollands [ FeH ]
that the stress-energy tensor evaluated on a nonnegative function is
bounded from below. These operators then, being local elements, remain
bounded from below also in the charged sector. So their sum in the
charged sector, which we may expect to be the generator of rotations in
that sector, should still be bounded from below.

There are several problems with this idea. For example, as the supports
of the functions @xmath must unavoidably “overlap”, the corresponding
operators will in general not commute. To deal with sums of
non-commuting unbounded operators is not easy. In particular, while in
the vacuum representation — due to the well known energy bounds — we
have the natural common domain of the finite energy vectors, in a
charged sector (unless we assume positivity of energy, which is exactly
what we want to prove) we have no such domain.

To overcome the difficulties we shall modify this idea in two points.
First of all, instead of @xmath , that is, the generator of rotations,
we may work with the generator of translations — the positivity of any
of them implies the positivity of the other one. In fact we shall go one
step further by replacing the generator of translations with the
generator of @xmath -translations . (This is why, as it has been already
mentioned, we shall consider the @xmath -Möbius group; particularly in
the case @xmath .) This has the advantage that the function representing
the corresponding vector field can be written as @xmath , where the two
local nonnegative functions @xmath do not “overlap”. These functions, at
the endpoint of their support are not smooth (such decomposition is not
possible with smooth functions); they are only once differentiable.
However, as it was discussed all through the previous chapter, the
stress-energy tensor can be evaluated even on nonsmooth functions, given
that their @xmath norm is finite, which is exactly the case of @xmath
and @xmath . As they are nonnegative but not smooth, to conclude that
@xmath and @xmath are bounded from below we cannot use the result stated
in [ FeH ] . However, it turns out to be (Prop. 6.4.1 ) a rather direct
and simple consequence of the construction, thus it will be deduced
independently from the mentioned result, of which we shall make no
explicit use. In fact the author considered this construction as an
argument indicating that if @xmath then @xmath is bounded from below
(which by now is of course proven, as it was already mentioned, in [ FeH
] ); see more on this at the remark after Prop 6.4.1 and in the
mentioned article of Fewster and Hollands at the footnote in the proof
of [ FeH , Theorem 4.1] .

#### §3.

Recall how the subgroup @xmath was defined for every positive integer
@xmath (see the preliminary Sect. 3.1 ). Recall also that in @xmath we
defined the one-parameter subgroup of @xmath -translations @xmath by the
usual procedure of lifting: it was set to be the unique continuous
one-parameter subgroup satisfying @xmath . Its generating vector field
is @xmath . The notion of @xmath -rotations @xmath and @xmath -dilations
@xmath were introduced similarly. The “ @xmath -rotations”, however,
apart from a re-scaling of the parameter, simply coincide with the
“true” rotations, see

As @xmath covers @xmath in a natural way, its universal cover is
canonically identified with @xmath . Note that if @xmath is the natural
covering map then @xmath for all @xmath , where the sign “ @xmath ”, as
always throughout the rest of this article, stands for the appropriate
lifts of one-parameter groups to @xmath . A strongly continuous
projective representation of @xmath lifts to a unique strongly
continuous representation of @xmath , see more on this in Sect. A.2 of
the appendix.

Regarding the representation theory of the latter group, in particular
the following is known (see Prop. A.2.1 ). If @xmath is a strongly
continuous unitary representation of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath being
the self-adjoint generator of rotations and translations in @xmath ,
respectively, then the following four conditions are equivalent:
@xmath is bounded from below,
@xmath is bounded from below,
@xmath ,
@xmath .
If any of the above conditions is satisfied, @xmath is called a positive
energy representation.

#### §4.

Let us now consider a conformal local net of on the circle @xmath with
stress-energy tensor @xmath . By equation ( 3.5 ), @xmath , the
restriction of the positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath to
@xmath , lifts to a positive energy representation of @xmath . In
particular, the self-adjoint operator @xmath must be bounded from below,
since it generates the translations for the representation @xmath .
(Note that @xmath is bounded from below but not necessary positive: it
is not the generator — it still generates the same projective
one-parameter group of unitaries if you add a real constant to it.) The
function @xmath is a nonnegative function with two points of zero:
@xmath . By direct calculation of the first derivative: @xmath , hence
the decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the functions @xmath defined by the condition @xmath is a
decomposition of @xmath into the sum of two (once) differentiable
nonnegative functions that satisfy the conditions of Lemma 5.1.2 .
Therefore, as it was explained, we can consider the self-adjoint
operators @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.4.1.

Let @xmath be a conformal net of local algebras on the circle with
stress-energy tensor @xmath . Then @xmath is affiliated to @xmath and
@xmath is affiliated to @xmath and so in particular they strongly
commute. Moreover, the operators @xmath are bounded from below.

###### Proof.

@xmath and so by Prop. 5.1.6 @xmath is affiliated to @xmath . So if
@xmath is a nonzero spectral projection of @xmath and @xmath is a
nonzero spectral projection of @xmath , then @xmath and by the algebraic
independence of two commuting factors (see for example [ Kad , Theorem
5.5.4] ) @xmath . Of course the range of @xmath is invariant for (and
included in the domain of) @xmath and the restriction of that operator
for this closed subspace is clearly bigger than @xmath and smaller than
@xmath . Thus, nesting every point of the spectra of @xmath into
arbitrarily narrow intervals we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

To conclude we only need to observe that by equation ( 6.36 ) on the
common core of the finite energy vectors @xmath , and as it was said,
the latter self-adjoint operator is bounded from below. ∎

Remark. The author considered this construction to indicate that if
@xmath then @xmath is bounded from below, which — as it was already
mentioned — by now is a proven fact (cf. [ FeH ] ). The point is the
following. If @xmath is strictly positive then, as a vector field on
@xmath , it is conjugate to the constant vector field @xmath for some
@xmath . Thus, using the transformation rule of @xmath under
diffeomorphisms, @xmath is conjugate to @xmath plus a constant, and so
it is bounded from below by the positivity of @xmath . The real question
is whether the statement remains true even when @xmath is nonnegative,
but not strictly positive because for example it is local (there is an
entire interval on which it is zero). One can of course consider a
nonnegative function as a limit of positive functions, but then one
needs to control that the lowest point of the spectrum does not go to
@xmath while taking this limit (which — in a slightly different manner —
has been successfully carried out in the mentioned article). However,
even without considering limits, by the above proposition we find
nontrivial examples of local nonnegative functions @xmath such that
@xmath can easily be checked to be bounded from below. (Take for example
@xmath but of course we may consider conjugates, sums and multiples by
positive constants to generate even more examples.)

Let us now investigate what we can say about a representation @xmath of
the conformal net @xmath . In [ D’AFK ] it was proved that the Möbius
symmetry is continuously implementable in any (locally normal)
representation @xmath by a unique inner way. By their construction the
implementing operators are elements of @xmath where @xmath is the subnet
given by the stress-energy tensor. Looking at the article, we see that
the only structural properties of the Möbius subgroup of @xmath that the
proof uses are the following.

-   There exist three continuous one-parameter groups @xmath and @xmath
    in @xmath , so that @xmath is a (continuous) covering of @xmath (In
    the article @xmath is the translational, @xmath is the dilational
    and @xmath is the rotational subgroup; see Prop. A.1.9 for the
    Iwasawa decomposition.)

-   The Lie algebra of @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath .

These two properties hold not only for the subgroup @xmath , but also
for @xmath where @xmath is any positive integer: the Lie algebra of
@xmath is isomorphic to @xmath for all @xmath , and with the rotations,
translations and dilations replaced by @xmath -rotations, @xmath
-translations and @xmath -dilations we still have the required
decomposition. Let us collect into a proposition what we have thus
concluded.

###### Proposition 6.4.2.

Let @xmath be a locally normal representation of the conformal local net
of von Neumann algebras on the circle @xmath . Then for all @xmath there
exists a unique strongly continuous representation @xmath of @xmath such
that @xmath and for all @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath with @xmath being the natural covering map. Moreover, this
unique representation satisfies @xmath .

We shall now return to the particular case @xmath . On one hand, the
action of the @xmath -translation @xmath in the representation @xmath
can be implemented by @xmath . On the other hand, as in the projective
sense

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may try to implement the same action by @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proposition 6.4.3.

The unitary operator in @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

up to phase coincides with @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is more or less trivial that the adjoint action of the two unitaries
coincide on both @xmath and @xmath . There remain two problems to
overcome:

-   the algebra generated by these two algebras do not necessarily
    contain @xmath , so it is not clear why the adjoint action of these
    two unitaries should coincide on the mentioned algebra,

-   but even if we knew that the actions coincide, the two unitaries,
    although both belonging to @xmath , for what we know could still
    “differ” in an inner element.

As for the first problem, consider an open interval @xmath such that it
contains the point @xmath and has @xmath in the interior of its
complement. Note that due to the conditions imposed on @xmath , the sets
@xmath are still elements of @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.4.4.

If @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof of the Lemma.

The flow of a vector field given by a nonnegative function on the
circle, moves all points forward (i.e. anticlockwise). Moreover, the
flow cannot move points from the support of the vector field to outside,
and leaves invariant all points outside.

Taking in consideration Prop. 5.1.6 and what was said it is easy to see
that @xmath and consequently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

It follows that if @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (6.42)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the last equality we have used the fact that for @xmath the
image of @xmath under the diffeomorphism @xmath is contained in @xmath .

We have thus seen that for @xmath the adjoint action of @xmath and of
@xmath coincide on @xmath . Actually, looking at our argument we can
realize that everything remains true if instead of @xmath we begin with
an open interval @xmath that contains the point @xmath and has @xmath in
the interior of its complement and we exchange the “+” and “-”
subindices. So in fact we have proved that for @xmath these adjoint
actions coincide on both @xmath and @xmath and therefore on the whole
algebra @xmath , since we may assume that the union of @xmath and @xmath
is the whole circle. (The choice of the intervals, apart from the
conditions listed, was arbitrary.) Of course the equality of the
actions, as they are obviously one-parameter automorphism groups of
@xmath , is true also in case the parameter @xmath is negative. We can
now also confirm that the unitary

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

lies in @xmath where “ @xmath ” stands for the word “center”. Thus
@xmath is a strongly continuous one-parameter group. (It is easy to see
that as @xmath commutes with both @xmath and @xmath it is actually a
one-parameter group.)

We shall now deal with the second mentioned problem. The @xmath
-dilations @xmath scale the @xmath -translations and preserve the
intervals @xmath . Thus they also scale the functions @xmath and so we
get some relations — both in the vacuum and in the representation @xmath
— regarding the unitaries implementing the dilations and translations
and the unitaries that were denoted by @xmath with different subindices
(see Prop. 5.1.6 ). More concretely, with everything meant in the
projective sense, in the vacuum Hilbert space we have that the adjoint
action of @xmath scales the parameter @xmath into @xmath in @xmath and
in @xmath . In the Hilbert space @xmath we have exactly the same scaling
of @xmath and of @xmath by the adjoint action of @xmath . Thus (up to
phases)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

but on the other hand of course, as @xmath is in the center, the left
hand side should be simply equal to @xmath . So up to phases @xmath for
all values of the parameters @xmath and @xmath which means that @xmath
is a multiple of the identity and hence in the projective sense @xmath
equals to @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 6.4.5.

The representation @xmath is of positive energy.

###### Proof.

The spectrum of the generator of a one-parameter unitary group remains
unchanged in any normal representation. The one-parameter groups @xmath
are local . Thus, as the representation @xmath is locally normal, by
Prop. 6.4.1 the self-adjoint generator of the one-parameter group

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

is bounded from below and by Prop. 6.4.3 this one-parameter group of
unitaries, at least in the projective sense, equals to the one-parameter
group @xmath . So by Lemma A.2.1 the representation @xmath is of
positive energy. ∎

Let us now take an arbitrary positive integer @xmath . By equation ( 3.5
) both @xmath and @xmath implement the same automorphism of @xmath .
Since both unitaries are actually elements of @xmath , they must commute
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a strongly continuous one-parameter group in the von Neumann algebra
@xmath .

As it was mentioned, (see the preliminary Sect. 3.3 ) the restriction of
the subnet @xmath onto @xmath — unless @xmath is trivial, in which case
dim @xmath — is isomorphic to a Virasoro net. Thus @xmath must be
separable (even if the full Hilbert space @xmath is not so; recall that
we did not assume separability) as the Hilbert space of a Virasoro net
is separable.

Every von Neumann algebra on a separable Hilbert space has a strongly
dense separable @xmath subalgebra. A von Neumann algebra generated by a
finite number of von Neumann algebras with strongly dense separable
@xmath subalgebras has a strongly dense @xmath subalgebra. Thus
considering that for an @xmath the restriction map from @xmath to @xmath
is an isomorphism, one can easily verify that the von Neumann algebra
@xmath has a strongly dense @xmath subalgebra.

We can thus safely consider the direct integral decomposition of @xmath
along its center

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Even if @xmath is not separable, by the mentioned property of the
algebra @xmath , it can be decomposed into the direct sum of invariant
separable subspaces for @xmath . Then writing the direct integral
decomposition in each of those subspaces, the rest of the argument can
be carried out without further changes.) For an introduction on the
topic of the direct integrals see for example [ Kad , Chapter 14.] .

Since the group @xmath is in particular second countable and locally
compact, and the representations @xmath are in @xmath , the
decomposition ( 6.47 ) also decomposes these representations (cf. [ Dix
, Lemma 8.3.1 and Remark 18.7.6] ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a strongly continuous representation for
almost every @xmath .

By Lemma A.2.4 a direct integral of strongly continuous representations
of @xmath is of positive energy if and only if the the representations
appearing in the integral are so for almost every point of the measure
space of the integration. As @xmath is a strongly continuous
one-parameter group in the center, for almost all @xmath in the
projective sense. Therefore, since by the mentioned Lemma and Corollary
6.4.5 in @xmath the self-adjoint generator of rotations is positive,
also in @xmath it must be at least bounded from below and hence by Lemma
A.2.1 it is actually positive. Thus, by using again Lemma A.2.4 we
arrive to the following result.

###### Theorem 6.4.6.

Let @xmath be a locally normal representation of the conformal local net
of von Neumann algebras on the circle @xmath . Then the strongly
continuous representation @xmath defined by Proposition 6.4.2 , is of
positive energy for all @xmath . In particular, the unique continuous
inner implementation of the Möbius symmetry in the representation @xmath
is of positive energy.

Carpi proved [ Ca04 , Prop. 2.1] that an irreducible representation of a
Virasoro net @xmath must be one of those that we get by integrating a
positive energy unitary representation of the Virasoro algebra
(corresponding to the same central charge) under the condition that the
representation is of positive energy. Thus by the above theorem we may
draw the following conclusion.

###### Corollary 6.4.7.

An irreducible representation of the local net @xmath must be one of
those that we get by integrating a positive energy unitary
representation of the Virasoro algebra corresponding to the same central
charge.

## Appendix A About the Möbius group

### a.1 Geometrical properties

#### §1.

We define @xmath to be the set of diffeomorphisms of @xmath of the form
@xmath with @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath such that @xmath , then by
setting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

by direct calculation one can easily find that @xmath and moreover that
@xmath . Thus @xmath , with the composition, is a group.

For a differentiable transformation @xmath of @xmath we think of its
derivative as a @xmath function:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using that @xmath we find that @xmath . Thus @xmath contains only
orientation preserving elements and hence @xmath .

If @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . In the converse direction,
if @xmath then by elementary arguments either @xmath or @xmath . Let us
denote this equivalence relation by @xmath and set @xmath . Then the map
@xmath is a well defined bijection from @xmath to @xmath . Hence it is
easy to see that @xmath is actually a three dimensional Lie subgroup of
@xmath . In fact the @xmath given by Eq. ( A.1 ) with which @xmath ,
satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus @xmath . So one can think of @xmath as a given action of @xmath on
@xmath . We shall now study the geometrical properties of this action.

#### §2.

We shall think of a vector field symbolically written as @xmath as the
corresponding real function @xmath . In case of a vector field we use
the notation @xmath (calling it simply the derivative) for the function
on the circle obtained by differentiating with respect to the angle:
@xmath .

Since the @xmath is compact, an @xmath smooth function always gives rise
to a flow on the circle. We denote by @xmath this one-parameter group
diffeomorphisms. We say that @xmath is a Möbius vector field , if @xmath
. Denoting by @xmath the set of Möbius vector fields, we can naturally
identify @xmath with the Lie algebra of @xmath in such a way that @xmath
will indeed correspond to the exponential of Lie algebra elements. In
this case however the Lie bracket will become the negative of the usual
bracket of vector fields. Thus for two smooth functions @xmath we set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the complexification of @xmath the three functions @xmath and @xmath
form a base, where @xmath @xmath . The exponential of the constant
@xmath function is the one-parameter group of (anticlockwise) rotations
@xmath where @xmath .

The Möbius vector fields @xmath defined by the formulae

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

are called the translational and dilational vector fields, respectively.
The generated flow @xmath is called the one-parameter group of
translations . The flow @xmath is called the one-parameter group of
dilations . It is probably worth to give them by formulae, too:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The reason behind the names is the following. Choosing the point @xmath
to be the so-called “infinite point”, we can identify @xmath with the
real line through the Cayley transformation defined by the map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The one-parameter groups @xmath and @xmath preserve the point @xmath and
through the above identification they go into the transformations @xmath
and @xmath , respectively.

By what was explained, it is evident that we have the following scaling
of the translations by the dilations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This could have been also established by calculating that the commutator
of the generating vector fields resulting @xmath .

#### §3.

It is also useful to investigate the transitivity of the action on the
circle. The next few lemmas will be stated without proofs; they are
justified by straightforward calculation.

###### Lemma A.1.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath two sets of distinct points with the numbering
corresponding to the anticlockwise direction in both collections. Then
there exists a unique @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath .

###### Corollary A.1.2.

@xmath acts transitively on the set @xmath of nonempty, nondense open
arcs of @xmath .

The one-parameter group of dilations preserves two points, namely, the
points @xmath . It also follows, that it preserves the intervals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Lemma A.1.3.

Any Möbius transformation preserving @xmath is a dilation @xmath with a
certain parameter @xmath . Thus up to parametrization @xmath is the only
one-parameter group in @xmath preserving @xmath .

###### Corollary A.1.4.

If @xmath and @xmath then it follows that @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

By rearranging the equation we see that what we have to prove is that
@xmath commutes with @xmath which follows since by the previous lemma
@xmath is again a dilation. ∎

###### Definition A.1.5.

For an interval @xmath the one-parameter group of dilations associated
to @xmath , @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . (By Corollary A.1.2 such a @xmath exists, and by
Corollary A.1.4 the definition is independent from the choice of @xmath
.)

Note that up to parametrization @xmath is the unique one-parameter group
in @xmath preserving @xmath . Note also that by the above definition the
dilational one-parameter group @xmath is the dilational one-parameter
group associated to @xmath . Moreover, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that @xmath where @xmath is the interior of the complement of
@xmath .

###### Lemma A.1.6.

Let @xmath be two intervals with no common endpoints. Then @xmath is a
generating set in @xmath .

###### Lemma A.1.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath three real numbers. Then there exists a unique
Möbius vector field @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath . Moreover, if
@xmath then this vector field is a multiple of @xmath , that is, the
generator of dilations associated to @xmath where @xmath is an interval
with endpoints @xmath .

###### Lemma A.1.8.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

#### §4.

The group @xmath is connected but not simply connected. Its universal
covering group @xmath is isomorphic to the universal covering of @xmath
; that is @xmath . Each discussed one-parameter group lifts to a
one-parameter group in @xmath . These lifts will be denoted by simply
adding a “ @xmath ”, e.g. @xmath will stand for the one-parameter group
in @xmath obtained by lifting the one-parameter group of rotations
@xmath . Note that while @xmath is a periodical one-parameter group,
@xmath is not. It follows from the fact that as smooth manifolds (but
not as groups) @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition A.1.9.

(The Iwasawa decomposition.) The map from @xmath to @xmath defined by
the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a smooth covering.

Sketch of proof. We shall (indicate how to) show that for each @xmath
there exists a unique @xmath such that @xmath where @xmath and that
moreover that this dependence is smooth.

Set @xmath . Then regardless what @xmath and @xmath are, since the
dilations and translations do not move the point @xmath , we have that
if @xmath then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore @xmath preserves the point @xmath , but not necessarily the
point @xmath . In fact one sees that there exists a unique @xmath such
that @xmath . Then, as the dilations do not move the point @xmath we
find that regardless what @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, by Corollary A.1.3 there exists a unique @xmath such that
@xmath . Hence @xmath . @xmath

###### Corollary A.1.10.

The map from @xmath to @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a diffeomorphism.

### a.2 Representation theory of @xmath

#### §1.

In what follows @xmath stands for the set of complex numbers of unit
length. We consider the projective unitary group @xmath of a Hilbert
space @xmath as a topological group with the topology being induced by
the strong operator topology on @xmath . A strongly continuous
projective representation @xmath of a topological group @xmath on a
Hilbert space @xmath is a continuous homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
. Sometimes we think of @xmath @xmath as a unitary operator. Although
there are more than one ways to fix the phases, note that expressions
like Ad @xmath or @xmath for a von Neumann algebra @xmath are
unambiguous.

Unlike with true representations, in general we cannot consider the
direct sum of projective representations. On the other hand, we can
still introduce the concept of invariant subspaces (it is independent
from the choice of phases) and thus that of irreducible representations.

Suppose @xmath is obtained by fixing the phases of the projective
representation @xmath in a certain way. Then for each pair @xmath there
exists a unique @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath , where @xmath is
the identity of @xmath , is a multiple of the identity, we have @xmath .
Also, by the associativity one finds that for all @xmath the function
@xmath satisfies the following identity: @xmath . Thus one says that
@xmath is a @xmath -cocycle on @xmath . If @xmath is again obtained by
fixing the phases of @xmath , then there exists a unique function @xmath
such that @xmath for all @xmath . Then the @xmath -cocycle @xmath
associated to @xmath can be calculated by the formula @xmath .

We can always find an open neighbourhood of the identity @xmath and a
certain fixing of the phases of @xmath in such a way that the map @xmath
will be strongly continuous on @xmath and that the associated cocycle
@xmath will be continuous on @xmath . Indeed, take a unit vector @xmath
. Whether for a @xmath the vector @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath is
independent from the phases. Let @xmath be the set where it is not
orthogonal. Then @xmath is an open neighbourhood of the identity. In
this neighbourhood for every @xmath there is a unique way of fixing the
phase of @xmath such that @xmath is minimal. It is clear that with this
choice @xmath is strongly continuous on @xmath and that there exists an
even smaller neighbourhood of the identity @xmath such that @xmath is
continuous on @xmath .

Suppose @xmath is in particular a finite dimensional Lie group. It is
well known that if the Lie algebra of @xmath is semisimple, and @xmath
is a @xmath -cocycle on @xmath which is continuous in a neighbourhood of
@xmath , then @xmath is exact in (a certain smaller) neighbourhood of
@xmath . That is, there exists a @xmath continuous function such that
@xmath for all @xmath where @xmath is a certain open neighbourhood of
@xmath . Thus with @xmath coming from @xmath where the phases are fixed
in the above explained way, we have that @xmath is strongly continuous
on @xmath and if @xmath then @xmath . If @xmath is also connected and
simply connected, then @xmath extends to a strongly continuous
representation of @xmath . These facts, as it was mentioned, are all
well known and can be found in almost any book treating projective
unitary representations; the original research article, establishing the
main ingredients of the theory is that [ Bar ] of Bargmann.

So suppose @xmath is a finite dimensional connected Lie group with
semisimple Lie algebra, and denote by @xmath its universal cover. By
what was said, if @xmath is a strongly continuous projective unitary
representation of @xmath , then there exists a strongly continuous
unitary representation @xmath of @xmath (on the same Hilbert space) such
that in the projective sense

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath with @xmath being the covering map. If further @xmath is
noncommutative with simple Lie algebra, then such a @xmath is unique.
Indeed, if @xmath and @xmath are two such representations, then there
exists a continuous character @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath .
But as @xmath is noncommutative and its Lie algebra is simple, the only
continuous character it admits is the identity function.

#### §2.

Our particular interest is the (projective, positive energy)
representation theory of @xmath where @xmath is a positive integer. The
group in question is a connected Lie group with simple Lie algebra.
Moreover, there is a canonical @xmath -fold covering map from @xmath to
@xmath . Thus the universal cover of @xmath can be canonically
identified with @xmath , that is, with the universal cover of @xmath .
So every strongly continuous projective unitary representation of @xmath
lifts to a unique strongly continuous unitary representation of @xmath .
This is why we shall investigate now what we can say about strongly
continuous unitary representations of @xmath . The following statement
is demonstrated by an adopted (and slightly modified) version of the
argument used in the proof of [ Kö02 , Prop. 1] .

###### Proposition A.2.1.

Let @xmath be a strongly continuous unitary representation of @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath being the self-adjoint generator of rotations and
translations in @xmath , respectively. Then the following four
conditions are equivalent:
@xmath is bounded from below,
@xmath is bounded from below,
@xmath ,
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall that @xmath is the rotational one-parameter group in @xmath and
set @xmath . Then @xmath is the self-adjoint generator associated to the
one-parameter group @xmath where the vector field @xmath is obtained by
rotating the vector field of translations @xmath , by @xmath radian;
that is @xmath . As @xmath is unitary conjugate to @xmath their spectra
coincide. Moreover, as @xmath on the Gårding-domain we have that @xmath
which immediately proves that if @xmath is bounded from below or
positive then so is @xmath .

As for the rest of the statement, apart from the trivial indications
there remains to show that if @xmath is bounded from below then @xmath
is positive. Consider the lifted dilations @xmath . By equation ( A.8 )
one has that @xmath . Moreover, by direct calculation @xmath so
similarly to the case of translations the dilations also “scale” @xmath
, but in the converse direction. Thus @xmath . So if @xmath for some
@xmath real (but not necessarily nonnegative) number then for any vector
@xmath in the Gårding-domain, setting @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

from which, letting @xmath we find that @xmath . ∎

###### Definition A.2.2.

A strongly continuous unitary representation of @xmath that satisfies
any of the listed conditions of Prop. A.2.1 is called a positive energy
representation of @xmath .

A useful observation about the Gårding-domain in connection with the
self-adjoint generator of rotations is the following

###### Lemma A.2.3.

Let @xmath be a strongly continuous unitary representation of @xmath
with @xmath being the self-adjoint generator of rotations. Then the
Gårding-domain of the representation is a core for any positive power of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a positive number. The Iwasawa decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

by Corollary A.1.10 is a diffeomorphism between @xmath and @xmath .
Hence if @xmath and @xmath is a compactly supported smooth function then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is in the Gårding-domain. (It does not matter that the measure is not
the Haar-measure: a replacement would only make a change in @xmath .)
From here it is easy to see that if @xmath is compactly supported and
smooth then @xmath is in the domain of the operator obtained by closing
the restriction of @xmath to the Gårding-domain. The rest is trivial. ∎

A unitary representation @xmath of a group @xmath is called a factor
representation , if the von Neumann algebra @xmath is a factor. For the
next statement recall the concept of direct integrals (see e.g. [ Kad ,
Chapter 14.] for direct integral of operators, representations of @xmath
algebras, and direct integrals of von Neumann algebras and [ Dix ,
Remark 18.7.6] for the connection between direct integral of
representations of @xmath algebras and that of groups).

Although for any kind of direct integral construction one usually
requires separability for the Hilbert spaces in question, note that in
our case this condition can be dropped. The point is that we can choose
a countable set @xmath which is dense. Then if @xmath is a strongly
continuous representation of our group then for any given vector @xmath
we have that the invariant space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

is separable. From here it is easy to see that any strongly continuous
representation is (equivalent with) a direct sum of representations
given on separable Hilbert spaces.

The group @xmath is in particular second countable and locally compact
and so the @xmath algebras associated to it is separable. Therefore, by
the mentioned remark of the above cited book, any strongly continuous
unitary representation of @xmath can be decomposed as a direct integral
of factor representations. (Note that in our case the condition on the
separability of the Hilbert space can be dropped: since one can find a
countable set of points which is dense in @xmath , by standard
arguments, any strongly continuous unitary representation of the group
in question can be decomposed into the direct sum of representations on
separable Hilbert spaces. Then on each component we can further
decompose the representation into a direct integral of factor
representations. Note also that in general for direct integral
constructions there is no need to require separability of the total
Hilbert space, what is necessary is the separability of the Hilbert
spaces that are to be “integrated together”. Thus the integral
decompositions in the components appearing in the above direct sum can
be indeed put together to give a direct integral decomposition of the
original representation into factor representations.)

###### Lemma A.2.4.

Every strongly continuous unitary representation of @xmath is
(equivalent with) a direct integral of factor representations. Moreover,
a direct integral of strongly continuous unitary representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath is of positive energy if and only if so is @xmath for almost
every @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first statement was just demonstrated (by the comments made above).
There remains to justify the affirmation about positivity. Since
positivity of energy regards only the restriction of the representation
onto the rotational subgroup, the argument will be presented about
one-parameter unitary groups, in general.

For a @xmath strongly continuous one-parameter group of unitaries the
positivity of the self-adjoint generator is for example equivalent with
the fact that @xmath for a certain smooth, fast decreasing function
@xmath whose Fourier transform is positive on @xmath and zero on @xmath
. If @xmath is a direct integral of a measurable family of strongly
continuous one-parameter groups, @xmath , then @xmath . As @xmath for
almost every @xmath , the operator @xmath is zero if and only if @xmath
for almost every @xmath . ∎

Still considering a strongly continuous unitary representation @xmath of
@xmath , let us denote, as before, the self-adjoint generator of
rotations by @xmath , the self-adjoint generator of translations by
@xmath and further, the self-adjoint generator of dilations by @xmath .
Set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath and by looking at the commutation relation between the
corresponding (complex) vector fields we find that on the Gårding-domain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further, by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that @xmath is a Casimir-operator: on the Gårding-domain it
commutes with all of the @xmath generators @xmath and @xmath . Since it
is a polinomial (quadratic) expression of the generator, and moreover
its restriction to the Gårding-domain is evidently symmetric, it is easy
to prove that the closure of this restriction (which, by symmetricalness
exists) is indeed a closed operator commuting with both @xmath and
@xmath . Hence if the representation @xmath is a factor representation,
then there exists a real number @xmath such that @xmath for every vector
@xmath in the Gårding-domain; we shall say that @xmath is the “value of
the Casimir-operator @xmath in the factor representation @xmath ”.

###### Proposition A.2.5.

Let @xmath be a positive energy factorial representation of @xmath ,
@xmath the value of the Casimir-operator defined above and @xmath . Then
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a positive integer and @xmath a polynomial with @xmath .
Then using the commutation relations, the value of @xmath and the fact
that @xmath we find that for any @xmath in the Gårding-domain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the polynomial @xmath is given by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be any vector whose (nonnegative) measure @xmath given by the
spectral decomposition of @xmath is compactly supported. Then on one
hand we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

but on the other hand Eq. ( A.21 ) and a simple use of Lemma A.2.3 show
that @xmath . This should be true for all positive integer @xmath and
polynomial @xmath with @xmath . From here, by setting @xmath , it is a
standard, although not trivial exercise to show that @xmath . (One needs
to take vectors @xmath with measure supported in @xmath with @xmath
sufficiently small, and consider for example the polynomial @xmath .)
Moreover, if a vector is supported in @xmath @xmath , then by setting
@xmath , and using similar considerations one sees (by choosing the
polynomial @xmath “well”) that the corresponding measure must be
concentrated on the set of points at which the product @xmath is zero.
Hence, using that @xmath it follows that @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary A.2.6.

Let @xmath be a positive energy representation of @xmath with @xmath as
before. Then @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for every @xmath , where @xmath is the minimum point of the spectrum of
@xmath . So if @xmath is any self-adjoint generator of @xmath then
@xmath and there exists a constant @xmath such that @xmath for every
@xmath . In particular any core for @xmath is a core for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Once the stated energy bounds are satisfied for @xmath on the Gårding
domain, it is clear that the rest follows. If @xmath is a factor
representation with @xmath being the lowest point of @xmath , then by
our previous proposition, taking account of the definition of @xmath we
find that on the Gårding-domain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus the bounds are justified by taking expectations with vectors from
the Gårding-domain. Hence the assertions for the domains follow and the
bounds hold on the whole domain of @xmath .

If @xmath is not a factor representation, then by Lemma A.2.4 it is a
direct integral @xmath of factor representations. It is also clear that
the lowest point of the spectrum of the self-adjoint generator of
rotations @xmath in the factor representation @xmath , is greater or
equal to @xmath for almost every @xmath (one can argue in a similar way
as in the proof of the mentioned lemma). Then the bounds hold in almost
all factor representation appearing in the direct integral
decomposition. To finish, all we need to do is to check that the bounds
on the generators can be “integrated” to give the right inequalities for
the direct integral decomposition; which is left for the reader. ∎

###### Corollary A.2.7.

Let @xmath be a positive energy representation of @xmath with @xmath as
before. Then @xmath is an invariant domain for @xmath and hence it is an
invariant core for any self-adjoint generator of @xmath . Moreover, not
only on the Gårding-domain, but even on @xmath the generators satisfy
the commutation relations of the Lie algebra of @xmath .

###### Proof.

By an easy use of the commutation relations one has that if @xmath is a
vector from the Gårding domain then @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .
So let @xmath . Then by Lemma A.2.3 there exists a sequence of Gårding
vectors @xmath converging to @xmath such that @xmath for any positive
power @xmath . Then, since @xmath are closable operators, by the above
equations and the previous corollary we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence @xmath and @xmath and the invariance of @xmath follows since
@xmath was any positive integer. As for the commutation relations, we
need to consider quadratic expressions like @xmath where @xmath are
generators of @xmath . On the Gårding domain @xmath where @xmath is
another generator of the representation and by the previous corollary
there exists an @xmath and @xmath such

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

for any vector @xmath from the Gårding domain. The rest follows easily
(again, using Lemma A.2.3 ). ∎

###### Corollary A.2.8.

Let @xmath be a positive energy representation of @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath as before. Then @xmath for all @xmath and so @xmath @xmath .

###### Proof.

In the previous proof we have seen that an expression like @xmath admits
a quadratic energy bound. In fact, it is not hard to see that in general
for a self-adjoint generator @xmath of @xmath there exists an @xmath
such that @xmath for all @xmath and so @xmath .

Suppose @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is a self-adjoint generator of
@xmath , hence by what was established @xmath . But it is equivalent
with saying that @xmath . We have thus proved that @xmath . Then
exchanging @xmath with @xmath , we see that in fact @xmath . ∎

#### §3.

We shall now proceed in the converse direction. Namely, in stead of
considering representations of the group and then deriving relations for
the generators, we shall consider representations of the generators of
@xmath and we shall try to integrate them.

###### Proposition A.2.9.

Let @xmath be a dense subspace of a Hilbert space and @xmath three
operators defined on @xmath satisfying the following properties:
@xmath @xmath is invariant for all three operators,
@xmath @xmath is diagonal and positive on @xmath
@xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath .
Then @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is a
linear combination of @xmath and @xmath , then there exists a @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

By the second condition @xmath is the span of the eigenvectors of @xmath
(every vector has a unique decomposition into eigenvectors associated to
different eigenvalues of @xmath ) and by the commutation relations
@xmath are again “stepping” operators.

Since @xmath is positive, the set of eigenvalues of @xmath has a
nonnegative infinum which we shall denote by @xmath . Suppose @xmath
contains only eigenvectors of @xmath with eigenvalues in @xmath . Then
@xmath and so @xmath and @xmath . We shall proceed by induction. Suppose
these inequalities hold for all @xmath containing eigenvectors of @xmath
with eigenvalues in @xmath for some @xmath positive integer. Suppose
@xmath is a combination of eigenvectors with eigenvalues in @xmath .
Then @xmath belongs to @xmath , i.e. it is a combination of eigenvectors
with eigenvalues in @xmath . Thus, setting @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the third line we have used the inductive assumption. Then,
using the commutation relations, one also finds that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus those inequalities hold for all vectors from the sets @xmath .

Every vector from @xmath can be written as a sum @xmath where @xmath and
only finite many of these vectors are non zero. These vectors are
pairwise orthogonal since @xmath is hermitian. But by the discussed
“stepping” nature of @xmath , also the vectors @xmath are pairwise
orthogonal and the same holds for the vectors @xmath . Thus by
orthogonality the inequality is justified for all vectors of @xmath .

Let us proceed to the second part of the statement. If @xmath is a
linear combination of the operators @xmath and @xmath then by the
justified bounds there exists an @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath
. Moreover, if the eigenvalues appearing in the decomposition of @xmath
are smaller than a certain positive integer @xmath , then the
eigenvalues appearing in that of @xmath are smaller than @xmath .
Therefore, if @xmath is an integer then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and hence if @xmath then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is exactly what we wanted to prove. Note that the convergence
radius depends only on @xmath (i.e. on the linear energy bound on the
element @xmath ) but not on the vector @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary A.2.10.

If @xmath and @xmath are as in the previous proposition, then they
integrate to a positive energy representation of @xmath . That it,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are essentially self-adjoint operators and setting @xmath for their
closure we have that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a positive energy representation of @xmath .

###### Proof.

By the previous proposition @xmath is a dense set of analytic vectors
for the symmetric operators @xmath (and in fact for any linear
combination of them). Thus by results of Nelson (see e.g. [ RS2 ,
Theorem X.39] ) they are essentially self-adjoint. Moreover, the group
@xmath is a connected and simply connected Lie group. Then, by the
results of [ FlSi ] on the integrability of the representations Lie
algebras, the statement follows because we have a representation of its
Lie algebra by antisymmetric operators defined on a common, dense,
invariant, analytic set of vectors. ∎

#### §4.

Let us now return to positive energy representations of @xmath in which
the spectrum of @xmath contains eigenvalues only. (We have seen that
this is the case if for example the representation is factorial.) Let
@xmath be an eigenvector associated to an eigenvalue @xmath , then using
the commutation relations one finds that @xmath and @xmath , thus @xmath
“steps up and down” on the spectrum of @xmath . In particular if @xmath
is an eigenvector associated to the lowest eigenvalue @xmath , then
@xmath and using the commutation relations @xmath . Thus if @xmath then
@xmath is annihilated by all generators and it is in an invariant vector
for the representation (i.e. the representation contains the trivial
representation). So suppose @xmath , @xmath and set @xmath and
recursively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the mentioned “stepping” property @xmath , and by the expression for
the Casimir-operator one finds (by an inductive argument) that these
vectors have all unit length. So in fact they are a set of orthonormal
eigenvectors for @xmath . Moreover, again by an inductive argument,
using the commutation relations, and the fact that @xmath , one finds
that @xmath . So the span of these vectors is an invariant subspace for
the generators.

Using the above observations we shall now construct all irreducible
positive energy representations of @xmath . Let @xmath be a positive
number and consider the Hilbert space @xmath whose standard complete
orthonormed system — somewhat unusually — shall be denoted by @xmath .
Further, denote by @xmath the algebraic span of this orthonormed system.
Following the observations made, we introduce the three operators @xmath
and @xmath on @xmath by the defining them on the base @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

(Note that the definition for @xmath is meaningful even when @xmath as
in that case the coefficient is zero.) It is an elementary exercise to
check that these operators then satisfy the requirements of Prop. A.2.9
and hence by Corollary A.2.10 it integrates to a positive energy
representation of @xmath which we shall denote by @xmath . Note that the
spectrum of the self-adjoint generator of rotations for this
representation is exactly @xmath .

###### Proposition A.2.11.

The representations @xmath are nonequivalent irreducible
representations. Moreover any nontrivial irreducible positive energy
representation of @xmath is equivalent with @xmath for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

That these representations are inequivalent is trivial, since the lowest
eigenvalue of the self-adjoint generator of rotations in @xmath is
exactly @xmath . As for the irreducibility, suppose @xmath . Then @xmath
preserves the eigenspaces of the self-adjoint generator of rotations,
thus for every @xmath there exists a complex number @xmath such that
@xmath . Also, from the commutation with the self-adjoint generator of
translations and dilations it follows that @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence @xmath which implies that @xmath is a multiple of the
identity. Finally, as for the last assertion, suppose @xmath is an
irreducible positive energy representation of @xmath . Denote the lowest
point of the spectrum of its self-adjoint generator @xmath by @xmath .
As @xmath is in particular a factor representation, by Prop. A.2.5 there
is an eigenvector of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath . As it was already
observed, @xmath cannot be zero as then the corresponding eigenvector
would be an invariant vector for @xmath . Let @xmath be a normalized
eigenvector of @xmath associated to the eigenvalue @xmath . By the same
observation, if define the vectors @xmath by the recursive formula of
Eq. (refrecursive.phi.n) then the map @xmath extends to an isometric
operator @xmath . Moreover, by denoting the self-adjoint generators of
translations and dilations in @xmath by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, we have that @xmath and @xmath . Therefore the span of
@xmath is a set of invariant, analytic vectors for the self-adjoint
generators of @xmath . Hence its closure, which is the range of @xmath
is an invariant subspace for @xmath and thus by irreducibility @xmath is
a unitary operator and of course it also follows, too, that @xmath
intertwines @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition A.2.12.

A positive energy factor representation of @xmath is equivalent with a
multiple of an irreducible representation.

###### Proof.

By Prop. A.2.5 we know that the spectrum of the self-adjoint generator
of rotations @xmath in the factor representation @xmath contains only
eigenvalues. Let @xmath be the lowest eigenvalue and @xmath as before.
By the same argument we employed in the proof of the previous
proposition, if we pick an eigenvector @xmath , then the subspace

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have set @xmath , is invariant and analytic for the
self-adjoint generators of @xmath . Thus its closure is an invariant for
@xmath . In fact by what was explained before it is a minimal invariant
closed subspace for @xmath . Moreover, by the fact that @xmath and by
the commutation relations it is clear that if @xmath then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is independent of the vectors @xmath . Thus if these
vectors are perpendicular then @xmath is perpendicular to @xmath . Hence
by choosing a complete orthonormed system @xmath in @xmath (where @xmath
is some index set), we have that @xmath @xmath are pairwise orthogonal
minimal invariant closed subspaces and the closure of their sum contains
@xmath . The orthogonal @xmath to the subspace generated by @xmath is
non-trivial, then, by similar arguments one finds that it contains a
nontrivial irreducible representation with some lowest eigenvalue for
the self-adjoint generator of rotations bigger then @xmath . By
factoriality this is not possible and thus the statement is proved. ∎

###### Corollary A.2.13.

A positive energy representation @xmath of @xmath is always equivalent
with a direct integral of irreducible representations. @xmath is
equivalent with a direct sum of irreducible representations if and only
if the span of the eigenvalues of the self-adjoint generator of
rotations is dense.

###### Proof.

The first statement follows directly from the previous proposition and
Lemma A.2.4 . As for the second statement: one direction is trivial
since this property is true for every irreducible positive energy
representation. For the converse direction, suppose @xmath is an
eigenvector of the self-adjoint generator of rotations @xmath and set
@xmath as before. If @xmath then, using the notations of the proof of
the previous proposition, @xmath is minimal invariant closed subspace.
If @xmath is orthogonal to all vectors that are annihilated by @xmath
and @xmath , then it is easy to see that @xmath is a minimal invariant
closed subspace containing @xmath . Similarly, if @xmath is orthogonal
to all vectors that are annihilated by @xmath and @xmath then we have
that @xmath is a minimal invariant closed subspace containing @xmath .
Since by the “stepping” property of @xmath and the positivity of @xmath
the eigenvector @xmath must be annihilated by some (large enough,
positive) power of @xmath , carrying on the sketched argument we find
that @xmath is a finite sum of orthogonal vectors lying in minimal
invariant closed subspaces (in fact, the number of the vectors needed in
this decomposition is @xmath the eigenvalue associated to @xmath plus
@xmath ). It is clear that together with what was established before how
this implies the statement. ∎

## Appendix B Piecewise Möbius transformations

### b.1 Definitions and properties

We begin with some rather trivial affirmations. Suppose that @xmath is a
differentiable bijection whose derivative @xmath is strictly positive.
Then by the inverse function theorem also @xmath is differentiable and
its derivative is strictly positive. Moreover, if @xmath and @xmath are
differentiable bijections with strictly positive derivative, then @xmath
is also a differentiable bijection with strictly positive derivative.

###### Proposition B.1.1.

If @xmath then @xmath (and so it is orientation preserving) and @xmath .
Moreover, if @xmath then @xmath . Thus the set @xmath with the
composition as multiplication forms a group.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath coincides with @xmath on @xmath . Then by continuity they
even coincide on @xmath . Moreover, as the derivative on @xmath is
completely determined by the function on @xmath (even on the endpoints
of the interval), we have that @xmath . But a Möbius transformation,
being in particular an orientation preserving diffeomorphism, has a
strictly positive derivative. Hence also the derivative of @xmath must
be strictly positive at each point. The rest of the statement is rather
obvious, as also the Möbius transformations, with the composition as
multiplication, form a group. ∎

Remark. The group @xmath at least contains the Möbius transformations.
But so far we have not addressed the question whether there are
nontrivial piecewise Möbius transformations: whether the group @xmath is
really bigger than @xmath . Could we have required for example twice
differentiability, in stead of once differentiability? No, since by
Lemma A.1.8 there are no nontrivial, twice differentiable piecewise
Möbius transformations: such a transformation is in fact automatically
Möbius . However, “luckily” we have only required once
differentiability, which, as we shall soon see, gives rise to a
completely different situation.

Recall that two intervals @xmath are said to be distant , if @xmath .
Recall also that for each interval @xmath there is an associated
one-parameter group @xmath which is called the one-parameter group of
dilations associated to @xmath , and that by Def. 4.2.1 , a certain
transformation @xmath was introduced for each pair of distant intervals
@xmath and real number @xmath . As a dilation of a certain interval
leaves fixed the endpoints of that interval, it is not hard to see that
the transformation @xmath is at least continuous. We shall now see that
it is in fact a differentiable bijection.

###### Lemma B.1.2.

Let @xmath be two distant intervals. Then @xmath is a one-parameter
group in @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath then there are @xmath points where
@xmath is not smooth, namely the endpoints of the intervals @xmath and
@xmath . Thus if @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is evident that @xmath is a one-parameter group, so in particular
@xmath is a bijection for all @xmath . By its construction it is clearly
a piecewise Möbius transformation if it is differentiable. Of course the
only problem with differentiability can happen at the endpoints of the
intervals appearing in the definition of the transformation.

Recall formula A.1 for the dilations @xmath of the interval @xmath and
the convention (identification) we use throughout this work according to
which the derivative of a @xmath transformation is an @xmath function.
By direct calculation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Let @xmath be an interval with endpoints @xmath and @xmath where the
@xmath index is given to the two endpoints in such a way that if @xmath
then @xmath are three points in the anticlockwise order. Then there
exists a @xmath such that @xmath . Thus @xmath , @xmath and using that
@xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the last equality we get by substituting in ( B.1 ). By applying
this result to our case we see that @xmath is indeed differentiable.

Finally, consider the second derivative of @xmath at the common endpoint
@xmath of the intervals @xmath and @xmath , for example. If it exists
then @xmath which by ( A.1.8 ) (considering that also the
transformations and their first derivative coincide at that point)
implies that @xmath . Hence @xmath preserves not only the endpoints of
@xmath but also those of @xmath , which by Lemma A.1.1 is only possible
if @xmath . ∎

A piecewise Möbius transformation is of course always smooth apart from
a finite number of points. If it is everywhere smooth then it must be a
Möbius transformation. The examples of piecewise Möbius transformations
which we just gave are not smooth at @xmath points. The next lemma says
that in fact in some sense these examples are the smallest possible.

###### Lemma B.1.3.

Let @xmath be a transformation with at most @xmath points where it is
not smooth. Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that the transformation @xmath is everywhere smooth apart from
the three (different) points @xmath where the numbering of the points
corresponds to the anticlockwise direction on the circle. By Prop. B.1.1
@xmath is orientation preserving, so @xmath are still three (different)
points listed in the anticlockwise direction. Therefore, by the @xmath
-transitivity of the action of the Möbius group (Lemma A.1.1 ), there
exists a @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath .

Let @xmath @xmath be the interval that does not contain the point @xmath
and has the other two points (out of @xmath and @xmath ) as endpoints.
The piecewise Möbius transformation @xmath preserves each of these
intervals, and it is smooth on each of these intervals. Therefore the
restriction of @xmath on each of these intervals must correspond to a
Möbius transformation; see the remarks made after Prop. B.1.1 . But any
Möbius transformation that preserves an interval @xmath must be a
dilation of that interval with a certain parameter (Lemma A.1.3 ). So
there exist three real numbers @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

By equation ( B.2 ), the existence of the first derivative at the point
@xmath implies that @xmath . Similarly, by the existence of the first
derivative at points @xmath and @xmath we get that @xmath and @xmath .
Thus the only solution is @xmath and so @xmath and @xmath . ∎

We can now present a generating set of elements in @xmath .

###### Theorem B.1.4.

The group @xmath is generated by the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . We shall show that @xmath by an inductive argument
regarding the number of points at which @xmath is not smooth.

If @xmath is not smooth at most three points then by Lemma B.1.3 it is
actually a Möbius transformation and so @xmath . To proceed with the
induction, assume that if a piecewise Möbius transformation is not
smooth at most @xmath points then it indeed belongs to @xmath . Now
suppose that @xmath is not smooth exactly at the @xmath points @xmath ,
where the numbering corresponds to the anticlockwise order.

Let us use the notation @xmath @xmath for the interval in @xmath that
does not contain any of the points where @xmath is not smooth, and has
@xmath and @xmath as endpoints. Just as in the proof of Lemma B.1.3 , we
may ”adjust” @xmath by a Möbius transformation in such a way that it
will preserve @xmath and @xmath ; i.e. we may assume that @xmath for
@xmath . This means that @xmath preserves the intervals @xmath and
@xmath and thus, just like in the mentioned proof, we can deduce that
there exist @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath . By equation ( B.2 ) the
differentiability of @xmath at the point @xmath implies that @xmath .
Then it is easy to see that @xmath acts identically on both @xmath and
@xmath , and so there can be at most @xmath points at which this
composition is not smooth (this transformation can be not smooth only at
the points @xmath with the exception of the point @xmath ). Therefore,
by the inductive assumption we may conclude that @xmath . ∎

We shall finish our investigation about the geometrical properties of
the piecewise Möbius transformation by showing that there are indeed
”many” such transformation. In particular, we shall prove that the
action of the group @xmath on @xmath is @xmath -transitive for any
@xmath positive integer. In relation with local nets it is also
important that these transformations can be even required to be local .
First we shall prove the following lemma.

###### Lemma B.1.5.

Let @xmath be two points in the interval @xmath . Then there exists a
piecewise Möbius transformation @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath

###### Proof.

It is clear that we can choose a smaller open interval @xmath which is
distant from @xmath but still contains the given two points. We shall
denote the two distant intervals forming the interior of the complement
of @xmath by @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath .

For a real number @xmath set @xmath . As @xmath , by the definition of
@xmath , the transformation @xmath acts identically on @xmath for all
@xmath . Moreover, as the maps @xmath and @xmath are clearly continuous,
so is the the map @xmath and thus its image is a connected set in @xmath
. In fact, as @xmath preserves the interval @xmath (as it acts
identically on @xmath ), it must be a connected subset of @xmath ; i.e.
an interval included in @xmath .

Of course the image of @xmath is the entire interval @xmath . Thus we
can choose two values @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath preserves
the interval @xmath we have that @xmath . Then by what was said about
the image we can conclude that @xmath and so there exist a value @xmath
such that @xmath . Thus the piecewise Möbius transformation @xmath
satisfies all what was required. ∎

Recall that for two points of the circle @xmath we denoted by @xmath the
closed interval whose first point (in the anticlockwise direction) is
@xmath and last point is @xmath . (We set @xmath to be the set
containing the single point @xmath if @xmath ).

###### Theorem B.1.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two sets of @xmath (different) points in @xmath
where @xmath is any positive integer and the numbering of the points
corresponds to the anticlockwise order. Then there exists a @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, if there is an interval @xmath containing both @xmath and
@xmath then @xmath can be chosen to be localized in @xmath ; i.e.
satisfying @xmath .

###### Proof.

Clearly the “local” version of the statement is stronger; by applying a
Möbius transformation we can move the points @xmath so that we will have
@xmath in which case of course we can always find an @xmath containing
both @xmath and @xmath .

We shall argue by induction. For @xmath by Lemma B.1.5 we are finished.
Now suppose the statement holds for the positive integer @xmath and
consider the case @xmath . By our assumption there exists a @xmath
localized in @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath . As @xmath is
orientation preserving and local, both @xmath and @xmath must come
“after” (in the anticlockwise direction) the points @xmath and still in
@xmath . Thus there exists a smaller open interval @xmath containing
both @xmath and @xmath but not containing the points @xmath . By Lemma
B.1.5 there exists a @xmath localized in @xmath such that @xmath . Thus
we are finished as the piecewise Möbius transformation @xmath is still
localized in @xmath and clearly it moves points @xmath into the points
@xmath . ∎

### b.2 Piecewise Möbius vector fields

Recall the notion of piecewise Möbius vector fields (Definition 5.1.1 ).
We begin with some elementary observation. First of all, by its
definition @xmath is a vector space: if @xmath is a real number and
@xmath then @xmath . Also, clearly the adjoint action of a Möbius
transformation sends a piecewise Möbius vector field into a piecewise
Möbius vector field: if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath . As it was
observed, a piecewise Möbius vector field is globally Liepschitz and
thus by the compactness of the circle it determines a unique flow.
However, the temptation to think of @xmath as the Lie algebra of the
group @xmath , having in mind the example of @xmath which is identified
with the Lie algebra of @xmath , is misleading. First of all, the group
of piecewise Möbius transformations is by no means a Lie group. In
general, the bracket of two piecewise Möbius vector fields is not
differentiable, so it does not remain in @xmath . Second of all, the
exponential of a piecewise Möbius vector field does not need to be a
piecewise Möbius transformation. On the other hand, by differentiating a
“sufficiently regular” one-parameter group of @xmath we indeed get an
element of @xmath .

###### Lemma B.2.1.

Let @xmath be two distant intervals. Then the function @xmath given by
the formula @xmath is well-defined (i.e. the derivative exists) and it
is an element of @xmath .

###### Proof.

That this derivative indeed everywhere exists (i.e. even at the
endpoints of the intervals @xmath ), is trivial since the endpoints
remain fixed for all @xmath . It is also evident that our function on
each of the four open intervals determined by these endpoints is the
restriction of a Möbius vector field. The only thing to be verified is
that the derivative of @xmath from the left and right coincide at these
four points.

Recall that the generating Möbius vector field @xmath for the
one-parameter group of dilations associated to @xmath has the expression
@xmath . Thus by setting @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be an interval with endpoints @xmath and @xmath where the
@xmath index is given to the two endpoints in such a way that if @xmath
then @xmath are three points in the anticlockwise order. Then there
exists a @xmath such that @xmath . Thus @xmath , and the Möbius vector
field @xmath generating the dilations associated to the interval @xmath
has the expression @xmath . Thus using that @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the last step is calculated by directly substituting into equation
B.4 . Considering the result received one can immediately see the
differentiability of @xmath . ∎

A piecewise Möbius vector field is always smooth apart from a finite set
of points. If it is really smooth then it is evidently a Möbius
transformation. We shall now state the counterpart of Lemma B.1.3 for
the piecewise Möbius vector fields.

###### Lemma B.2.2.

Let @xmath . If @xmath is not smooth at most @xmath points then it is
actually smooth and so @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us assume that @xmath is smooth apart from the three points @xmath
where the numbering corresponds to the anticlockwise order. We shall
denote by @xmath @xmath the element of @xmath that does not contain the
point @xmath and has the other two points (out of @xmath ) as endpoints.
By our assumption @xmath is the restriction of a Möbius vector field on
each of the three intervals @xmath and @xmath .

By Lemma A.1.7 there exists a unique Möbius vector field @xmath such
that @xmath for @xmath . Thus @xmath @xmath and hence by still by the
cited Lemma, for each @xmath we have that @xmath coincides with the
restriction of @xmath for some real multiple @xmath . However, by
looking at equation ( B.2 ) we see that the condition of once
differentiability at the three endpoints points implies that @xmath ,
@xmath and finally that @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath . ∎

Exactly as in the case of Möbius transformations, by using the previous
lemma we can prove that the examples of piecewise Möbius vector fields
we have so far exhibited form a generating set.

###### Theorem B.2.3.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be smooth apart from the points @xmath where @xmath is a
positive integer and the numbering of the points corresponds to the
anticlockwise order. If @xmath then by the previous lemma @xmath and so
we are finished. We shall proceed by induction. Assume that @xmath
belongs to the Span in question whenever @xmath where @xmath and suppose
that @xmath . Just like in the previous lemma, we may assume that @xmath
for the first three points @xmath (if it was not so, we may change
@xmath by adding a suitable Möbius vector field to it in such a way,
that the new @xmath will have this property). Then using equation ( B.2
) and the same idea which was used in the proof of the previous lemma,
it is easy to see that there exists a @xmath such that @xmath on @xmath
where @xmath are the two distant intervals with endpoints @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. Then @xmath can have at most @xmath points where
it is not smooth and thus by the assumption of the inductive argument we
are finished with our proof. ∎

As we have seen in Sect. 5.1 , from the point of view of representation
theory of @xmath it is useful to consider the topology on @xmath given
by the @xmath norm. It is therefore important to investigate the
relationship between this norm and the piecewise Möbius vector fields.
It has been already mentioned that every piecewise Möbius vector field
has a finite @xmath norm (Corollary 5.1.3 ). The following lemma is the
first step in deriving a density result.

###### Lemma B.2.4.

Let @xmath . Then there exists an @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Proof.

It is enough to find an example of a piecewise Möbius vector field which
is localized somewhere and nonnegative: then by transforming it with the
adjoint action of a suitable Möbius transformation and normalizing it we
get what we want.

We know that for any @xmath the function @xmath is strictly positive on
@xmath and negative on @xmath . Also, if @xmath is a nonempty, non-dense
open subinterval of @xmath having one endpoint in common with @xmath ,
then @xmath is zero on the common endpoint and strictly positive
elsewhere. This is because @xmath must be a positive multiple of the
generator of the translations that have the common endpoint as infinite
point.

Let therefore @xmath be two distant intervals with @xmath being the
other two distant intervals determined by the endpoints of @xmath . Then
@xmath is a nonnegative function which is zero on @xmath and strictly
positive on @xmath and @xmath and thus the lemma is proven. ∎

###### Theorem B.2.5.

Let @xmath be a continuous real function on @xmath with finite @xmath
norm. Then there exists sequence @xmath converging to @xmath in the
@xmath sense. Moreover, if @xmath is localized in the interval @xmath
(i.e. @xmath ) then the sequence can be chosen so that every element of
it is localized in @xmath .

###### Proof.

We shall make the proof in two steps. First, let @xmath any piecewise
Möbius transformation. We shall prove that @xmath , the convolution
defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be approximated by elements of @xmath . (Note that @xmath .) Indeed,
by setting @xmath it is clear that @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all positive integer @xmath . Then by expressing the Fourier
coefficients of @xmath in terms of the Fourier coefficients @xmath of
the functions @xmath and @xmath we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is continuous, for every @xmath integer @xmath is bounded
by @xmath and goes to zero as @xmath . Moreover, by Corollary 5.1.3
@xmath . We can thus conclude that @xmath as @xmath in the @xmath norm.
Note that if @xmath , then if the support of @xmath is a sufficiently
small interval around the point @xmath then @xmath for all positive
integer @xmath .

Let @xmath @xmath be a descending chain of intervals contracting to the
point @xmath ; that is @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma B.2.4 for
each @xmath positive number there exists a nonnegative function @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath . Then it is easy to see that as @xmath the
convolution @xmath converges to @xmath in the @xmath norm. Moreover, if
@xmath then for @xmath large enough @xmath . Thus by further
approximating the convolution with the sum we considered before one can
easily finish the proof. ∎
