# Acknowledgements

There are many people whom I wish to express my utmost gratitude for
making this thesis possible.

Foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Cheryl E.
Praeger for her guidance and encouragement throughout the work on this
thesis. She has been an inspiration to me. I am most grateful to her for
introducing me to the area of algebraic graph theory, for sharing with
me her vast knowledge and for providing me with various opportunities.

I also want to thank my co-supervisor Associate Professor Cai Heng Li
for his support and many invaluable suggestions during the course of my
study. His willingness to answer my various questions is greatly
appreciated.

I will always be thankful to Dr. James A. MacDougall, my honours
supervisor at the University of Newcastle (NSW), who first introduced me
to mathematical research and showed me how much fun and satisfying the
experience can be.

I am greatly indebted to my parents for their support. Although deprived
of a decent education at a very young age, they never cease to encourage
me in pursuing a higher education. I am grateful to my two sisters, Sok
Ting and Sok Khim, who while I am away from home, have provided me with
the ease of mind that my parents are being well taken care of,
especially during the time when Singapore was hit with SARS. I also want
to thank my girlfriend Sandra Tan for her love, patience and constant
support during the course of my study in UWA.

I would like to thank Mr. Daryl Foster, principal of Currie Hall, under
whom I have the privilege to work as a residential adviser. His warmth
and friendliness will be fondly remembered. Also, to the many friends I
have got to know throughout my three and a half years in Currie Hall, I
would like to say a big “thank you” — for all your friendship and a
great sense of humour.

I want to acknowledge the support of a PhD completion scholarship from
the University of Western Australia during the final semester of my
research study.

Last but not least I would like to thank my Lord and Saviour, Jesus
Christ, who has blessed me with so much, and saved me from that which I
could not save myself.

## List of publications arising from this thesis

[ 39 ] C. H. Li, T. K. Lim and C. E. Praeger, Homogeneous factorisations
of complete graphs with edge-transitive factors, in preparation .

[ 45 ] T. K. Lim, Arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations, Hamming
graphs and affine planes, submitted (also in Research Report No.
2003/21, U. Western Australia).

[ 46 ] T. K. Lim and C. E. Praeger, On generalised Paley graphs and
their automorphism groups, preprint .

###### Contents

-    Abstract
-    Acknowledgements
-    List of publications arising from this thesis
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Introduction
    -    1.2 Brief literature review
    -    1.3 Summary of main results
-    2 Preliminaries
    -    2.1 Permutation groups and group actions
    -    2.2 @xmath -homogeneous and @xmath -transitive permutation
        groups
    -    2.3 Blocks and primitivity
    -    2.4 Various types of primitive permutation groups
    -    2.5 Orbitals for transitive permutation groups
    -    2.6 Graphs: Basic concepts
    -    2.7 Automorphisms of graphs
    -    2.8 Cayley graphs
-    3 Generalised Paley graphs
    -    3.1 Main results on structure of generalised Paley graphs
    -    3.2 Conditions for generalised Paley graphs to be connected
    -    3.3 Proof of Theorem 3.1.5
    -    3.4 Proof of Theorem 3.1.6
    -    3.5 The case when @xmath and proof of Theorem 3.1.8
    -    3.6 Cyclotomic association scheme
-    4 Methods and background theory
    -    4.1 Some basics
    -    4.2 Almost simple case
    -    4.3 Affine case
    -    4.4 Examples: two families of arc-transitive homogeneous
        factorisations
-    5 The affine @xmath -transitive case
    -    5.1 Cases @xmath - @xmath
    -    5.2 Case @xmath
        -    5.2.1 On the graphs @xmath
    -    5.3 Case @xmath
    -    5.4 Summing up the cases
-    6 Hamming graphs as arc-transitive homogeneous factors
    -    6.1 Some representation theory
    -    6.2 @xmath as arc-transitive factors
    -    6.3 @xmath -Designs
    -    6.4 Final remarks
-    7 The one-dimensional affine case
    -    7.1 Generic constructions for @xmath and @xmath
    -    7.2 Some explicit examples
    -    7.3 Non-isomorphism
-    Appendix: Computations using MAGMA
    -    A4-4

## Chapter 1 Introduction

We begin by defining what we mean by a homogeneous factorisation of a
complete graph and pose the central question addressed in this thesis.
In addition, we also briefly review the study of factorisations of
complete graphs, and provide some background to the research development
that motivates the study of homogeneous factorisations of graphs.
Finally, we give an overview of the results achieved in this thesis.

### 1.1 Introduction

The study of graph factorisations has long been a very important topic
in graph theory. Roughly speaking, a factorisation of a graph @xmath is
an expression of @xmath as an edge-disjoint union of subgraphs called
factors. Here, we are only interested in factorisations of complete
graphs. (We refer readers to Chapter 2 of this thesis and other standard
texts [ 6 , 12 , 16 , 21 ] in permutation groups and algebraic graph
theory for definitions, notations and terminology not fully explained in
this chapter.)

Let @xmath be a complete graph on @xmath vertices with vertex set @xmath
and edge set @xmath . A factorisation of @xmath is a partition of its
edges into disjoint classes @xmath . Each class of edges in a
factorisation of @xmath corresponds to some spanning subgraph called a
factor @xmath , with vertex set @xmath and edge set @xmath . If all the
factors are isomorphic to one another, then the factorisation of @xmath
is called an isomorphic factorisation . The following is an example of
an isomorphic factorisation of a complete graph.

###### Example 1.1.1.

Figure 1.1 shows an isomorphic factorisation of @xmath into 2 factors
@xmath and @xmath (where @xmath and @xmath ). Notice that there are two
groups associated with this example. First, we have @xmath ( @xmath is
the dihedral group of order @xmath ). Then there is @xmath (the
Frobenius group of order @xmath ), which contains @xmath as a normal
subgroup, and interchanges @xmath and @xmath .

Inspired by the beautiful examples of self-complementary
vertex-transitive graphs (a graph that is isomorphic to its complement
is said to be self-complementary , see Section 2.6 for a detailed
definition) such as the one shown in Figure 1.1 , Li and Praeger in [ 41
] introduced the concept of homogeneous factorisations of complete
graphs. We shall now define what we mean by a homogeneous factorisation.

###### Definition 1.1.2.

(Homogeneous factorisation) A homogeneous factorisation of a complete
graph @xmath is defined to be an isomorphic factorisation @xmath (where
@xmath ) such that there exists a transitive subgroup @xmath Sym @xmath
which leaves the partition @xmath invariant, permutes the parts @xmath
transitively, and the kernel @xmath of this action acts transitively on
@xmath . A homogeneous factorisation of a complete graph is said to be
of index @xmath if the edge set is partitioned into @xmath parts. We
shall use the 4-tuple @xmath to denote a homogeneous factorisation of
@xmath .

This thesis is dedicated to studying homogeneous factorisations of
complete graphs with edge-transitive (undirected) factors. More
precisely, we look at the situation where there exists a group @xmath
that is transitive on the factors of an isomorphic factorisation @xmath
of @xmath with @xmath , the kernel of this @xmath -action on @xmath ,
acting transitively on both vertices and edges of each factor. Thus we
have @xmath Sym @xmath such that:

-   For all @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath .

-   For any @xmath and @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath .

-   For each @xmath , @xmath fixes @xmath setwise and is transitive on
    @xmath and on @xmath .

We shall call such a factorisation an edge-transitive homogeneous
factorisation of a complete graph. We also call @xmath an arc-transitive
homogeneous factorisation if @xmath is arc-transitive on each factor.
For convenience, we will often refer to @xmath simply as an edge or
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation. Clearly @xmath is a normal
subgroup of @xmath (since it is the kernel of the @xmath -action on
@xmath ) and @xmath . Furthermore, since the group @xmath permutes the
factors transitively, it also induces isomorphisms between each pair of
the graphs @xmath ( @xmath . (Note that Example 1.1.1 is an
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath of @xmath of index
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath (see Figure 1.1 ).)

There are many interesting questions that we can ask pertaining to
edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs. However,
our point of departure with regards to this topic will be the following
natural question.

###### Question 1.1.3.

Given an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of a complete graph,
what can we say about its (undirected) factors?

The focus of this thesis will be centered around the above general
question. In Chapter 3 , we first study the structure of an infinite
class of graphs called the generalised Paley graphs. We will prove in
Chapter 4 that they arise as factors of arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisations of complete graphs. Also in Chapter 4 , we will discuss
the general approach used to investigate the structure of the factors of
edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath of @xmath . In
subsequent chapters (Chapters 5 to 7 ), we will determine the possible
groups @xmath and @xmath in such factorisations, characterise the
edge-transitive homogeneous factors that arise, and give a nearly
complete and explicit classification. In the case where we do not have
an explicit classification (Chapter 7 ), we are also able to give two
infinite families of examples. A more detailed introduction to the main
results of this thesis will be given in Section 1.3 .

We now give a brief review to the study of graph factorisations and
discuss the motivation behind the investigations of edge-transitive
homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs.

### 1.2 Brief literature review

Investigation into the factorisations of graphs have long been an
integral part of graph theory. More important is the study of isomorphic
factorisations of graphs and in particular, isomorphic factorisations of
complete graphs, which have received considerable attention (see for
example [ 25 ] and [ 26 ] ). Isomorphic factorisations of complete
graphs are studied for various reasons, but one of the main foci of the
research so far has been the study of one-factorisations and
two-factorisations of complete graphs (see for instance [ 7 ] and [ 36 ]
).

A one-factor in a graph is a set of edges no two of which are adjacent
(that is, they do not share a common vertex) and each vertex of the
graph is incident to precisely one of the edges in the set. A
one-factorisation of a graph is a partition of the edge set into
one-factors. One-factorisations of complete graphs have been widely
studied and have implications in many areas, such as tournament
scheduling (see [ 15 , p. 566] ) and in design theory. We refer readers
to the surveys [ 47 , 60 ] for a detailed account. Two-factorisations of
@xmath coincide with the celebrated Oberwolfach problem , which asks for
the existence of factorisations of complete graphs into isomorphic
2-regular graphs (graphs of regular valency 2) on @xmath vertices, whose
components are simply cycles of length @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath . Many results had been achieved and we refer readers to [ 1 ]
for a summary.

Another focus in isomorphic factorisations of complete graphs has been
the study of isomorphic Ramsey numbers. For a graph @xmath containing no
isolated vertices and any number @xmath , the isomorphic Ramsey number
@xmath is defined to be the minimum @xmath such that for every @xmath ,
@xmath is isomorphic to a subgraph of every factor of an isomorphic
factorisation of @xmath into @xmath parts. It follows that @xmath where
@xmath denotes the @xmath -colouring Ramsey number of @xmath (which is,
the minimum number @xmath such that if we colour the edges of @xmath
with @xmath colours denoted as @xmath , then there exists some @xmath (
@xmath ) such that @xmath is isomorphic to some subgraph in @xmath
coloured by @xmath ). The most well-studied case is the case where
@xmath (see [ 26 ] ), and there are many interesting problems in this
area.

The study of homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs was first
introduced by Li and Praeger in [ 41 ] (see also [ 40 ] ). In it, the
theory of homogeneous factorisations was established and is fundamental
source to the development of this thesis. The interest is motivated
mainly by the investigations into vertex-transitive self-complementary
graphs, which arise as the factors of homogeneous factorisations of
complete graphs of index @xmath . The study of vertex-transitive
self-complementary graphs began with a construction of a family of
self-complementary circulant graphs by Sachs in [ 55 ] . Since then,
vertex-transitive self-complementary graphs have received much
attention, see for example [ 33 , 42 , 54 , 57 ] . Also, a lot of effort
has been made to determine the positive integers @xmath such that there
exist vertex-transitive, self-complementary graphs with @xmath vertices
(see for example, [ 2 , 38 , 48 ] ). In [ 48 ] , Muzychuk completely
determined such positive integers.

One of the major results (Theorem 1.1) of the paper by Li and Praeger [
41 ] is a generalisation of Muzychuk’s result. They proved that a cyclic
¹ ¹ 1 A cyclic homogeneous factorisation of @xmath is one which the
group @xmath induces a cyclic permutation group on the partition @xmath
homogeneous factorisation of index @xmath of @xmath (where @xmath ,
@xmath are distinct primes and @xmath ) exists if and only if, for all
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We further note that in [ 22 ] , the point primitive case for cyclic
homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs is studied (that is, where
@xmath acts primitively ² ² 2 See Section 2.3 for definition of a
primitive permutation group. on the vertices @xmath ). They are related
to the exceptionality of permutation groups studied in [ 23 ] .

Our investigation of edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations of
complete graphs can also be traced back to the study of arc-transitive
self-complementary graphs (which are factors of arc-transitive
homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs of index @xmath ). In [ 62
] , H. Zhang gave an algebraic characterisation of all
self-complementary, arc-transitive graphs, and showed that they are all
Cayley graphs. One family of examples is the well-known class of Paley
graphs. In [ 50 ] , W. Peisert, in an attempt to determine if there are
any self-complementary arc-transitive graphs other than the Paley
graphs, completely classified, up to graph isomorphism, all finite
self-complementary arc-transitive graphs (see Theorem 1.2.1 ). In his
paper [ 50 ] , Peisert constructed a second infinite family of
self-complementary arc-transitive graphs that are not isomorphic to the
Paley graphs (except for one case), and called them the @xmath -graphs.
Like the Paley graphs, the @xmath -graphs are defined on finite fields
@xmath where @xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath is even. In fact, by
expanding on Peisert’s construction, we are able to construct an
infinite family of graphs (where the @xmath -graphs occur as a special
case), called the twisted generalised Paley graphs, that arise as
factors of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs.

We shall present Peisert’s result below.

###### Theorem 1.2.1.

A graph @xmath is self-complementary and arc-transitive if and only if
@xmath for some prime @xmath , @xmath @xmath mod @xmath @xmath , and
@xmath is one of the following @xmath

1.   a Paley graph, or

2.   a @xmath -graph, or

3.   a graph @xmath of order @xmath not isomorphic to a Paley graph or a
    @xmath -graph.

###### Remark 1.2.2.

Along with the graph @xmath , there are two other exceptional graphs,
namely the @xmath graph (on @xmath vertices) and the @xmath graph (on
@xmath vertices). Even though both @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic to
@xmath -graphs [ 50 , Lemmas 6.6 and 6.7] , the three graphs @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are “exceptional” in the sense that unlike the Paley
graphs and most of the @xmath -graphs, none of their full automorphism
groups is permutationally isomorphic to a one-dimensional affine group [
50 , p. 217] . ³ ³ 3 Note that we will not (for now) give detailed
descriptions of the @xmath -graphs and the three exceptional graphs; the
reason being that the @xmath -graphs occur as a special case of the
twisted generalised Paley graphs constructed in Chapter 4 , while the
three exceptional graphs arise from our investigation in Section 5.2.1 .

This thesis originated in the work of H. Zhang [ 62 ] in 1992 on
arc-transitive self-complementary graphs. However, in our investigation,
we use and refine the methodology developed by Li and Praeger in [ 41 ]
for studying homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs. Just as
Peisert was able to complete Zhang’s work, we achieve an almost complete
classification of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations of complete
graphs of all indices @xmath . Our classification relies on the finite
simple group classification through its use of the classification of
finite 2-transitive permutation groups. Moreover, our classification
specialises in the index 2 case to the theorem of Peisert (Theorem 1.2.1
). Finally, on a more ambitious note, it is hoped that by our study of
edge or arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations of @xmath , we may be
able to shed some light on the computation of lower bounds for some
@xmath -colouring Ramsey numbers.

### 1.3 Summary of main results

In this section, we will give a summary of the important results
achieved in this thesis. The main results are found in Chapters 3 to 7 .
Chapter 3 is based on the paper [ 46 ] , Chapters 4 , 5 and 7 are based
on [ 39 ] and Chapter 6 is based on [ 45 ] .

Chapter 3 deals with the structure of the class of generalised Paley
graphs, denoted as @xmath , which arise as factors of arc-transitive
homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs on @xmath vertices, where
@xmath is prime and @xmath (see Definition 3.1.1 ). One of the main
results in this chapter says that a connected generalised Paley graph is
either a Hamming graph or a normal Cayley graph where its full
automorphism group is an affine primitive group.

###### Theorem A.

@xmath Theorems and @xmath . Let @xmath @xmath @xmath be a connected
generalised Paley graph. Then one of the following holds.

1.  @xmath @xmath Hamming graph @xmath , for some divisor @xmath of
    @xmath with @xmath , if and only if @xmath .

2.   If @xmath for any divisor @xmath of @xmath with @xmath , then
    @xmath is a primitive subgroup of @xmath containing the translation
    group @xmath .

Furthermore, we determine explicitly the full automorphism group of a
class of generalised Paley graphs under certain conditions which are
relevant to the study of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations (see
Theorem B below; also see Section 3.1 for details on the notations
used). This result will be used in Chapter 7 to show the non-isomorphism
between the class of generalised Paley graphs and another infinite
family of graphs (the twisted generalised Paley graphs, see Definition
4.4.3 ) that also arise as factors of arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisations of complete graphs.

###### Theorem B.

@xmath Theorem @xmath . Suppose @xmath is a generalised Paley graph such
that @xmath , and if @xmath is odd, then @xmath . Then @xmath is
connected and @xmath .

In the last part of the chapter, we will briefly mention the connection
between the generalised Paley graphs and the class of graphs associated
with a symmetric cyclotomic association scheme.

In Chapter 4 , we will develop the general theory of edge-transitive
homogeneous factorisations @xmath of @xmath . In particular, we will
show that in such a factorisation, the group @xmath is necessarily
@xmath -homogeneous (Lemma 4.1.1 ). Then, using the classification of
finite 2-transitive permutation groups as well as Kantor’s description
of finite 2-homogeneous but not 2-transitive permutation groups [ 34 ] ,
we are able to employ a case-by-case approach in our investigation to
classify factors arising from edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations
of @xmath . We first deal with the case where @xmath is an almost simple
group, that is @xmath has a unique minimal normal subgroup that is
nonabelian simple, and show that there exists only one example of an
edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations of @xmath where @xmath
(Proposition 4.2.1 ). Then we reduce the problem of classifying factors
that arise from edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath ,
where @xmath is an affine group, to the problem of classifying factors
arising from arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations, where @xmath is
affine 2-transitive. Also in the same chapter, we construct two infinite
families of examples: the generalised Paley graphs @xmath and the
twisted generalised Paley graphs @xmath . Both graphs arise as factors
of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath of @xmath , where
@xmath (and so @xmath ), that is, @xmath is a one-dimensional affine
permutation group acting on the finite field @xmath .

In Chapter 5 , we will look in detail at the list of affine 2-transitive
permutation groups in Theorem 2.2.1 . For each class of groups @xmath in
that list, we analyse and find out all possible transitive normal
subgroups @xmath , and use this information to determine the structure
of the @xmath -arc-transitive factors. We show that many of the examples
are disconnected generalised Paley graphs. In other cases, we use Magma
[ 8 ] to construct the factor graphs (as @xmath -orbital graphs) and
compute their full automorphism groups. By doing that, we are able to
determine their structures more explicitly. The main result in this
chapter classifies all factors arising from @xmath , where @xmath is an
affine 2-transitive permutation group with @xmath (that is, @xmath is
not a one-dimensional affine 2-transitive group). Combining the result
(Proposition 4.2.1 ) from the previous chapter for the case where @xmath
is almost simple, we have the following.

###### Theorem C.

@xmath Proposition and Theorem @xmath . Let @xmath be an arc-transitive
homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of index @xmath with factors @xmath
. Suppose @xmath is a @xmath -transitive permutation group on @xmath
such that @xmath . Then one of the following holds.

1.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath is a non-Cayley,
    @xmath -arc-transitive graph of valency @xmath .

2.  @xmath is an affine @xmath -transitive permutation group on @xmath
    @xmath and hence @xmath @xmath such that @xmath is in one of the
    cases @xmath of Theorem . Then @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is
    even if @xmath is odd, and @xmath is such that precisely one of the
    following holds.

    1.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and each @xmath is a @xmath
        disconnected @xmath generalised Paley graph @xmath .

    2.  @xmath is as in Tables and , the @xmath are connected, and one
        of the following holds.

        1.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
            @xmath or @xmath @xmath the graph @xmath is as in Definition
            @xmath .

        2.  @xmath where @xmath and @xmath or @xmath .

        3.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath @xmath note that for
            @xmath , @xmath @xmath .

        4.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

    3.  @xmath and @xmath and the homogeneous factors @xmath are all
        isomorphic to the Hamming graph @xmath .

(See Chapter 5 for further details on the notations used in Theorem C.
Also, part @xmath of Theorem C relies on a result from Chapter 6 which
shows that the factors are Hamming graphs.)

In Chapter 6 we show, using representation theory, that one example of
an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath determined in
Chapter 5 has factors that are all isomorphic to the Hamming graph
@xmath . We also show that such a factorisation of a complete graph
(into Hamming graphs) gives rise to a related edge partition that
corresponds to an interesting 2-design (see Theorem 6.3.2 ).

Chapter 7 deals with the (one) remaining case not covered in Chapter 5 :
where @xmath is a one-dimensional affine 2-transitive permutation group.
By expressing the groups @xmath and @xmath using a standard set of
parameters introduced by Foulser in [ 17 ] (see also [ 18 ] ), we give a
generic construction (Construction 7.1.10 ) that will yield all possible
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath where @xmath (see
Theorem 7.1.11 ).

We also show that the two infinite families of examples, the generalised
Paley graphs @xmath and twisted generalised Paley graphs @xmath ,
constructed in Section 4.4 can be derived from this generic
construction. Finally, in the last part of the chapter, we will prove
that, except for one small example, the graphs from the two infinite
families are pair-wise non-isomorphic.

###### Theorem D.

@xmath Theorem @xmath . For @xmath even, @xmath @xmath mod @xmath , and
@xmath odd such that @xmath , @xmath except for the case @xmath , when
we have @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries

This chapter is a collection of basic definitions and well-known results
pertaining to graphs and permutation groups that will be used in
subsequent chapters. The results and notations contained here are often
standard and can be found in texts such as [ 6 , 12 , 16 , 21 ] .

### 2.1 Permutation groups and group actions

Let @xmath be a finite set of size @xmath . A bijection of @xmath onto
itself is called a permutation on @xmath . The set of all permutations
on a finite set @xmath form a group under the operation of composition
of mappings. We call this group the symmetric group on @xmath and denote
it by Sym @xmath or S @xmath . Any subgroup @xmath of Sym @xmath is said
to be a permutation group on @xmath , and we say that @xmath is a
permutation group of degree @xmath if @xmath . We denote the image of
the point @xmath under the permutation @xmath by @xmath . Note that by
our definition, a permutation group is always finite. It is of course
possible to extend the definition of a permutation group to the infinite
case, but in this thesis, we will only consider finite permutation
groups and finite groups in general.

Let @xmath be a group and @xmath a finite set. An action of @xmath on
@xmath is a map @xmath written @xmath , such that

-   for every @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath denotes the identity
    element of the group @xmath , and

-   for every @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath .

The kernel of the action of @xmath on @xmath is defined to be the
subgroup of all elements of @xmath which fix each point of @xmath . If
this kernel consists of just the identity element of @xmath , then we
say that @xmath acts faithfully on @xmath (or @xmath is faithful on
@xmath ). Otherwise @xmath is said to act on @xmath unfaithfully (or
@xmath is unfaithful on @xmath ).

Note that every subgroup @xmath of Sym @xmath acts naturally on @xmath .
It is easy to see that such an action is faithful. We will always assume
that this is the action we are dealing with whenever we have a
permutation group.

When a group (not necessarily a permutation group) @xmath acts on a set
@xmath , a typical element @xmath is moved by elements of @xmath to
various other points. The set of these images is called the orbit of
@xmath under @xmath or the @xmath -orbit containing @xmath . We usually
denote it by @xmath but sometimes, we will use @xmath to denote a
typical orbit of @xmath in @xmath . Finally, the number of elements in a
@xmath -orbit @xmath is called the length of @xmath .

We also call the set of elements in @xmath which fix a specified point
@xmath , the stabiliser of @xmath in @xmath and denoted it by @xmath .
Note that @xmath forms a subgroup of @xmath and is often called the
point-stabiliser of @xmath .

A group @xmath acting on @xmath is said to be transitive if for any
@xmath , there is some @xmath such that @xmath . In other words, @xmath
is transitive on @xmath if it has only one orbit, and so @xmath for all
@xmath . A group @xmath acting on a set @xmath is said to be semiregular
if the only element fixing a point in @xmath is the identity. We say
that a group @xmath acting on @xmath is regular if @xmath is both
transitive and semiregular on @xmath .

Let @xmath be a group and let @xmath . Then each element @xmath induces
a permutation @xmath of @xmath by right multiplication :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(This is the right regular representation of @xmath ; see for example [
16 , Example 1.3.3] .) All permutations @xmath , with @xmath , form a
permutation group @xmath Sym @xmath (where @xmath ). Furthermore, @xmath
is isomorphic to @xmath and is a regular subgroup of Sym @xmath .

Let @xmath be a group acting on @xmath and @xmath be a group acting on
@xmath . Then we say that @xmath on @xmath is permutationally isomorphic
to @xmath on @xmath if there exist a group isomorphism @xmath and a
bijection @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

### 2.2 @xmath-homogeneous and @xmath-transitive permutation groups

For a positive integer @xmath , we use @xmath to denote the set of
@xmath -tuples of distinct members of a finite set @xmath . Suppose a
group @xmath acts on @xmath . Then @xmath induces a natural action of
@xmath on @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is transitive on @xmath under this
action, then we say that @xmath is @xmath -transitive on @xmath . Now
let @xmath be the set of all @xmath -subsets (that is, the subsets of
size @xmath ) of @xmath where @xmath . Then @xmath also induces a
natural action of @xmath on @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath . The group @xmath is @xmath -homogeneous if
its action on @xmath is transitive. It is not too difficult to see that
a @xmath -transitive group is necessarily @xmath -homogeneous but the
converse is not always true.

As a result of the classification of finite simple groups, all finite
@xmath -transitive permutation groups have been classified up to
permutation isomorphism (see [ 11 ] ). Now if @xmath is 2-transitive,
then by a result of Burnside [ 10 , Section 154] , @xmath has a unique
minimal normal subgroup @xmath where either @xmath is a regular normal
subgroup that is elementary abelian ( @xmath is an affine group), or
@xmath is a nonabelian simple group ( @xmath is almost simple).

A group @xmath is almost simple if it has a unique minimal normal
subgroup @xmath which is nonabelian and simple. Equivalently, @xmath is
almost simple if @xmath for some nonabelian simple group @xmath . This
is true since @xmath , so @xmath can be embedded in @xmath and the image
of @xmath under the embedding contains @xmath .

We call a group @xmath acting on a set @xmath affine if it has a regular
normal subgroup @xmath which is an elementary abelian @xmath -group for
some prime @xmath , say @xmath . Such a regular normal subgroup is often
written additively, and we usually call it a translation subgroup and
denote it by @xmath (and so @xmath ). The set @xmath is identified with
a @xmath -dimensional vector space over the prime field @xmath and the
group @xmath is such that for each @xmath , there exists a unique @xmath
which acts on @xmath by translation: @xmath for all @xmath . Each affine
group @xmath is a semidirect product @xmath where @xmath , the
stabiliser of @xmath , is contained in @xmath . However, if @xmath
preserves on @xmath a vector space of dimension @xmath over a finite
field @xmath (so @xmath ), then we may identify @xmath and @xmath as a
subgroup of @xmath . If such case arise, then the affine group @xmath is
identified as a subgroup of @xmath acting on @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath .

The following contains a list of all finite @xmath -transitive
permutation groups (up to permutation isomorphism) compiled from [ 20 ,
Theorem 2.9] and [ 35 ] (see also [ 43 ] ). We further refer readers to
[ 16 , Section 7.7] for definitions and descriptions of the nonabelian
groups @xmath occurring in Theorem 2.2.1 (1).

###### Theorem 2.2.1.

Let @xmath be a finite @xmath -transitive permutation group on a set
@xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath has a unique minimal normal subgroup
@xmath where one of the following holds @xmath

1.  @xmath is one of the following nonabelian simple groups and @xmath
    @xmath

    1.  @xmath , of degree @xmath .

    2.  @xmath , of degree @xmath with @xmath or @xmath .

    3.  @xmath , of degree @xmath with @xmath .

    4.  @xmath @xmath Suzuki @xmath , of degree @xmath , with @xmath .

    5.  @xmath @xmath Ree @xmath , of degree @xmath , with @xmath .

    6.  @xmath , of degree @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath .

    7.  @xmath , of degree @xmath ; @xmath , of degree @xmath ; @xmath ,
        of degree @xmath ; @xmath , of degree @xmath ; @xmath , of
        degree @xmath .

    8.  @xmath , of degree @xmath or @xmath of degree @xmath .

2.  @xmath for some prime @xmath and integer @xmath and @xmath is an
    affine permutation group of degree @xmath ; @xmath where @xmath and
    @xmath is one of the following @xmath note that the symbol “ @xmath
    ” denotes a central product @xmath @xmath

    1.  @xmath and @xmath ,

    2.  @xmath and @xmath ,

    3.  @xmath and @xmath ,

    4.  @xmath , @xmath even and @xmath ,

    5.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath or @xmath ,

    6.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

    7.  @xmath , @xmath or @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath , @xmath or
        @xmath and @xmath ,

    8.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath has a normal extraspecial subgroup
        @xmath of order @xmath , and @xmath is isomorphic to a subgroup
        of @xmath .

###### Remark 2.2.2.

For each of the cases in Theorem 2.2.1 (2), @xmath is chosen such that
@xmath preserves on @xmath the structure of an @xmath -dimensional
vector space over the finite field @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath with @xmath . Also, @xmath (stabiliser of the zero vector in
@xmath ) is transitive on the set of nonzero vectors in @xmath , denoted
as @xmath .

The next result characterises finite permutation groups that are @xmath
-homogeneous but not @xmath -transitive.

###### Theorem 2.2.3.

[ 31 , pp. 368-369] or [ 34 ] .  Suppose @xmath is a finite @xmath
-homogeneous but not @xmath -transitive permutation group. Then @xmath
is isomorphic to an affine primitive ¹ ¹ 1 See Section 2.3 for
definition of a primitive permutation group. group of semilinear
mappings @xmath on @xmath where @xmath is a prime power, @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , that is, @xmath . In particular, @xmath is odd and @xmath
@xmath mod @xmath @xmath . In fact, a permutation group @xmath is @xmath
-homogeneous but not @xmath -transitive if and only if @xmath is
transitive on @xmath and the point stabiliser @xmath of the zero element
has just @xmath -orbits, @xmath and @xmath , in @xmath , of equal odd
length.

### 2.3 Blocks and primitivity

A partition of a finite set @xmath is a set @xmath of subsets of @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath for distinct @xmath . Let @xmath be a group
acting on a finite set @xmath . A nonempty subset @xmath is called a
block for @xmath if for every @xmath , either @xmath or @xmath . A block
@xmath is said to be trivial if @xmath or @xmath . Otherwise, @xmath is
called nontrivial . Let @xmath be a partition of @xmath and @xmath be a
group acting on @xmath . If @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath , then we
say that @xmath is a @xmath -invariant partition of @xmath . It is easy
to see that elements of a @xmath -invariant partition @xmath are blocks
for @xmath . Moreover, @xmath permutes the elements of @xmath blockwise
and induce a (possibly unfaithful) natural action on @xmath . We say
that a group @xmath acting on @xmath is primitive if @xmath is
transitive on @xmath and the only blocks for @xmath are the trivial
ones. If @xmath is transitive but not primitive on @xmath , then @xmath
is said to be imprimitive .

The following lemma shows that partitions invariant under a transitive
permutation group often arise as orbits set of a normal subgroup.

###### Lemma 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be a transitive permutation group on @xmath and @xmath a
normal subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath acts transitively on the set
@xmath of @xmath -orbits in @xmath . In particular, @xmath is a @xmath
-invariant partition of @xmath and all @xmath -orbits in @xmath have
equal length.

###### Proof.

We first prove that @xmath leaves the set @xmath of @xmath -orbits in
@xmath invariant, that is, if @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath .
Observe that for all @xmath and @xmath , @xmath (since @xmath is normal
in @xmath ). Hence @xmath , and so @xmath . Thus @xmath is @xmath
-invariant. Suppose @xmath . Then we have @xmath . Since @xmath is an
@xmath -orbit, there is an @xmath such that @xmath . Now @xmath , and so
it follows (since @xmath ) that @xmath is transitive on @xmath . Hence
@xmath and @xmath leaves @xmath invariant. Further, as elements of
@xmath are @xmath -orbits in @xmath , @xmath is a @xmath -invariant of
@xmath .

Finally, let @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Then as @xmath is
transitive on @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath . Since
@xmath leaves the set @xmath invariant, it follows that @xmath . Thus
@xmath is transitive on the set @xmath of @xmath -orbits. The assertion
on all @xmath -orbits having equal length then follows immediately. ∎

### 2.4 Various types of primitive permutation groups

The structure of finite primitive permutation groups up to permutational
isomorphism are described by the O’Nan-Scott Theorem (for example see [
51 ] ; see also [ 44 ] or [ 56 ] ). The O’Nan-Scott Theorem essentially
provides an identification of several types of finite primitive
permutation groups such that, for each type, information is given about
the abstract group structure, or the group action, or both. Here, we
will briefly describe only three types of finite primitive permutation
groups (we refer readers to [ 51 ] for further details about the
remaining types).

A finite primitive permutation group @xmath on @xmath is of type HA
(holomorph of an abelian group) if @xmath is a subgroup of an affine
group @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath is the (regular) group of
translations (and we may identify @xmath with a @xmath -dimensional
vector space over @xmath ) and @xmath is an irreducible subgroup of
@xmath . We often call a primitive group of this type an affine
primitive permutation group. (Note that the holomorph Hol @xmath of a
group @xmath is the semidirect product @xmath , where @xmath acts
naturally on the normal subgroup @xmath . The group @xmath is Hol @xmath
where @xmath , so the affine primitive groups are primitive subgroups of
holomorphs of elementary abelian groups.)

A primitive permutation group @xmath is of type AS (almost simple) is
such that @xmath is an almost simple group.

Finally, to describe the next type of primitive group, we define a
special type of group action which we will also often encounter
throughout this thesis. Let @xmath be a group, @xmath a positive integer
and @xmath be a subgroup of the symmetric group @xmath . Then the wreath
product @xmath is the semidirect product @xmath where elements of @xmath
act on @xmath by permuting the “entries” of elements of @xmath , that
is, @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Now suppose @xmath Sym @xmath .
Then the product action of @xmath on @xmath is defined as follows.
Elements of @xmath act coordinate-wise on @xmath and elements of @xmath
permute the coordinates: for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A primitive permutation group @xmath on @xmath is of type PA (product
action) if @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath Sym @xmath in its product
action, where @xmath is a primitive permutation group on @xmath of type
AS with socle @xmath . (The socle of a group @xmath , usually denoted as
soc @xmath , is the product of its minimal normal subgroups.)

We further note that all finite @xmath -homogeneous permutation groups,
which also include all finite 2-transitive permutation groups, are
primitive. (This fact is standard and can be found in texts like [ 12 ,
16 ] ; see also Theorems 2.2.1 and 2.2.3 .) It follows from an old
result of Burnside [ 10 , Section 154] that the @xmath -transitive
permutation groups found in Theorem 2.2.1 are of either (1) the almost
simple type AS , or (2) the affine type HA respectively.

For other terminology and notations on permutation groups not defined
here, we refer readers to standard texts such as [ 12 , 16 ] .

### 2.5 Orbitals for transitive permutation groups

Let @xmath be a transitive permutation group on @xmath . Then @xmath
acts faithfully on the set @xmath via the action as in Section 2.2 ,
namely, @xmath where @xmath . The orbits of @xmath on @xmath are known
as the orbitals of @xmath in @xmath (or simply the @xmath -orbitals ).
The subset @xmath is a @xmath -orbital and is called a diagonal orbital
or trivial orbital of @xmath in @xmath . Furthermore if @xmath is an
orbital of @xmath in @xmath , then the set @xmath is also a @xmath
-orbital, and is called the paired orbital of @xmath . If @xmath , then
@xmath is called a self-paired orbital of @xmath in @xmath .

The following is an observation (similar to Lemma 2.3.1 ) about the set
of nontrivial @xmath -orbitals, where @xmath is a transitive normal
subgroup of a transitive permutation group.

###### Lemma 2.5.1.

Let @xmath be a transitive permutation group on @xmath . Let @xmath be a
transitive normal subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath leaves invariant the
set of nontrivial @xmath -orbitals and the set of self-paired @xmath
-orbitals in @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath is @xmath -transitive on
@xmath , then @xmath acts transitively on the set of nontrivial @xmath
-orbitals in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a nontrivial @xmath -orbital in @xmath and let @xmath .
The proof that @xmath is an @xmath -orbital is similar to the proof of
Lemma 2.3.1 (and so we do not give details here). Suppose now that
@xmath and let @xmath . Then @xmath and hence @xmath . Thus @xmath is a
self-paired @xmath -orbital and so the first part of the lemma is
proved.

Suppose now that @xmath is @xmath -transitive on @xmath . Let @xmath and
@xmath be nontrivial @xmath -orbitals in @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath . Since @xmath is 2-transitive, there exists @xmath such that
@xmath . As @xmath leaves the set of nontrivial @xmath -orbitals
invariant, it follows that @xmath . Thus @xmath is transitive on the set
of nontrivial @xmath -orbitals in @xmath . ∎

### 2.6 Graphs: Basic concepts

All graphs considered in this thesis are finite, undirected and without
loops or multiple edges .

By an (undirected) graph, we mean a pair @xmath such that @xmath is a
set whose element are called vertices of @xmath , and @xmath is a subset
of the set @xmath whose elements are called edges of @xmath . Thus a
typical element or edge in @xmath is a distinct unordered pair @xmath
where @xmath . We say that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath in @xmath if
@xmath .

By an arc in an undirected graph @xmath , we mean an ordered pair @xmath
(or @xmath ) such that @xmath . Also in an (undirected) graph @xmath ,
each @xmath always gives rise to two corresponding ordered arc-pairs,
@xmath and @xmath . Thus if the arcs set of a graph @xmath always comes
in pairs of the form @xmath , then @xmath is an undirected graph. We
shall use @xmath to denote the set of all arcs in @xmath . We are now
ready to present other graph-related definitions and notations.

For @xmath , we use @xmath to denote the set of vertices of @xmath
adjacent to @xmath . The valency of @xmath in @xmath is defined to be
the size of @xmath . If all vertices of @xmath has the same valency,
then we say that the graph @xmath is regular .

A subgraph of @xmath is a graph @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . We
say that a subgraph @xmath of @xmath is a spanning subgraph if @xmath .
Often, such a graph @xmath is called a factor of @xmath . Two graphs
@xmath and @xmath are said to be vertex-disjoint if they have no vertex
in common. Similarly two graphs @xmath and @xmath are said to be
edge-disjoint if they have no edges in common. However, any two
edge-disjoint graphs may share common vertices. Suppose @xmath and
@xmath are two (not necessarily vertex or edge-disjoint) graphs. Then
the union @xmath of @xmath and @xmath is the graph having vertex set
@xmath and edge set @xmath . The union of finitely many graphs is
defined similarly.

A path of a graph @xmath of length @xmath is a sequence of @xmath
vertices @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent for @xmath .
Such a path is said to connect @xmath and @xmath . A graph @xmath is
connected if for any two distinct vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath ,
there is a path which connects @xmath and @xmath . Otherwise, @xmath is
said to be disconnected , and in this case @xmath is a union of some
connected vertex-disjoint subgraphs which are called the connected
components of @xmath .

### 2.7 Automorphisms of graphs

Let @xmath and @xmath be two graphs. A mapping @xmath is called a
(graph) homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath if @xmath preserves edges,
that is, for any edge @xmath of @xmath , @xmath is an edge of @xmath .
If @xmath is a bijection with @xmath a (graph) homomorphism from @xmath
to @xmath , then @xmath is said to be a (graph) isomorphism from @xmath
to @xmath . In this case, we write @xmath . An isomorphism from @xmath
to itself is called an automorphism of @xmath .

An automorphism of @xmath can be seen as a permutation of the vertex set
@xmath that leaves the edge set @xmath invariant. The set of all
automorphisms form a subgroup @xmath of Sym @xmath called the
automorphism group of @xmath . Let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath . Then
we say that a graph @xmath is @xmath - vertex-transitive , @xmath -
edge-transitive or @xmath - arc-transitive if @xmath acts transitively
on the vertices, edges or arcs of @xmath respectively. Note that a
@xmath -arc-transitive graph is also @xmath -vertex and @xmath
-edge-transitive. However the converse is not true in general. There are
graphs that are @xmath -vertex and @xmath -edge-transitive but not
@xmath -arc-transitive (see example below).

###### Example 2.7.1.

Let @xmath (a cycle on @xmath vertices) with vertex set @xmath and edge
set @xmath . Let @xmath . Then it is easily seen that @xmath acts
transitively on both @xmath and @xmath . However, @xmath is not
arc-transitive on @xmath as there is no element in @xmath that maps the
arc @xmath to the arc @xmath .

The following is a useful characterisation of an arc-transitive graph
which can be taken from standard graph theory texts such as [ 6 ] or [
21 ] .

###### Lemma 2.7.2.

A connected graph @xmath is @xmath -arc-transitive if and only if @xmath
is transitive on @xmath and for any @xmath , @xmath is transitive on
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a transitive permutation group on a finite set @xmath .
Let @xmath be a nontrivial self-paired @xmath -orbital. Then an orbital
graph of @xmath is a graph @xmath with vertex set @xmath and edge set
@xmath . In the next result, we shall see that an orbital graph is
always arc-transitive, and that the edge set of a @xmath -edge and
@xmath -vertex-transitive graph can be characterised in terms of its
corresponding nontrivial @xmath -orbital.

###### Lemma 2.7.3.

Let @xmath be a transitive permutation group on @xmath .

1.  @xmath is an arc-transitive group of automorphisms of a connected
    graph @xmath if and only if @xmath is an orbital graph for @xmath
    where @xmath and @xmath is a nontrivial self-paired @xmath -orbital
    in @xmath . Furthermore, the arc set of @xmath is @xmath .

2.  @xmath is an edge-transitive but not an arc-transitive group of
    automorphisms of a connected graph @xmath if and only if the edge
    set @xmath , where @xmath is a nontrivial @xmath -orbital in @xmath
    with @xmath as its paired orbital and @xmath . Furthermore, the arc
    set of @xmath is @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1)  This is well-known, see for example [ 51 , Theorem 2.1 (b)] .

(2)  See for example [ 59 , 7.53, p. 59] . ∎

A complete graph is a graph in which every two distinct vertices are
adjacent. We use @xmath to denote a complete graph with @xmath vertices.
Given a graph @xmath , its complement , usually denoted as @xmath , is
the graph with the same vertex set as @xmath in which @xmath are
adjacent if and only if they are not adjacent in @xmath . Thus @xmath
and @xmath are edge-disjoint and it is easy to see that @xmath . If a
graph @xmath is isomorphic to its complement @xmath , that is @xmath ,
then we say that @xmath is a self-complementary graph.

### 2.8 Cayley graphs

We now introduce some classes of vertex-transitive graphs that we shall
often encounter throughout this thesis.

###### Definition 2.8.1.

(Cayley graph) Let @xmath be a finite group and @xmath be a nonempty
subset of @xmath such that @xmath . The Cayley graph @xmath of @xmath
relative to @xmath is the graph with vertex set @xmath such that @xmath
is an edge if and only if @xmath . Finally, the set @xmath is called the
connection set of @xmath . (Note that for @xmath to be undirected, we
must have @xmath .)

The following are some standard results regarding Cayley graphs.

###### Lemma 2.8.2.

Let @xmath be the Cayley graph of @xmath relative to @xmath . Then
@xmath

1.  @xmath is @xmath -vertex-transitive ² ² 2 Note that @xmath acts on
    @xmath by right multiplication; see also definition of @xmath in
    Section 2.1 , and so @xmath .

2.  @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath .

3.  @xmath is connected if and only if @xmath , where @xmath is the
    group generated by elements of @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1) This is well-known, for example see proof of [ 6 , Proposition 16.2
(1)] . We shall present the proof here. Take any @xmath , then there is
a corresponding @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . Now notice that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath , and since @xmath acts regularly on @xmath , it follows
that @xmath is @xmath -vertex-transitive.

(2) Suppose @xmath . Then by definition, @xmath . Now @xmath . Thus
@xmath .

(3) Suppose @xmath generates @xmath . Then each element @xmath can be
written as @xmath where @xmath for @xmath . It is easy to see that
@xmath is a path from @xmath to @xmath . Thus every element of @xmath is
connected to @xmath with a path, and hence @xmath is connected.

Conversely, suppose @xmath is connected. Then for each @xmath , there is
a path of length @xmath , @xmath , connecting @xmath to @xmath . We
claim that each element in this path belongs to @xmath , that is, @xmath
for @xmath . We prove this by induction on @xmath . For @xmath , the
element @xmath is clearly in @xmath . Suppose the claim holds for some
@xmath . Then we show that it also holds for @xmath . Now @xmath is an
edge in @xmath and so @xmath for some @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath
is contained in @xmath , it follows that @xmath . Thus by the induction
process, we have @xmath for all @xmath ; and as the claim holds for each
@xmath , we have @xmath . ∎

Furthermore, since @xmath is vertex-transitive (Lemma 2.8.2 (1)), it
follows that if @xmath is disconnected, then each connected component is
isomorphic to @xmath (see for example [ 37 , Section 1] ). By observing
that the vertex set of each connected component is a (right) coset of
@xmath , it is easily seen that the number of connected components
equals @xmath .

Notice that by Lemma 2.8.2 (1), a Cayley graph @xmath contains @xmath
acting regularly on its vertices. It follows that we can characterise a
Cayley graph through the existence of a subgroup of its full
automorphism group which acts regularly on its vertices.

###### Lemma 2.8.3.

[ 6 , Lemma 16.3] . A graph @xmath is isomorphic to a Cayley graph for
some group if and only if its automorphism group @xmath has a subgroup
which is regular on vertices.

In subsequent chapters, we will often come across edge-transitive and
arc-transitive Cayley graphs @xmath of a vector space @xmath (where
@xmath and @xmath a prime power), which admit an affine transitive
permutation group @xmath as a subgroup of automorphisms. (Note that the
translation group @xmath acts regularly on @xmath .) In the next result,
we characterise (in a similar fashion to Lemma 2.7.3 ) such a Cayley
graph with respect to the @xmath -orbits in its connecting set @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.8.4.

Let @xmath be an affine transitive permutation group on the vector space
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath is a prime power. Let @xmath be a Cayley
graph on @xmath @xmath with @xmath @xmath and suppose @xmath is a
subgroup of @xmath . Then the following hold.

1.  @xmath is @xmath -arc-transitive if and only if the point stabiliser
    @xmath @xmath of the zero-vector @xmath is transitive on @xmath .

2.  @xmath is @xmath -edge-transitive but not @xmath -arc-transitive if
    and only if @xmath has @xmath orbits on @xmath , where @xmath for
    some @xmath , and @xmath . In particular, in this case @xmath is
    odd.

###### Proof.

(1) Observe that the connecting set @xmath of a Cayley graph @xmath is
precisely the set of all vertices in @xmath that are adjacent to the
zero-vector @xmath . The result then follows from Lemma 2.7.2 .

(2) Recall from Lemma 2.7.3 (2) that @xmath is @xmath -edge-transitive
but not @xmath -arc-transitive if and only if the edge set @xmath for
some nontrivial @xmath -orbital @xmath in @xmath with corresponding
paired orbital @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath , where @xmath is
the arc set of @xmath . Now there is a @xmath – @xmath correspondence
between the set of nontrivial @xmath -orbitals and the set of @xmath
-orbits in @xmath (since for a nontrivial orbital @xmath , the
corresponding @xmath -orbit is @xmath ). Thus it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now we need to show that @xmath . Let @xmath . Since @xmath is a
nontrivial orbit of @xmath in @xmath , we have @xmath where @xmath .
Similarly, let @xmath . Then @xmath for some nonzero @xmath . Clearly,
@xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath and @xmath are
edges of @xmath . As @xmath is @xmath -edge-transitive, there exists
@xmath such that @xmath . Now @xmath where @xmath for some @xmath and
@xmath . It follows that @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath ,
which is a contradiction since @xmath . Hence @xmath , and @xmath . Thus
@xmath , and so @xmath and thus @xmath . Furthermore since @xmath is a
@xmath -orbit in @xmath and @xmath , it follows that @xmath and so
@xmath .

Conversely, suppose @xmath with @xmath for some @xmath , and @xmath .
Then a similar argument shows that @xmath , and with that, the first
part of Lemma 2.8.4 (2) follows.

Finally, suppose @xmath is @xmath -edge-transitive but not @xmath
-arc-transitive and @xmath is even. Then @xmath has characteristic 2,
that is, every element of @xmath is its own (additive) inverse. It
follows that @xmath , a contradiction since @xmath . Thus @xmath is odd.
∎

###### Definition 2.8.5.

(Paley graph) Let @xmath be a finite field with @xmath elements such
that @xmath (mod @xmath ). Let @xmath be a primitive element in @xmath
and @xmath the set of nonzero squares in @xmath , so @xmath . The Paley
graph , denoted by @xmath , is defined to be the Cayley graph @xmath of
@xmath relative to @xmath . (Note that we take @xmath as the additive
group of @xmath .)

The Paley graphs are a special class of Cayley graphs based on the
additive groups of finite fields. They were first defined by Paley in [
49 ] , and are known to be self-complementary and arc-transitive.
Furthermore, the full automorphism group of a Paley graph is contained
in @xmath , see for instance [ 50 ] .

###### Definition 2.8.6.

(Hamming graph) The Hamming graph @xmath is a connected graph with
vertices the @xmath -tuples ( @xmath ) with entries from a set @xmath of
size @xmath . Two vertices are adjacent in @xmath if and only if the two
@xmath -tuples differ in exactly one component.

The full automorphism group of the Hamming graph @xmath is the wreath
product @xmath (of product action type on @xmath ; see Section 2.1 for
details on the product action) [ 9 , Theorem 9.2.1] . If @xmath is a
regular subgroup of @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath acts regularly on
the vertex set of @xmath . Thus by Lemma 2.8.3 , each @xmath is a Cayley
graph. If @xmath is a prime power @xmath , then @xmath can be identified
with a finite field @xmath of order @xmath . In this case, we may choose
@xmath to be the additive group of the field @xmath .

Finally, we refer readers to [ 6 ] or [ 21 ] for further graph-theoretic
terminology and notations not mentioned in this chapter.

## Chapter 3 Generalised Paley graphs

The generalised Paley graphs are a special class of Cayley graphs based
on the additive group of a finite field. They are a generalisation of
the Paley graphs, first defined by Paley in 1933 (see [ 49 ] ), which
are well-known to be self-complementary and arc-transitive. They also
arise as factors of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath of
complete graphs where @xmath is a one-dimensional affine group (see
Section 4.4 ). In this chapter, we study the structure of generalised
Paley graphs and their automorphism groups. One of the main results here
is important for its use in Chapter 7 to distinguish the generalised
Paley factors from another class of factor graphs (the twisted
generalised Paley graphs defined in Chapter 4 ). This chapter is based
on the work done by Praeger and the author in [ 46 ] .

### 3.1 Main results on structure of generalised Paley graphs

We will state the major results of this chapter and will prove them in
subsequent sections. First, we introduce some notations.

Let @xmath be a finite field of order @xmath where @xmath is a prime and
@xmath . Let @xmath be the set of nonzero elements in @xmath . For a
fixed primitive element @xmath in @xmath , we let @xmath be the
corresponding scalar multiplication @xmath for @xmath . Then let @xmath
be the multiplicative subgroup of @xmath generated by the element @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath . (Note that @xmath , @xmath .) Since for each
@xmath , there is a corresponding @xmath , we shall use @xmath to denote
the set @xmath . Note that for @xmath , we will use @xmath and @xmath to
denote the corresponding scalar multiplications. Also, we let @xmath
denote the Frobenius automorphism of @xmath , that is, @xmath . Finally,
we note that the group @xmath is generated by the scalar multiplication
map @xmath and the Frobenius automorphism @xmath . Thus @xmath and hence
@xmath , where @xmath is the translation group acting additively (and
regularly) on @xmath .

###### Definition 3.1.1.

(Generalised Paley graph) Let @xmath and @xmath be as defined above. Let
@xmath be an integer which divides @xmath such that if @xmath is odd,
then @xmath is even. Let @xmath be a fixed primitive element in @xmath .
The graph @xmath is the Cayley graph @xmath with connecting set @xmath
and is called a generalised Paley graph with respect to @xmath (that is
to say it is the graph with vertex set @xmath such that @xmath is an
edge if and only if @xmath ).

###### Remark 3.1.2.

Since @xmath is even when @xmath is odd, we have @xmath , and so @xmath
is an undirected Cayley graph (see also Proposition 4.4.2 ). Also,
@xmath has valency @xmath . Observe that if @xmath , then @xmath is the
familiar Paley graph. In this case, since we require @xmath to be even
for @xmath odd, it follows that @xmath (mod 4). Finally, a generalised
Paley graph is not necessarily connected. In Theorem 3.1.4 (see also
Lemma 3.2.1 ), we give a necessary and sufficient condition for a @xmath
to be connected.

The following simple observation tells us that @xmath occurs as a
subgroup of automorphisms in a generalised Paley graph. (Note that
@xmath is assumed to satisfy the conditions in Definition 3.1.1 .)

###### Lemma 3.1.3.

Let @xmath be a generalised Paley graph. Then @xmath . Further, @xmath
is arc-transitive on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first part of the lemma follows from Lemma 2.8.2 (1) – (2) by
identifying the group @xmath acting by right multiplication on @xmath
(in Lemma 2.8.2 (1)) with the translation subgroup @xmath acting
(additively) on @xmath , and by observing that @xmath is a subgroup of
@xmath that leaves @xmath invariant. The second assertion in the lemma
then follows from Lemma 2.8.4 (1) by observing that @xmath acts
regularly on @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 3.1.4.

Let @xmath be a finite field of order @xmath and @xmath be as defined
above. Suppose @xmath is a disconnected generalised Paley graph. Then
@xmath is contained in a proper subfield @xmath of @xmath @xmath where
@xmath is a proper divisor of @xmath @xmath and each connected component
of @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , where @xmath .

The above theorem follows immediately from Lemma 3.2.1 which we prove in
the next section. Since (by Theorem 3.1.4 ) the components of a
disconnected generalised Paley graph are generalised Paley graphs of
subfields, we will, in the remainder of the chapter, only consider
connected generalised Paley graphs.

Our next main result below gives a necessary and sufficient condition
for a connected generalised Paley graph to be isomorphic to a Hamming
graph.

###### Theorem 3.1.5.

Let @xmath be a finite field of order @xmath . Let @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath be a connected generalised Paley graph. Then @xmath @xmath
Hamming graph @xmath , for some divisor @xmath of @xmath with @xmath ,
if and only if @xmath .

As we noted in Chapter 2 , the automorphism group of a Hamming graph is
a wreath product of symmetric groups. By contrast, we will show in our
next result, that whenever a connected generalised Paley graph is not
isomorphic to a Hamming graph, then its full automorphism group is a
primitive affine group (we refer readers to Section 2.3 for details on
primitive groups). Note that the result below is crucial for the proof
of Theorem 3.1.8 , needed in Chapter 7 .

###### Theorem 3.1.6.

Let @xmath be a finite field of order @xmath . Let @xmath be a connected
generalised Paley graph. Suppose @xmath for every divisor @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath is a primitive subgroup of @xmath
containing the translation group @xmath .

Theorem 3.1.6 proves that the graph @xmath is a normal Cayley graph ,
that is, the regular subgroup @xmath of automorphisms is normal in the
full automorphism group of @xmath . Its proof uses results from [ 52 ]
that rely on the finite simple groups classification.

Although Theorems 3.1.5 and 3.1.6 provide a great deal of information
about the generalised Paley graphs, we do not yet have a complete
knowledge of their full automorphism groups. In particular, for Theorem
3.1.6 , we do not know the precise conditions under which @xmath is
contained in the one-dimensional affine group @xmath (much like in the
case of a Paley graph where the full automorphism group is a subgroup of
index 2 in @xmath ). We find it worthwhile to pose the following
problem.

###### Problem 3.1.7.

Determine the full automorphism group of the generalised Paley graph
@xmath for all @xmath .

We are able to provide a partial solution to this problem. For the case
when @xmath divides @xmath (and also @xmath if @xmath is odd), we will
prove that @xmath is a one-dimensional affine group. This result depends
heavily on results in [ 24 ] , and hence on the finite simple group
classification. This result was applied in Chapter 7 to distinguish
between the generalised Paley graphs and their “twisted” versions (see
Chapter 4 for definition of a twisted generalised Paley graph).

###### Theorem 3.1.8.

Suppose @xmath is a generalised Paley graph such that @xmath , and if
@xmath is odd, then @xmath . Then @xmath is connected and @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.9.

Suppose @xmath . Then by definition of a generalised Paley graph, @xmath
always divides @xmath . Thus for @xmath , Theorem 3.1.8 always applies.

We note that apart from the disconnected case and the Hamming graph case
already dealt with in Theorems 3.1.4 and 3.1.5 , there are other cases
where @xmath is not a one-dimensional affine group. We give an explicit
example below.

###### Example 3.1.10.

Take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath for any divisor
@xmath of @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be a generalised Paley graph
with parameters @xmath as given above. By Theorems 3.1.5 and 3.1.6 ,
@xmath is not a Hamming graph and @xmath is a primitive subgroup of
@xmath . Using Magma [ 8 ] , we computed @xmath , which has order @xmath
, greater than @xmath . Thus @xmath is not a one-dimensional affine
group.

A further check using Magma shows that the point-stabiliser @xmath of
@xmath has order @xmath . Further, @xmath contains a normal subgroup
@xmath isomorphic to @xmath , and by taking the quotient, we have @xmath
, where @xmath is the dihedral group (order 8) of degree @xmath . So
@xmath is an extension of @xmath by @xmath ; written as @xmath . Thus it
follows that @xmath .

Thus in spite of the various results above, Problem 3.1.7 is still
largely open. It would be interesting to determine a necessary and
sufficient condition, based on the parameters @xmath , for @xmath to be
a one-dimensional affine group.

### 3.2 Conditions for generalised Paley graphs to be connected

Let @xmath . Recall that by Lemma 3.1.3 , @xmath contains @xmath as an
arc-transitive subgroup, where @xmath . The following result (Lemma
3.2.1 ) relates the connectedness of @xmath with the action of @xmath on
@xmath ; Theorem 3.1.4 then follows immediately from part (2) of Lemma
3.2.1 .

###### Lemma 3.2.1.

Let @xmath be a generalised Paley graph with vertex set @xmath and
@xmath . Then the following hold @xmath

1.  @xmath is connected if and only if @xmath acts irreducibly on @xmath
    .

2.   Suppose @xmath is not connected. Then the connected components of
    @xmath are isomorphic to @xmath for some proper divisor @xmath of
    @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1)  Let @xmath be the @xmath -span of @xmath , that is, @xmath . Since
@xmath leaves @xmath invariant, it also leaves invariant the @xmath
-span @xmath of @xmath . Also, we note that @xmath is connected if and
only if @xmath (which may be seen by regarding @xmath as an @xmath
-dimensional vector space over @xmath ).

Suppose @xmath acts irreducibly on @xmath . Then as @xmath is @xmath
-invariant and nonzero, we have @xmath and so @xmath is connected.
Conversely suppose @xmath is connected. Then @xmath is a spanning set
for @xmath (that is @xmath ). Now @xmath is the orbit @xmath (note that
@xmath acts by field multiplication). Also, for each @xmath , @xmath
maps @xmath to @xmath , and as @xmath , it follows that @xmath is also a
spanning set for @xmath (as an @xmath -dimensional vector space over
@xmath ). However @xmath is the @xmath -orbit containing @xmath . Thus
it follows that every @xmath -orbit in @xmath is a spanning set for
@xmath , and hence @xmath is irreducible on @xmath .

(2)  Suppose @xmath is disconnected. Let @xmath be the vertex set of the
connected component of @xmath containing @xmath . Then @xmath is the
@xmath -span of @xmath . Since @xmath is vertex-transitive, all the
connected components of @xmath are isomorphic to @xmath . We claim that
@xmath is a subfield of @xmath .

Since @xmath is @xmath -invariant, @xmath for each @xmath , and hence
@xmath for each @xmath . Thus @xmath is closed under multiplication by
elements of @xmath . Now each element of @xmath is of the form @xmath
for some @xmath , and (by regarding @xmath as an integer in the range
@xmath ) each @xmath is equal to the sum @xmath ( @xmath -times). Thus
each element of @xmath is a sum of a finite number of elements of @xmath
. Since @xmath is closed under addition and under multiplication by
elements of @xmath , it follows that @xmath is closed under
multiplication. Thus @xmath is a subring of @xmath . Also @xmath
contains the identity @xmath of @xmath (since @xmath ). Let @xmath .
Then since @xmath is finite, we have that @xmath for some @xmath and,
since @xmath is closed under multiplication, @xmath . Thus @xmath is a
subfield of @xmath as claimed.

Since @xmath is a proper subfield of @xmath , we have @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath . Also, since @xmath , it follows that @xmath divides
@xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath , and by definition of a generalised
Paley graph, we have @xmath . Thus the connected components of @xmath
are isomorphic to @xmath and since there are @xmath components in @xmath
, it follows that @xmath . ∎

From Lemma 3.2.1 (2) (see also Theorem 3.1.4 ), we see that whenever a
generalised Paley graph @xmath is disconnected, the connected components
are generalised Paley graphs for subfields. Thus without loss of
generality we will, from now on, assume that @xmath is connected.

### 3.3 Proof of Theorem 3.1.5

In this section, we shall prove Theorem 3.1.5 .

Proof of Theorem 3.1.5 . Suppose @xmath . Then the number of vertices is
@xmath and so @xmath where @xmath . Now the valency of @xmath is @xmath
. So @xmath as required.

Conversely suppose that @xmath where @xmath and @xmath , and set @xmath
. Then since @xmath is connected, the @xmath -span of @xmath equals
@xmath , that is, @xmath . Let @xmath be the @xmath -span of the set
@xmath . We claim that @xmath .

Observe that @xmath . So it follows that @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath
, @xmath has order @xmath , it follows that @xmath has order @xmath .
Thus @xmath . Now suppose @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath
(not all zero) and the sum is over all @xmath . Let @xmath where @xmath
. Then @xmath and we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that @xmath . Also, since @xmath , it follows that @xmath . Thus
@xmath and so @xmath . Thus @xmath as claimed.

So from now on, we shall regard @xmath as a vector space over @xmath .
We have shown that @xmath is spanned by the set @xmath , and as dim
@xmath , it follows that @xmath is an @xmath -basis for @xmath . Define
@xmath as follows. For @xmath with @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that since @xmath is an @xmath -basis for @xmath , @xmath is a
bijection.

Next, we determine the image of the connecting set @xmath under @xmath .
As we observed above, @xmath . Thus each element of @xmath can be
expressed uniquely as @xmath for some @xmath such that @xmath . As
before, we write @xmath where @xmath . So @xmath . Now @xmath , and so
@xmath . Observe that @xmath can be any integer satisfying @xmath , and
that @xmath takes on each of the values in @xmath . Moreover each of
these values occurs exactly once in each of the positions @xmath , for
@xmath . Thus @xmath is the set of all elements of @xmath with exactly
one component non-zero, that is, the set of “weight-one” vectors.

Now @xmath determines an isomorphism from @xmath to the Cayley graph for
@xmath with connecting set @xmath . In this Cayley graph, two @xmath
-tuples @xmath are adjacent if and only if @xmath , that is, if and only
if @xmath has exactly one non-zero component. Thus @xmath is mapped
under the isomorphism @xmath to the Hamming graph @xmath where @xmath .
∎

### 3.4 Proof of Theorem 3.1.6

Recall that by Lemma 3.2.1 (1), if @xmath is connected, then @xmath acts
irreducibly on @xmath . It follows that the group @xmath is a
vertex-primitive subgroup of @xmath of affine type (or of type HA). Thus
@xmath is a primitive permutation group on @xmath containing @xmath . In
[ 52 ] the possible types for @xmath were determined. The proofs in [ 52
] depend on the finite simple group classification, and therefore
Theorem 3.1.6 also depends on this classification since we use results
from [ 52 ] and [ 53 ] in its proof.

Proof of Theorem 3.1.6 . Suppose @xmath is connected and let @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath . Suppose also that @xmath for any @xmath with
@xmath . Note that @xmath , and since @xmath is irreducible on @xmath
(by Lemma 3.2.1 ), it follows that @xmath is a primitive subgroup of
@xmath .

Now suppose the group @xmath is not contained in @xmath (that is @xmath
is not of type HA). Since @xmath , @xmath is not a complete graph and so
@xmath or @xmath . By [ 52 , Proposition 5.1] , it follows that @xmath
is primitive of type PA. Thus (see Section 2.3 ) @xmath with @xmath (and
so @xmath ), @xmath where @xmath , and @xmath where @xmath is a
primitive permutation group on @xmath that is almost simple with socle
@xmath . Moreover from [ 52 , Proposition 5.1] and [ 53 , Proposition
2.1] we have that @xmath or @xmath is one of the groups listed in [ 52 ,
Table 2] (denoted as @xmath in [ 52 ] ). Note that in all cases, @xmath
is nonabelian simple with @xmath , @xmath is transitive on @xmath and
@xmath acts 2-transitively on @xmath .

We will prove that @xmath , thus contradicting the assumption on @xmath
and therefore proving the theorem. To do this, we need to know how a
point-stabiliser subgroup of @xmath acts on @xmath .

Let @xmath and let @xmath be its corresponding point-stabiliser in
@xmath . It follows that since @xmath is transitive on @xmath , we have
@xmath . Now @xmath contains @xmath , and each @xmath acts transitively
on @xmath . Thus if @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath has @xmath
entries different from @xmath (where @xmath ), then @xmath .

Next, we need to find out how @xmath permutes the entries of a point in
@xmath . Let @xmath Sym @xmath be the projection map with @xmath (Sym
@xmath . Since @xmath is a primitive subgroup of Sym @xmath , @xmath is
a transitive subgroup of @xmath (for instance, see [ 12 , Theorem 4.5]
). As @xmath , it follows that @xmath . Thus, the subgroup of @xmath
induced by @xmath permutes the @xmath entries of points of @xmath
transitively. Consider the action of @xmath on @xmath where @xmath is as
defined above. Since @xmath permutes the @xmath entries of a point
transitively, the @xmath -subset of entries @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath has at least @xmath distinct images under @xmath . Let @xmath be
the number of distinct images under @xmath of this @xmath -subset. It
follows that the length of the @xmath -orbit containing @xmath is at
least @xmath . Recall that the graph @xmath has valency @xmath , and
choose @xmath . As @xmath fixes setwise the set of points adjacent to
@xmath , we must have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Observe that @xmath contains @xmath . Now all @xmath -orbits in @xmath
have length @xmath . It follows that all orbits of @xmath in @xmath have
length greater than or equal to @xmath . But there exists an orbit of
@xmath in @xmath of length @xmath (the set of @xmath -tuples with
exactly one entry different from @xmath ), and so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Combining inequalities ( 3.1 ) and ( 3.2 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , it is easily checked that the inequality ( 3.3 ) holds if
and only if @xmath , and it follows that @xmath as claimed.

However, this implies that @xmath , contradicting the fact that @xmath .
Thus @xmath is a primitive subgroup of @xmath . ∎

### 3.5 The case when @xmath and proof of Theorem 3.1.8

Let @xmath be a generalised Paley graph (where @xmath and @xmath are as
defined in Definition 4.4.1 ). We first show that if @xmath divides
@xmath , then @xmath is connected.

###### Lemma 3.5.1.

Suppose @xmath divides @xmath . Then @xmath is connected.

###### Proof.

Suppose not. Then by Theorem 3.1.4 , @xmath is a multiple of @xmath for
some proper divisor @xmath of @xmath . Let @xmath for some integer
@xmath . Then since @xmath , it follows that @xmath is an integer, which
is impossible for any proper divisor @xmath of @xmath . ∎

Recall that by Lemma 3.1.3 , @xmath admits @xmath as an arc-transitive
subgroup of automorphisms. By Lemma 3.2.1 , @xmath is connected if and
only if @xmath acts irreducibly on @xmath . Thus by Lemma 3.5.1 , we
always have @xmath acting irreducibly on @xmath .

In this section we will prove Theorem 3.1.8 , that is, we will show that
when @xmath divides @xmath , then the full automorphism group of @xmath
is @xmath where @xmath .

Observe that when @xmath , @xmath is a Paley graph whose automorphism
group is well known to be @xmath (see for example [ 50 ] ). Thus we may
assume that @xmath . Note also that if @xmath and @xmath , then the
prime @xmath must be at least @xmath . Consequently, we shall assume
that @xmath and @xmath .

First we apply Theorem 3.1.6 . Let @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.2.

For @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose this is not the case. By Theorem 3.1.6 , @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath . Now @xmath and as @xmath we have @xmath . It follows, since
@xmath , that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . However, since @xmath , this
is not possible. ∎

Thus by Lemma 3.5.2 , we have @xmath where @xmath . Note that @xmath
preserves @xmath , and hence @xmath does not contain @xmath . We
identify @xmath with an @xmath -dimensional vector space over the prime
field @xmath . The group @xmath is then identified with a subgroup of
@xmath acting on the vector space @xmath . Moreover the cyclic group
@xmath is called a Singer cycle (acting irreducibly on @xmath ) and
contains @xmath (see [ 29 , Satz II .7.3 (Theorem 7.3)] ). We next
observe that if @xmath is a one-dimensional group then @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.3.

Suppose @xmath , and that @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath . Thus in order to prove the
lemma, it suffices to prove that @xmath . Since @xmath is semiregular on
@xmath , and since @xmath leaves @xmath invariant, it follows that
@xmath . As @xmath , we have @xmath as required. ∎

Thus for the case where @xmath , if we are able to show that @xmath ,
then by Lemma 3.5.3 , @xmath . We shall adopt this approach in
subsequent parts of this section to prove Theorem 3.1.8 . First we
consider the case when @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.4.

If @xmath , then @xmath where @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider the canonical homomorphism @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Since @xmath we have that @xmath . We want to find the maximal
subgroups of @xmath that contain @xmath

Now @xmath , and @xmath has order @xmath if @xmath is odd and @xmath if
@xmath is even. It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, it follows from the classification of the subgroups of @xmath and
@xmath (see [ 58 , p. 417] ) that either @xmath (where @xmath ), or
@xmath . In the former case, @xmath and so by Lemma 3.5.3 , @xmath as
required. So suppose that @xmath . Then, since @xmath and @xmath , it
follows that @xmath or 7. Moreover since @xmath and @xmath if follows
that @xmath in both cases, and hence @xmath is transitive on 1-spaces.
Thus @xmath consists of, say, @xmath points from each 1-space and hence
@xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath is even. Further, as
@xmath , we have @xmath which divides @xmath or @xmath . However since
@xmath , this implies that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This is
impossible since in this case @xmath projects to @xmath and @xmath has
no such subgroup. ∎

Now suppose @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath and
@xmath . We shall start off by defining a primitive prime divisor.

###### Definition 3.5.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath be positive integers with @xmath . A prime number
@xmath is called a primitive prime divisor of @xmath (or @xmath for
short) if @xmath divides @xmath but does not divide @xmath for any
integer @xmath with @xmath .

It was shown by Zsigmondy in [ 63 ] that for @xmath , @xmath has a
primitive prime divisor unless @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , it
follows that @xmath has a primitive prime divisor, say @xmath . By
Definition 3.5.5 , @xmath does not divide @xmath , and so, since @xmath
, the prime @xmath divides @xmath , and hence @xmath divides @xmath .

In [ 24 ] , a classification is given of all subgroups of @xmath with
order divisible by a primitive prime divisor of @xmath for some @xmath
satisfying @xmath . In particular, the results of [ 24 ] specify all
subgroups of @xmath with order divisible by @xmath .

Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath preserves on
@xmath the structure of an @xmath -dimensional vector space over a field
of order @xmath . Then @xmath acts on @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.6.

If @xmath then @xmath where @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath then @xmath , and by Lemma 3.5.3 , @xmath with @xmath . ∎

So in what follows, we assume @xmath . Now @xmath is also a @xmath of
@xmath . Let @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath and @xmath
divides @xmath . Also, since @xmath , the order of @xmath is divisible
by @xmath , and so @xmath contains an element of order @xmath . We apply
the results in [ 24 ] to find the possibilities for @xmath ( @xmath ),
where @xmath contains an element of order @xmath and an element of order
@xmath . By [ 24 , Main Theorem] , either (here, @xmath )

-   @xmath belongs to one of the families of Examples 2.1 - 2.5 in [ 24
    ] , or

-   @xmath is nearly simple , that is, @xmath for some nonabelian simple
    group @xmath , and the examples are listed in Examples 2.6 - 2.9 in
    [ 24 ] .

We first show that @xmath is not one of the examples in case ( A ).

###### Lemma 3.5.7.

Let @xmath and suppose @xmath . Then case @xmath does not hold.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath belongs to one of the families of Examples 2.1
- 2.5 in [ 24 ] . We shall refer to these families of examples as E1 -
E5, and consider each of them in turn.

(E1: Classical Examples )  Here @xmath contains a classical group. Since
@xmath is not transitive on the set of non-zero vectors @xmath , @xmath
cannot contain @xmath or @xmath (as in [ 24 , Examples 2.1 (a) - (b)] ),
and since @xmath contains the irreducible element @xmath , either @xmath
(with @xmath even) or @xmath (with @xmath odd and @xmath a square) (see
[ 5 ] or [ 30 ] ). Now (see [ 5 ] ) @xmath and @xmath , whereas @xmath .
Thus @xmath . It follows that @xmath and @xmath . However in this
“degenerate case” of E1, @xmath , contradicting the minimality of @xmath
.

(E2: Reducible Examples and E3: Imprimitive Examples )  These families
of groups contain no groups with order divisible by a @xmath of @xmath
(where @xmath ).

(E4: Extension Field Examples )  In this class of examples, since @xmath
is a @xmath of @xmath , there exists a proper divisor @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath and so @xmath . However this contradicts the minimality
of @xmath .

(E5: Symplectic Type Examples )  For this class of examples, we have
@xmath and @xmath . Hence, @xmath is a power of @xmath . Recall that
@xmath , and since @xmath and @xmath , it follows that @xmath and @xmath
is even. The group @xmath is contained in @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
are as listed in Table 3.1 .

Note that the largest element orders in @xmath and @xmath are less than
or equal to 4 and @xmath respectively (see [ 5 , Proof of Lemma 2] ),
and @xmath . Since @xmath contains an element of order @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now @xmath , and since @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath is a power of @xmath , this implies that either
@xmath , or @xmath . In the latter case, @xmath is not a @xmath of
@xmath , and we have a contradiction. Hence @xmath and so @xmath .

Now for @xmath , inequality ( 3.4 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

However since @xmath and @xmath , there are no values of @xmath , @xmath
for which this holds.

This completes the proof of Lemma 3.5.7 . ∎

Thus case ( B ) holds. A subgroup of @xmath is said to be realisable
modulo scalars over a proper subfield @xmath of @xmath if it is
conjugate by an element of @xmath to a subgroup of @xmath where @xmath .
When this occurs, we may replace the subgroup by a conjugate if
necessary, and assume that it lies in @xmath . Choose @xmath minimal
such that @xmath is realisable modulo scalars over @xmath and as above,
assume @xmath (see [ 24 , p. 172] ). Note that @xmath for some divisor
@xmath of @xmath , where @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.8.

Suppose @xmath . Then @xmath , that is, @xmath .

###### Proof.

The maximum order of the elements in the group @xmath is @xmath and
hence the maximum order of the elements of @xmath is less than or equal
to @xmath . Since @xmath contains an element of order @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Re-arranging the above expression, we have (noting that @xmath and
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose @xmath . Then since @xmath , we have @xmath and hence @xmath .
Thus the inequality in ( 3.5 ) becomes @xmath and hence @xmath , which
is a contradiction. So @xmath . ∎

We now consider the examples from Examples 2.6 - 2.9 in [ 24 ] (see also
Tables 3.2 - 3.6 ) of subgroups @xmath of @xmath with order divisible by
a @xmath @xmath of @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Here, @xmath for
some non-abelian simple group @xmath .

(Turn over for Tables 3.3 - 3.6 .)

###### Lemma 3.5.9.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then case @xmath does not hold.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath belongs to one of the families of examples in
case @xmath . We consider all the examples Examples 2.6 - 2.9 in [ 24 ]
.

In Example @xmath of [ 24 ] (see Table ), @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath if @xmath , or @xmath if @xmath . Now @xmath contains an element
of order @xmath , which is a multiple of @xmath . However, since @xmath
or @xmath and @xmath is prime, any element of @xmath of order divisible
by @xmath is an @xmath -cycle and hence has order equal to @xmath . Thus
an element of @xmath of order divisible by @xmath has order at most
@xmath . Hence @xmath , so @xmath . It follows that @xmath and so @xmath
, which contradicts @xmath .

In Example @xmath of [ 24 ] (see Table ), @xmath and @xmath is @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . In @xmath , an element of order a
multiple of @xmath has order at most @xmath and hence an element of
@xmath of order @xmath has order at most @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

More details on values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given in Table
3.3 . First suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath , so @xmath and ( 3.6 )
gives @xmath , which is not true. Next, suppose that @xmath . Then
@xmath , @xmath and so @xmath and @xmath , which is not the case. Now
suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . So @xmath , which is
again not true. Hence @xmath , @xmath and as @xmath , we must have
@xmath . Hence @xmath , so line (6) of Table 3.3 holds. Thus @xmath ,
@xmath , and ( 3.6 ) fails since @xmath in this case.

In Example @xmath of [ 24 ] (see Table ), one of the lines of Table 3.4
holds. In particular @xmath and so @xmath contains an element of order
@xmath . However (see the Atlas [ 13 ] ) an element of @xmath of order a
multiple of @xmath has order at most @xmath and this is a contradiction
for all lines of Table 3.4 .

In Example @xmath of [ 24 ] (see Table ), one of the lines of Table 3.5
holds. In particular @xmath and so @xmath contains an element of order
@xmath . This quantity is at most @xmath where @xmath is the largest
order for an element of @xmath of order divisible by @xmath , which is
(see Atlas [ 13 ] ): 13, 10, 28 and 21 in lines (20), (21), (22) and
(23) respectively. This gives a contradiction in all cases.

In Example @xmath of [ 24 ] (see Table ), one of the lines of Table 3.6
holds. Following the notation used in [ 5 ] , we let @xmath denote the
maximum of the orders of the elements of a finite group @xmath . Now
@xmath has order modulo scalars at least @xmath and hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We shall make use of the inequality in ( 3.7 ) to go through lines (24)
to (30) of Table 3.6 .

Line @xmath of Table : Here @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath , where gcd
@xmath and @xmath is a prime power. Thus @xmath where @xmath is a prime
and @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Now @xmath . Using
inequality ( 3.7 ), we have @xmath . Thus @xmath , which is impossible
for @xmath and @xmath .

Line @xmath of Table : Here, @xmath ( @xmath ; @xmath is prime) and
@xmath where @xmath . Again we let @xmath where @xmath is a prime,
@xmath and we have @xmath . Note that @xmath . Since @xmath , we have
@xmath (since @xmath ).

Using inequality ( 3.7 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and hence, since @xmath , this implies that @xmath . Also, as @xmath is
prime, @xmath is odd and @xmath , it follows that @xmath is either
@xmath or @xmath . However in the first case, @xmath is not a nonabelian
simple group. Hence @xmath and @xmath . Using the Atlas [ 13 ] , we know
that @xmath and by inequality ( 3.7 ), @xmath . However, for @xmath and
@xmath , this inequality does not hold.

Line @xmath of Table : Here, @xmath and @xmath where @xmath . Also,
@xmath is an odd prime power and @xmath . Let @xmath . Now @xmath .
Since @xmath and by inequality ( 3.7 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , this implies that @xmath , and since @xmath is prime,
@xmath , and @xmath is odd, it follows that @xmath is @xmath . Thus
@xmath and using the Atlas [ 13 ] , @xmath , which is not greater than
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

Lines @xmath of Table : In all cases, @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Then @xmath (see [ 5 ] ) and hence inequality ( 3.7 ) yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , this implies that @xmath and @xmath . Thus
line (29) or (30) holds with @xmath , and @xmath . So @xmath and @xmath
. However the only @xmath of @xmath is 31 whereas by Table 3.6 , @xmath
.

We have exhausted all possibilities for @xmath and so Lemma 3.5.9 is
proved. ∎

We formalise the proof of Theorem 3.1.8 .

Proof of Theorem 3.1.8 . Suppose @xmath is a generalised Paley graph
where @xmath and @xmath . Then by Lemma 3.5.1 , @xmath is connected. Let
@xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath (see for example [ 50 ] ).

So suppose that @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath is connected, then by
Lemma 3.5.2 , we have @xmath and @xmath where @xmath . If @xmath , then
by Lemma 3.5.3 and Lemma 3.5.4 , we have @xmath and so the theorem
holds.

Now suppose @xmath , and let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . By
Lemmas 3.5.7 and 3.5.9 , @xmath , and by Lemma 3.5.6 , @xmath . ∎

### 3.6 Cyclotomic association scheme

In this section, we briefly mention the relationship between a
generalised Paley graph and the class of graphs associated with a
symmetric cyclotomic association scheme. We start by defining a
symmetric association scheme.

###### Definition 3.6.1.

[ 9 , Chapter 2, p. 43] A symmetric @xmath -class association scheme is
a pair @xmath such that

1.  the set @xmath is a partition of @xmath ( @xmath are called classes
    of the association scheme @xmath );

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath (that is, @xmath @xmath @xmath ) for all @xmath ;

4.  there are numbers @xmath (called the intersection numbers of the
    scheme) such that for any pair @xmath , the number of @xmath with
    @xmath and @xmath equals @xmath .

Equivalently, we may see each class of a symmetric association scheme
@xmath as an undirected graph with vertex set @xmath , that is, @xmath
where @xmath (see for example [ 19 , Chapter 12] ). Thus from now on we
shall identify the @xmath classes of a symmetric association scheme
@xmath with a set of undirected graphs @xmath . Note that the graphs
@xmath need not be isomorphic to one another. We say that an association
scheme is primitive if each of the graphs @xmath is connected, otherwise
it is called imprimitive .

Let @xmath and suppose @xmath where @xmath . Define the cyclotomic
association scheme (or cyclotomic scheme ) on @xmath by @xmath where for
@xmath , @xmath . We shall denote a cyclotomic scheme by Cyc @xmath . A
cyclotomic scheme is symmetric when @xmath is even, or when @xmath is
even. If @xmath , then the cyclotomic schemes are just the association
schemes of the Paley graphs (see [ 9 , p. 66] ). Note that in a
symmetric cyclotomic scheme Cyc @xmath , the classes @xmath of the
scheme (identified as undirected graphs on @xmath ) are all isomorphic
to one another.

It is easily seen that a generalised Paley graph @xmath is isomorphic to
each of the graphs @xmath (where @xmath ) of a @xmath -class symmetric
cyclotomic scheme Cyc @xmath where @xmath . By Theorem 3.1.4 , they are
connected if and only if @xmath is not a multiple of @xmath for any
proper divisor @xmath of @xmath . This divisibility condition is
therefore a necessary and sufficient condition for Cyc @xmath to be
primitive.

Suppose now Cyc @xmath is a primitive @xmath -class symmetric cyclotomic
scheme where @xmath . Then the set of @xmath undirected graphs @xmath
associated with Cyc @xmath are all connected, and are isomorphic to a
connected generalised Paley graph @xmath . By Theorem 3.1.5 , the graphs
@xmath are Hamming graphs if and only if there exists a divisor @xmath
of @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath . Thus, in the language of
association scheme, we may restate Theorems 3.1.4 and 3.1.5 as follow
(note that a proper divisor @xmath of @xmath is one satisfying @xmath ).

###### Theorem 3.6.2.

Suppose Cyc @xmath is a @xmath -class symmetric cyclotomic scheme where
@xmath . Let @xmath be the set of @xmath undirected graphs associated
with Cyc @xmath . Then @xmath

1.  Cyc @xmath is primitive if and only if @xmath is not a multiple of
    @xmath for every proper divisor @xmath of @xmath .

2.   Each @xmath is a Hamming graph if and only if @xmath for some
    proper divisor @xmath of @xmath .

## Chapter 4 Methods and background theory

In this chapter, we develop the general theory in our investigation of
edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs. In
particular, we show that in an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation
@xmath of a complete graph, the group @xmath is necessarily @xmath
-homogeneous. Equipped with this result, we then spell out the approach
and the methods we will use to characterise the factor graphs arising in
such factorisations.

### 4.1 Some basics

We shall start with the following result which is fundamental to our
study of edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs.

###### Lemma 4.1.1.

Suppose @xmath is a homogeneous factorisation of @xmath such that @xmath
is edge-transitive on each factor. Then @xmath is a @xmath -homogeneous
permutation group on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two unordered pairs from the vertex set @xmath
of @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are from the same factor, say @xmath ,
then since each factor is @xmath -edge-transitive, there exists @xmath
such that @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are not of the same factor, then
there exists @xmath that maps @xmath to a pair @xmath of the same factor
as @xmath . We then apply some @xmath to reach @xmath . Thus @xmath is
2-homogeneous. ∎

All finite 2-homogeneous permutation groups have been classified. They
consist of all finite 2-transitive permutation groups (up to permutation
isomorphism) listed in Theorem 2.2.1 and all finite 2-homogeneous but
not 2-transitive permutation groups described by Kantor (see Theorem
2.2.3 ). As we shall see, it will not be necessary to use details of the
latter classification.

In light of Lemma 4.1.1 , we can now take a finite 2-homogeneous
permutation group @xmath , find all its possible normal subgroups @xmath
that are not 2-homogeneous, and for each @xmath , determine the
structure of the @xmath -edge-transitive (or @xmath -arc-transitive)
factors. We shall adopt this general approach to classify all
edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations of complete graphs.

The next result tells us that if @xmath is a 2-transitive permutation
group on @xmath with a normal subgroup @xmath of even order, then all
@xmath -orbitals in @xmath are self-paired. In particular, we show that
given an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath where the
groups @xmath and @xmath have such properties, the factor graphs are
always @xmath -arc-transitive.

###### Proposition 4.1.2.

Let @xmath be an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with @xmath . Also, let @xmath with corresponding factors
@xmath . Suppose @xmath is a @xmath -transitive permutation group on
@xmath and @xmath is a transitive normal subgroup of @xmath such that
@xmath is even. Then the following hold.

1.   All nontrivial @xmath -orbitals in @xmath are self-paired and the
    number of such @xmath -orbitals equals @xmath . Let them be @xmath .

2.   The partition @xmath may be labelled such that @xmath for each
    @xmath . Furthermore, the factors @xmath are all @xmath
    -arc-transitive of valency @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1)  By [ 61 , Theorem 16.5] , a finite permutation group has a
nontrivial self-paired orbital if and only if it is of even order. Thus
the group @xmath has at least one nontrivial self-paired orbital in
@xmath . Since @xmath is 2-transitive and @xmath is normal in @xmath ,
it follows by Lemma 2.5.1 that @xmath leaves the set of nontrivial
@xmath -orbitals invariant and permutes the set of all nontrivial @xmath
-orbitals transitively. Thus all nontrivial @xmath -orbitals are
self-paired.

Since @xmath acts edge-transitively on each @xmath and all nontrivial
@xmath -orbitals are self-paired, it follows by Lemma 2.7.3 that each
@xmath corresponds to a nontrivial self-paired @xmath -orbital @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath . It follows immediately that the number of nontrivial
self-paired @xmath -orbitals equals @xmath .

(2)  The first statement follows from the proof of part (1). The part
about @xmath being @xmath -arc-transitive follows from Lemma 2.7.3 (1).
Also, since all @xmath ( @xmath ) are vertex-transitive and isomorphic
to one another, it follows that a vertex in @xmath (for any @xmath ) has
the same valency as all other vertices in @xmath , as well as @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath . Now every vertex in @xmath is also a vertex in
@xmath (of valency @xmath ). Consider a vertex @xmath in @xmath . Then
the set of vertices adjacent to @xmath in @xmath is a (disjoint) union
of the sets of vertices adjacent to @xmath in @xmath for all @xmath . As
the vertices in @xmath (for all @xmath ) have equal valency, it follows
that each @xmath is regular of valency @xmath . ∎

In what follows, we will use the list of finite 2-transitive permutation
groups found in Theorem 2.2.1 . In the case of finite 2-homogeneous but
not 2-transitive permutation groups, we use the fact that they are
primitive groups of affine type. In our treatment of this case in
Section 4.3 , we show that it is sufficient to only consider the
2-transitive affine case (see Proposition 4.3.2 ). We first look at the
case when @xmath is an almost simple 2-transitive permutation group,
that is, the list of groups with minimal normal subgroups @xmath listed
in Theorem 2.2.1 (1).

### 4.2 Almost simple case

Let @xmath be a 2-homogeneous group on @xmath that is not of affine
type. Then by Theorems 2.2.1 and 2.2.3 , @xmath has a normal subgroup
@xmath which is a nonabelian simple group, and @xmath is listed in
Theorem 2.2.1 (1). Moreover, @xmath is also 2-transitive, except in case
1(g) where @xmath (see [ 11 ] or [ 16 , p. 245-253] ). (We note that
@xmath is transitive on @xmath and @xmath is even.)

Suppose that @xmath is an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of
@xmath of index @xmath , and let @xmath . Since the group @xmath is a
normal subgroup of @xmath and acts transitively on @xmath , it must
contain @xmath . Thus @xmath is even, and by Lemma 4.1.2 , @xmath has
@xmath nontrivial self-paired orbitals @xmath in @xmath and each @xmath
. Furthermore, since @xmath , @xmath is not 2-transitive and so @xmath
acts on @xmath points (hence we have @xmath and @xmath ). The next
result shows that an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath of
@xmath where @xmath is almost simple has index @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath . Suppose @xmath is an almost simple @xmath -transitive
permutation group on @xmath with minimal normal subgroup @xmath . Then
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, each factor is an
@xmath -arc-transitive graph of valency @xmath .

###### Proof.

By the remarks above, @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is a maximal
subgroup of @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath . Now the point
stabiliser @xmath has three orbits in @xmath of equal length 9 (see for
example, [ 12 , p. 24] ). Since there is a natural one-to-one
correspondence between the orbits of @xmath in @xmath and the @xmath
-orbits in @xmath , we have exactly three nontrivial @xmath -orbitals in
@xmath . Also, as @xmath is even, then by Proposition 4.1.2 (1), all
three nontrivial @xmath -orbitals are self-paired and so @xmath . Thus
by Proposition 4.1.2 (2), each factor is @xmath -arc-transitive of
valency @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.2.2.

We used Magma (see Appendix A2 ) to compute the full automorphism group
of the above arc-transitive homogeneous factor @xmath and found that
@xmath (note that in Magma , the primitive group @xmath on 28 points is
written as             PrimitiveGroup(28,2)            ). Thus it
follows that @xmath . Now no subgroup of @xmath acts regularly on @xmath
and so by Lemma 2.8.3 , the factor @xmath is non-Cayley.

### 4.3 Affine case

In this section, we will undertake a general study of the case where
@xmath is an affine 2-homogeneous permutation group. In this case,
@xmath is either a 2-homogeneous but not 2-transitive permutation group
(see Theorem 2.2.3 ), or @xmath belongs to the list of all finite
2-transitive permutation groups (up to permutation isomorphism) in
Theorem 2.2.1 (2). In both cases, @xmath contains a unique minimal
normal subgroup @xmath which is regular and is an elementary abelian
@xmath -group for some prime @xmath , so @xmath .

Let @xmath be an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath
where @xmath is an affine 2-homogeneous permutation group with a unique
minimal normal subgroup @xmath . Since @xmath is a transitive normal
subgroup of @xmath , it must contain @xmath . Furthermore, as @xmath is
regular on @xmath , we may identify the vertex set @xmath with a finite
vector space (see Section 2.1 ). Let @xmath be maximal such that @xmath
preserves on @xmath the structure of a vector space over a field @xmath
of order @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath , @xmath . Finally, we
identify the regular normal subgroup @xmath with the translation group
@xmath which acts regularly and additively on @xmath (see Section 2.1 ).

Thus we can denote the groups @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath (stabilisers of the zero-vector in @xmath and @xmath
respectively). So from now on, whenever we have an edge-transitive
homogeneous factorisation @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is an affine
2-homogeneous permutation group, we shall adopt the above notations for
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.3.1.

Let @xmath be an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with factors @xmath @xmath and so by definition, @xmath
acts transitively on @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is an affine @xmath
-homogeneous permutation group on @xmath . Then the following hold.

1.   The factors are Cayley graphs of @xmath , that is, @xmath where
    @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Moreover, the set @xmath forms a
    partition of @xmath .

2.   The group @xmath acts transitively on @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1)  The @xmath -edge-transitive homogeneous factors admit the
translation group @xmath as a regular subgroup of automorphisms. So by
Lemma 2.8.3 , the undirected factors are Cayley graphs of @xmath . Hence
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Observe that @xmath , and since
@xmath forms a partition of @xmath of @xmath , it follows that @xmath
forms a partition of @xmath .

(2)  From part (1), we know that @xmath , and by definition of @xmath ,
@xmath fixes setwise each @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Then @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath (since @xmath ). Suppose also that @xmath . Then
@xmath (since @xmath fixes @xmath setwise). Let @xmath , then @xmath .
Since @xmath , we have @xmath . This implies that @xmath . So @xmath .
Similarly if @xmath , then @xmath . Furthermore @xmath for some edge
@xmath . Thus @xmath and so @xmath . Hence @xmath and we have @xmath .
Thus @xmath acts on @xmath . Since @xmath is transitive on @xmath , for
all @xmath , there is an element @xmath such that @xmath , and hence
such that @xmath . Thus @xmath is transitive on @xmath . ∎

By Lemma 4.3.1 (1), when @xmath is an affine 2-homogeneous permutation
group, all @xmath -edge-transitive factors are Cayley graphs. The next
result shows that for an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is affine 2-homogeneous, we may,
without loss of generality, assume @xmath to be affine 2-transitive and
@xmath to be arc-transitive on each homogeneous factor.

###### Proposition 4.3.2.

Let @xmath be an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with factors @xmath @xmath . Suppose @xmath is an affine
@xmath -homogeneous permutation group on @xmath and @xmath is
edge-transitive but not arc-transitive on @xmath . @xmath Note that by
Lemma @xmath , @xmath is a Cayley graph. @xmath Then the following hold.

1.  @xmath is odd and for each @xmath , @xmath where @xmath for some
    @xmath , and @xmath .

2.   The map @xmath , where @xmath for all @xmath , is such that @xmath
    , @xmath centralises @xmath , @xmath fixes @xmath @xmath zero-vector
    in @xmath @xmath , and @xmath is an affine @xmath -transitive
    permutation group. Furthermore, @xmath is even and @xmath is
    arc-transitive on each @xmath , with @xmath acting transitively on
    @xmath .

3.  @xmath is an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath
    @xmath where @xmath is arc-transitive on each factor @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1)  The result follows immediately from Lemma 2.8.4 (2).

(2)  The map @xmath of @xmath as defined above is an automorphism of the
additive group of @xmath . So @xmath . Suppose @xmath for some @xmath .
Then @xmath . Now @xmath , and since @xmath , we have @xmath and so
@xmath . As @xmath is arbitrarily chosen, @xmath for all @xmath . Since
@xmath acts as @xmath on @xmath (where @xmath is the identity element of
@xmath ), @xmath centralises @xmath .

Observe that @xmath fixes the zero-vector in @xmath and @xmath . As
@xmath is an affine 2-homogeneous permutation group, it follows that
@xmath is also an affine 2-homogeneous permutation group on @xmath where
the stabiliser of the zero-vector is @xmath . Since @xmath divides
@xmath , it follows by Kantor’s result on 2-homogeneous but not
2-transitive permutation groups [ 34 ] that @xmath is 2-transitive.

As shown earlier, @xmath for all @xmath and so we have @xmath .
Moreover, @xmath is even since @xmath has order 2. Now by part (1),
@xmath where @xmath for some @xmath , and as @xmath , we have that
@xmath is transitive on @xmath for each @xmath . Thus @xmath is
arc-transitive on @xmath by Lemma 2.8.4 (1).

(3)  Since @xmath is normal in @xmath , part (3) follows from part (2).
∎

Thus whenever @xmath is an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation of
@xmath with @xmath affine 2-homogeneous, then by Proposition 4.3.2 , we
may extend both @xmath and @xmath by @xmath (defined in Proposition
4.3.2 ) such that @xmath is an affine 2-transitive permutation group on
@xmath , @xmath is arc-transitive on @xmath and @xmath even.

So from now on, whenever @xmath is an affine group on @xmath , we will
without loss of generality, assume @xmath to be an arc-transitive
homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of index @xmath with factors @xmath
( @xmath ). Moreover, we also assume @xmath to be an affine 2-transitive
permutation group, and @xmath a transitive normal subgroup of even
order. In particular, @xmath is transitive on @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath is even if @xmath odd.

In the next chapter, we will look at the list of affine 2-transitive
permutation groups @xmath in Theorem 2.2.1 (2), and determine all their
possible transitive normal subgroups @xmath that are not 2-homogeneous.
In particular, since (from the above assumptions) the homogeneous
factors are @xmath -arc-transitive Cayley graphs @xmath , we will
determine the @xmath -orbits in @xmath (which are also elements of the
set @xmath ) and use them to characterise ¹ ¹ 1 Note that since the
group @xmath induces isomorphisms between the factors @xmath (or rather,
it is @xmath that induces the isomorphisms; since by Lemma 4.3.1 (2),
@xmath acts transitively on the set @xmath ), we only need to consider
ONE typical @xmath to describe all the factors. the homogeneous factors.
Finally, we note that the number of @xmath -orbits in @xmath is
precisely the index @xmath of the homogeneous factorisation.

### 4.4 Examples: two families of arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisations

We first construct two families of arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisations @xmath of @xmath where the group @xmath is an affine
2-transitive permutation group. In the examples below, we will use the
notations found in the beginning of Section 3.1 . For convenience, we
shall repeat some of them here.

Let @xmath be a finite field of order @xmath and @xmath . For a fixed
primitive element @xmath in @xmath , we let @xmath be the corresponding
scalar multiplication @xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath be the
multiplicative subgroup of @xmath generated by the element @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath . Since for each @xmath , there is a corresponding
@xmath , we shall use @xmath to denote the set @xmath . Also, we let
@xmath denote the Frobenius automorphism of @xmath , that is, @xmath .
Finally, note also that @xmath and hence @xmath , where @xmath is the
translation group acting additively on @xmath .

Recall in Chapter 3 where we mentioned that the class of generalised
Paley graphs arise as factors of arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisations of complete graphs. We shall prove this assertion here.
Again for convenience, we shall give the definition of a generalised
Paley graph and define what we mean by a generalised Paley partition of
a complete graph.

###### Definition 4.4.1.

(Generalised Paley graph and partition) Let @xmath and @xmath be as
defined above. Let @xmath be an integer which divides @xmath such that
if @xmath is odd, then @xmath is even. Let @xmath be a fixed primitive
element in @xmath . The graph @xmath is the Cayley graph @xmath with
connecting set @xmath and is called a generalised Paley graph with
respect to @xmath .

The generalised Paley partition of the complete graph @xmath is the
partition @xmath of the edge set @xmath into @xmath parts such that
@xmath for @xmath . (The claim that @xmath forms a partition of @xmath
is proved in Proposition 4.4.2 .)

###### Proposition 4.4.2.

Let @xmath be a generalised Paley graph as defined in Definition . Let
@xmath and @xmath . Then the following hold.

1.  @xmath is an undirected, @xmath -arc-transitive graph of valency
    @xmath .

2.  @xmath is an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
    index @xmath . Furthermore, each factor @xmath is isomorphic to
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1) By Lemma 3.1.3 , @xmath admits @xmath as an arc-transitive subgroup
of automorphisms. To show that @xmath is undirected, it suffices to show
that @xmath is an element of @xmath . Since @xmath is even, it follows
that @xmath is an integer. Now @xmath has order 2 and hence is equal to
@xmath . Thus @xmath . Finally, the valency of @xmath equals @xmath .

(2)  It is easy to see that the sets @xmath , where @xmath , are
precisely the @xmath -orbits in @xmath . Since each @xmath corresponds
to @xmath (an @xmath -orbit) and since @xmath for @xmath , it follows
that @xmath . Now take an edge @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath and
it follows that @xmath . Hence @xmath forms a partition of the edge set
@xmath of @xmath .

Note that the @xmath are the Cayley graphs @xmath for @xmath . Since
@xmath and @xmath is transitive on @xmath (by Lemma 7.2.1 ), it follows
by Lemma 2.3.1 that @xmath permutes the the sets @xmath transitively.
Thus for each @xmath , there exists an element of @xmath which induces
an isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath . Also, since each @xmath
admits @xmath as a subgroup of automorphisms and @xmath acts
transitively on @xmath for each @xmath , it follows (by Lemma 2.8.4 (1))
that @xmath is arc-transitive on @xmath .

Now since @xmath , we have @xmath . Also, @xmath acts transitively on
the sets @xmath . Now suppose @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath for some
@xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath and so @xmath . Thus @xmath and it
follows that @xmath . Since @xmath fixes each @xmath setwise, it follows
that @xmath acts on @xmath . As @xmath is transitive on the sets @xmath
, we have @xmath acting transitively on @xmath . Finally, as @xmath
fixes each @xmath set-wise and @xmath is transitive on @xmath , the
result on @xmath being a homogeneous factorisation with @xmath
-arc-transitive factors follows. ∎

###### Definition 4.4.3.

(Twisted generalised Paley graph and partition) Again, let @xmath and
@xmath be as previously defined and @xmath be a primitive element in
@xmath . Let @xmath be even and @xmath (mod 4). Let @xmath be an odd
integer such that @xmath . Let @xmath (observe that @xmath even, @xmath
(mod @xmath ), and @xmath imply that @xmath ). The twisted generalised
Paley graph , denoted as @xmath , with respect to @xmath is the Cayley
graph @xmath .

The twisted generalised Paley partition of the complete graph @xmath is
the partition @xmath of the edge set @xmath into @xmath parts such that
@xmath for @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.4.4.

Let @xmath be a twisted generalised Paley graph as defined in Definition
. Let @xmath and @xmath . Then the following hold.

1.  @xmath is an undirected @xmath -arc-transitive graph of valency
    @xmath .

2.  @xmath is an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
    index @xmath . Furthermore, each factor @xmath is isomorphic to
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1)  Clearly multiplication by @xmath leaves both @xmath and @xmath
invariant. Also, @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath (since @xmath (mod @xmath
)), and maps @xmath to @xmath . Thus, setting @xmath , @xmath admits
@xmath as a subgroup of automorphisms. Then since @xmath acts regularly
on @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath interchanging @xmath and @xmath , we
have that @xmath is transitive on @xmath . Thus by Lemma 2.8.4 (1),
@xmath is @xmath -arc-transitive. To show that @xmath is undirected, it
suffices to show that @xmath . Observe that the conditions @xmath even,
@xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath imply that @xmath . Thus @xmath is an
integer and so @xmath . Finally, the valency of @xmath equals @xmath
(since @xmath ).

(2)  We first show that the sets @xmath are @xmath -orbits in @xmath for
all @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath acts transitively on @xmath
and @xmath . So it suffices for us to show that @xmath interchanges
@xmath and @xmath . Thus, using the fact that @xmath (mod 4), we have
(recall that @xmath acts by multiplication by @xmath , and @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that since @xmath , we have @xmath . So, @xmath (mod @xmath ). In
light of this, it follows that @xmath . Using a similar argument, we
obtain @xmath and thus the sets @xmath are @xmath -orbits in @xmath .
Clearly their union is the whole set @xmath .

Now by definition, a pair @xmath if and only if @xmath lies in the
@xmath -orbit @xmath . It follows that the graph @xmath is the Cayley
graph @xmath , admitting @xmath as an arc-transitive subgroup of
automorphisms, for @xmath ; and that @xmath is a partition of the edge
set of @xmath .

We will prove in Lemma 7.2.2 that @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath
and that the latter group is transitive on @xmath . Hence @xmath and
@xmath permutes the @xmath -orbits in @xmath transitively. It follows
that @xmath is @xmath -invariant and @xmath permutes the parts (in
@xmath ) transitively. (The details of proof are similar to those in the
last paragraph of the proof of Proposition 4.4.2 and are omitted.)

Thus @xmath is an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath . Also, as @xmath permutes the @xmath transitively, each
@xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.4.5.

Note that for @xmath , the twisted generalised Paley graphs form the
class of self-complementary, arc-transitive graphs, called the @xmath
-graphs, which are constructed and studied by Peisert in [ 50 ] .

Although the constructions for the generalised Paley graphs and the
twisted generalised Paley graphs look similar at first glance, the two
class of graphs are in fact very different. We will, later in Chapter 7
, show that in general (except for one small case) @xmath . Furthermore,
we note that in both of the above cases (the generalised Paley partition
and the twisted generalised Paley partition), the groups @xmath and
@xmath are contained in the one-dimensional affine group @xmath . In
fact, the factors that arise from these two partitions are the only two
infinite families of examples known so far that arise from
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations, where @xmath .

## Chapter 5 The affine @xmath-transitive case

In this chapter, we will make a case-by-case study of the list of finite
2-transitive permutation groups @xmath found in Theorem 2.2.1 (2) and
determine all their transitive normal subgroups @xmath . Then using the
information we know about @xmath and @xmath , we determine the structure
of the @xmath -arc-transitive factors.

Recall from Proposition 4.3.2 and the discussion following it, that if
@xmath is an affine @xmath -homogeneous group on @xmath (in an
edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath ), we may assume @xmath
to be 2-transitive, @xmath to have even order (and hence @xmath to have
even order if @xmath is odd), and @xmath to act arc-transitively on each
homogeneous factor. Furthermore, we can denote the groups @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath and @xmath respectively, where @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath is the translation group acting (regularly) on @xmath by
addition. Finally, @xmath is transitive on the set of nonzero vectors
@xmath while @xmath is not transitive on @xmath . Note that we use the
notation of Theorem 2.2.1 (2), and so @xmath .

### 5.1 Cases @xmath - @xmath

Here, for cases @xmath to @xmath of Theorem 2.2.1 , @xmath contains
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath respectively; while for cases @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath respectively. In all these cases
@xmath with @xmath . We first prove some basic results.

###### Lemma 5.1.1.

Let @xmath be as in cases @xmath to @xmath of Theorem . Define @xmath ,
a normal subgroup of @xmath , as one of the following @xmath

1.  @xmath , @xmath or @xmath with @xmath and @xmath of @xmath
    satisfying:

    1.  @xmath or @xmath if @xmath ,

    2.  @xmath even and @xmath if @xmath ,

    3.  @xmath is even and @xmath if @xmath ,

2.  @xmath or @xmath and @xmath , @xmath @xmath that is, @xmath @xmath
    or,

3.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath @xmath that is, @xmath @xmath .

Suppose @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider case @xmath of the above Lemma. Let @xmath . Suppose @xmath is
the canonical homomorphism (with appropriate restriction of @xmath to
@xmath and @xmath for cases @xmath and @xmath of Theorem 2.2.1
respectively). Moreover, for any @xmath , denote @xmath by @xmath . Then
under @xmath , we have @xmath where the simple group @xmath is either
(i) @xmath , (ii) @xmath or (iii) @xmath . In particular, if

  ----- ------------------------
  (A)   @xmath , then @xmath ,
  (B)   @xmath , then @xmath ,
  (C)   @xmath , then @xmath .
  ----- ------------------------

For all the above three cases, @xmath contains @xmath as the unique
minimal normal subgroup. Furthermore since @xmath , it follows that
@xmath , where @xmath since @xmath . Hence @xmath . Then by the
Correspondence Theorem applied to the homomorphism @xmath , we have
@xmath . Now @xmath contains and normalises @xmath and @xmath . By the
Second Isomorphism Theorem, @xmath is cyclic. In particular, the
subgroup @xmath is also cyclic and hence abelian. Now @xmath and so
@xmath is abelian. However, we know that @xmath is a perfect group, i.e.
@xmath . Hence @xmath , implying that @xmath .

Next consider case (2). Here @xmath or @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath
are nonabelian simple groups, we must have @xmath .

Finally, consider case (3). Here @xmath . The only proper nontrivial
normal subgroup of @xmath is @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that
@xmath . ∎

Note that the groups @xmath in cases (1), (2) and (3) of Lemma 5.1.1 are
transitive on @xmath . (Cases (1) and (2) are well known. For case (3),
we refer the reader to [ 16 , p. 244] .) Observe also that there are
cases involving small values of @xmath and @xmath are not covered in
Lemma 5.1.1 : @xmath and @xmath . We will consider them in the following
lemma.

###### Lemma 5.1.2.

Let @xmath be as in cases @xmath of Theorem with @xmath where @xmath or
@xmath . Suppose @xmath is normal in @xmath such that @xmath is not
transitive on the non-zero vectors @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath or
@xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then @xmath and the only proper nontrivial normal subgroup
of @xmath has order 3 and acts regularly on the set of non-zero vectors
in @xmath . Thus it follows that @xmath .

If @xmath , then there are 2 possibilities for @xmath , namely @xmath or
@xmath . Every nontrivial normal subgroup @xmath of @xmath contains
@xmath , and if @xmath , then @xmath contains a subgroup @xmath of order
8. However, @xmath is transitive on @xmath , and @xmath is intransitive
on @xmath . Hence @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 5.1.3.

Let @xmath be an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with factors @xmath @xmath where @xmath . Suppose @xmath is
an affine @xmath -transitive permutation group on @xmath where @xmath is
as listed in Theorem @xmath - @xmath . Then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and each @xmath is isomorphic to the generalised Paley graph @xmath with
@xmath even if @xmath is odd.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.3.1 (1), @xmath with @xmath , for @xmath . Since @xmath , we
have that @xmath is even if @xmath is odd. Note also that @xmath is
intransitive on @xmath , but is transitive on @xmath since @xmath is
@xmath -arc-transitive (see also Lemma 2.8.4 (1)). If @xmath is as in
Lemma 5.1.1 , then the group @xmath as defined in that lemma is
transitive on @xmath , and hence @xmath cannot contain @xmath ; it
follows from Lemma 5.1.1 that @xmath . Similarly, if @xmath is one of
the groups of Lemma 5.1.2 , then by that lemma, @xmath also. Thus in all
cases, @xmath .

Now we may identify @xmath with @xmath . In this case, @xmath is
contained in the multiplicative group of @xmath generated by @xmath for
a primitive element @xmath of @xmath . (See Section 4.4 for explanation
of notations @xmath and @xmath used here.) Moreover, @xmath acts
regularly on @xmath for each @xmath (since @xmath , as a multiplicative
subgroup of @xmath , which acts semiregularly on @xmath where @xmath ).
Thus it follows that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath divides @xmath ,
we have @xmath and so @xmath .

Finally, as @xmath is identified with a finite field @xmath , and
elements of the set @xmath are orbits of @xmath in @xmath where @xmath ,
it follows from Proposition 4.4.2 (2) that @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 5.1.4.

Here each @xmath is contained in some 1-space of @xmath , where we
identify @xmath as the vector space @xmath , and since @xmath , the
factors @xmath are disconnected (since @xmath ).

### 5.2 Case @xmath

We first look at the case where @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath or
@xmath . Again we use @xmath to denote the set of nonzero vectors in
@xmath and @xmath . Clearly, @xmath . Let @xmath be the canonical
homomorphism. Then @xmath where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Finally we
note that @xmath is transitive on the set @xmath of 1-spaces of @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.2.1.

Suppose @xmath where @xmath or @xmath . Then @xmath if @xmath or @xmath
. If @xmath , then @xmath or @xmath . In all cases, @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

From [ 58 , p. 417 (Ex. 7)] (which gives the classification of the
maximal subgroups of @xmath where @xmath is a prime power), we know that
@xmath is contained and maximal in @xmath for @xmath or @xmath , and
there are two conjugacy classes of subgroups @xmath in @xmath that are
interchanged by @xmath . It follows that @xmath is self-normalising in
@xmath . Thus @xmath for @xmath or @xmath . For @xmath , we have @xmath
and @xmath , and so @xmath or @xmath . Now @xmath is normal in @xmath
and @xmath is not transitive on @xmath . So under the canonical
homomoprhism @xmath , we have @xmath where @xmath . Since @xmath is
simple, it follows that @xmath or @xmath , and hence @xmath (when @xmath
) or @xmath (when @xmath ). ∎

###### Remark 5.2.2.

Note that for @xmath , @xmath is transitive on @xmath . Thus for this
case, @xmath .

We now look at the case when @xmath where @xmath and @xmath or @xmath .
As before, we let @xmath be the canonical homomorphism with @xmath and
@xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are primes, we have @xmath . Note also
that @xmath is transitive on the set of 1-spaces @xmath of @xmath only
for @xmath or @xmath . Finally, we let @xmath where @xmath or @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.2.3.

Suppose @xmath where @xmath or @xmath . Then @xmath or @xmath @xmath
only for @xmath or @xmath . Also, @xmath , @xmath @xmath where @xmath ,
or @xmath .

###### Proof.

By [ 58 , Theorem 6.26(ii)] , it follows that @xmath , and so we have
either @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath (since @xmath is transitive on the
@xmath only for @xmath or @xmath ). Now @xmath has normal subgroups
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath is one of these
subgroups. Arguing as in the proof of Lemma 5.2.1 , we have @xmath , or
@xmath (such that @xmath ), or @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 5.2.4.

Note that for @xmath , @xmath is transitive on @xmath . In this case, we
can only have @xmath or @xmath .

We summarise the results obtained in Lemmas 5.2.1 and 5.2.3 and list the
possibilities for @xmath and @xmath (where @xmath ) in Tables 5.1 and
5.2 . In addition, using Magma , we compute (see Appendix A3 ) the
number of @xmath -orbits on the 1-spaces of @xmath .

Although it is clear that the results in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 do not tell
us much about the number of @xmath -orbits in @xmath , they are useful
in enabling us to see (almost directly) if the resulting @xmath
-arc-transitive homogeneous factors are connected.

###### Lemma 5.2.5.

Let @xmath be an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with factors @xmath @xmath where @xmath . Suppose @xmath is
an affine @xmath -transitive permutation group on @xmath , where @xmath
is as listed in Theorem @xmath . Suppose also that @xmath . Then the
@xmath -arc-transitive factors @xmath are all connected.

###### Proof.

The assertion that @xmath is a Cayley graph @xmath follows from Lemma
4.3.1 . Also, since @xmath is @xmath -arc-transitive (where @xmath ), we
have that @xmath is transitive on @xmath (see Lemma 2.8.4 (1)). Since
@xmath , then by Lemmas 5.2.1 and 5.2.3 , @xmath is one of the groups
listed in Tables 5.1 or 5.2 . From Tables 5.1 and 5.2 , we see that each
orbit of @xmath in @xmath has length at least 2. In particular, each
@xmath -orbit in @xmath , and hence each set @xmath , must contain
elements from at least two different 1-spaces. As dim @xmath , it
follows that each @xmath spans @xmath and so each @xmath is connected. ∎

Again using Magma , we are able to construct explicitly all the
possibilities for @xmath (where @xmath , and @xmath are as briefly
described in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 ) and compute the number of @xmath
-orbits in @xmath (Appendix A4 ). In doing so, we can immediately
determine, for each @xmath and @xmath , the index @xmath of the
corresponding arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath where
@xmath . The results are given in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 .

Also, for each group @xmath (where @xmath is as in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 ),
we construct its corresponding @xmath -arc-transitive factors @xmath and
compute @xmath using Magma . A point to note is that as all the @xmath
-orbital graphs are pairwise isomorphic, we only need to construct one
of them (see Appendix A4 and also the footnote at the end of Section 4.3
). The @xmath -arc-transitive graphs constructed are denoted by @xmath ,
where @xmath is the index of the corresponding arc-transitive
homogeneous factorisation (and also @xmath is the number of @xmath
-orbits in @xmath ).

#### 5.2.1 On the graphs @xmath

We shall now give a formal definition ¹ ¹ 1 Although we define @xmath as
a Cayley graph on @xmath , for computational purposes (using Magma ), it
is easier to construct it as an @xmath -orbital graph. for the graphs
@xmath given in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 .

###### Definition 5.2.6.

(The graph @xmath ) Let @xmath be an affine permutation group on @xmath
such that @xmath is one of the groups listed in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 . Let
@xmath be a fixed element of @xmath and let @xmath . Then @xmath is
defined to be the Cayley graph @xmath where @xmath is the number of
@xmath -orbits in @xmath .

###### Remark 5.2.7.

Note that each of the groups @xmath in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 is such that
@xmath , where @xmath is the identity matrix. It follows that if @xmath
, then @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath is undirected. Also since @xmath
(as listed in Theorem 2.2.1 @xmath ) permutes transitively the
connecting sets @xmath of the @xmath -arc-transitive homogeneous factors
@xmath , the “fixed” @xmath in Definition 5.2.6 can be arbitrarily
chosen.

In the remainder of this small section, we make some simple observations
about the graphs @xmath , and comment on the information given in Tables
5.3 and 5.4 . Furthermore, we briefly describe how some of the results
in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 are obtained using Magma (see Appendix A4 ² ² 2
Note that not all the codes used for performing our computations were
written in Appendix A4 . Only function codes and examples that
sufficiently illustrate how the rest of results may be obtained were
written. ). Our comments are listed in “point-form” below. (In what
follow, we have @xmath where @xmath is one of the values given in Tables
5.3 and 5.4 .)

1.  As noted before, each @xmath is an orbital graph for the permutation
    group @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath is as given in Tables 5.3 and
    5.4 . Furthermore by Lemma 5.2.5 , all @xmath are connected.

2.  Observe from Tables 5.3 and 5.4 that different groups @xmath can
    give rise to isomorphic @xmath -arc-transitive factors @xmath . (The
    isomorphisms are checked using Magma .)

3.  It is relatively clear from Tables 5.3 and 5.4 that different values
    of @xmath and @xmath yield non-isomorphic graphs @xmath , that is,
    @xmath whenever @xmath or @xmath .

4.  We do not include the case where @xmath and @xmath in Table 5.3 (see
    Remark 5.2.2 ), and the case where @xmath and @xmath in Table 5.4
    (see Remark 5.2.4 ), the reason being that in both cases, @xmath is
    transitive on @xmath and hence there are no homogeneous
    factorisations.

5.  Note that when @xmath , we have one of the following:

    1.  @xmath , @xmath or @xmath and @xmath (line (3) of Table 5.4 ),

    2.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (line (11) of Table 5.4 ) or

    3.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (line (1) of Table 5.3 ).

    In each of the cases above, the homogeneous factors correspond to
    some arc-transitive self-complementary graphs. In fact, they are the
    three exceptional graphs studied in [ 50 ] , where they are denoted
    as (a) @xmath , (b) @xmath and (c) @xmath respectively (see also
    Theorem 1.2.1 and Remark 1.2.2 in Section 1.2 ).

    However, in [ 50 , Lemma 6.6 and 6.7] , it was shown that @xmath (or
    @xmath ) and @xmath (or @xmath ) are isomorphic (using our notation)
    to the twisted generalised Paley graphs @xmath and @xmath
    respectively. (See also Section 4.4 for details on twisted
    generalised Paley graphs.) Only the graph @xmath (or @xmath ) is
    “new” in the sense that it is neither a Paley graph nor a @xmath
    -graph [ 50 , Lemma 6.8] .

6.  It was determined using Magma whether or not each of the graphs
    @xmath graph is isomorphic to a generalised Paley graph ( GPaley )
    or a twisted generalised Paley graph ( TGPaley ). The results are
    shown under the “Remarks” column of Tables 5.3 and 5.4 .

7.  In line (1) of Table 5.4 , we verified using Magma that the @xmath
    are generalised Paley graphs; the fact that the factors are also
    Hamming graphs follows from Theorem 3.1.5 . Thus in this case,
    @xmath . In lines (4) and (5) of Table 5.4 , we again used Magma to
    verify that the factors are generalised Paley graphs. It follows
    that by Lemma 3.1.3 , the factors @xmath admit subgroups of
    automorphisms isomorphic to @xmath (line (4)) and @xmath (line (5)).
    As the order of the full automorphism groups (computed using Magma )
    in both cases equal @xmath and @xmath , the results follow. Finally,
    we note that @xmath in each of the remaining lines of Tables 5.3 and
    5.4 has the same order as its largest @xmath . As each @xmath
    contains @xmath as a subgroup of automorphisms ( @xmath are @xmath
    -orbital graphs), it follows that each @xmath , in the remaining
    lines of Tables 5.3 and 5.4 , is exactly its largest @xmath .

8.  By first noting that each @xmath in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 contains
    either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath (see Lemmas 5.2.1 and 5.2.3 ), the
    structure of @xmath , and hence @xmath , can be easily determined
    using Magma . In almost all cases, namely lines (1) to (4) of Table
    5.3 and all of Table 5.4 except the second part of line (6) and line
    (10), we only need to test for isomorphisms to see if @xmath
    contains @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , and compute @xmath (whereby we
    are able to determine @xmath ). It turns out that in all these
    cases, we either have

    1.  @xmath (see line (1) of Table 5.3 ; note that by @xmath , we
        mean an extension of @xmath by @xmath ), or

    2.  @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

    For the second part of line (6) of Table 5.4 , Magma was used to
    show that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . In line (10) of Table 5.4
    , we considered the quotient group of @xmath by @xmath ( @xmath is
    normal in @xmath ) and verified using Magma that it is isomorphic to
    @xmath ; thus @xmath , an extension of @xmath by @xmath .

9.  Finally, for each of the factors @xmath in lines (7) and (8) of
    Table 5.4 , we were able to construct (using Magma , see Appendix
    A4: Example A4-4(iv) ) a @xmath -orbital graph @xmath such that
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath (line (7)) or @xmath (line
    (8)). Thus in both of these cases, @xmath is isomorphic to a
    subgroup of a one-dimensional affine group @xmath .

    We further note that even though @xmath , the factors @xmath are
    neither isomorphic to the generalised Paley graphs (verified using
    Magma ) nor the twisted generalised Paley graphs. They cannot be
    isomorphic to the twisted generalised Paley graphs @xmath , since if
    they were, then by definition (see Definition 4.4.3 ) the index
    @xmath must divide @xmath . A quick check from Table 5.4 shows that
    this is not the case ( @xmath (line (7)) and @xmath (line (8)) do
    not divide @xmath ).

(Turn over for Tables 5.3 and 5.4 .)

For the rest of the graphs @xmath which are not isomorphic to the
generalised Paley graphs, the twisted generalised Paley graphs, or the
graphs in line (7) and (8) of Table 5.4 (see “Remark” columns of Tables
5.3 and 5.4 ), we are able to show that their full automorphism groups
do not contain any arc-transitive subgroups which are contained in the
one-dimensional affine group. Thus they will not occur in the
one-dimensional case studied in Chapter 7 .

###### Lemma 5.2.8.

Let @xmath be such that @xmath , @xmath or @xmath @xmath see Table
@xmath or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath @xmath see Table @xmath .
Then @xmath does not contain an arc-transitive subgroup isomorphic to a
subgroup of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be its point stabiliser. Now suppose there exists
a subgroup @xmath such that @xmath @xmath and @xmath is transitive on
@xmath . Then since @xmath is such that @xmath is even, say @xmath , it
follows that @xmath must contain a cyclic subgroup of order at least
@xmath .

Consider the cases from Table 5.3 , that is, @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .
In all of these cases, @xmath and so we have one of the following (with
@xmath ; see also Table 5.3 ).

1.  @xmath and @xmath .

2.  @xmath and @xmath .

3.  @xmath and @xmath .

Note that the largest cyclic subgroup in @xmath has order @xmath and
@xmath . Thus it follows that in all of the above cases, the order of a
cyclic subgroup in @xmath is at most @xmath , contradicting the fact
that @xmath .

Next, we consider the cases from Table 5.4 , that is, @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath . In these cases, @xmath respectively, and one of the
following holds (also see Table 5.4 ):

1.  @xmath and @xmath .

2.  @xmath and @xmath .

3.  @xmath and @xmath .

4.  @xmath and @xmath .

Note that largest cyclic subgroup in @xmath has order @xmath , and in
the four cases above, one can easily check using Magma that the order of
a cyclic subgroup in @xmath is at most @xmath for cases (1), (2) and
(3), and at most @xmath for case (4). It follows that all the above
cases contradict the fact that @xmath , and so the lemma is proved. ∎

We are now ready to prove the following result for case @xmath of
Theorem 2.2.1 .

###### Proposition 5.2.9.

Let @xmath be an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with factors @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath . Suppose @xmath
is an affine @xmath -transitive permutation on @xmath with @xmath as
listed in Theorem @xmath . Then @xmath is even if @xmath is odd and one
of the following holds.

1.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and each @xmath is a @xmath disconnected
    @xmath generalised Paley graph @xmath .

2.  @xmath is as in Tables and , the @xmath are connected, and one of
    the following holds.

    1.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
        or @xmath @xmath the graph @xmath is as in Definition @xmath .

    2.  @xmath where @xmath and @xmath or @xmath .

    3.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

    4.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.3.1 (1), @xmath for all @xmath . Also each @xmath is
undirected and so @xmath . Hence @xmath is even if @xmath is odd.

Now @xmath is one of the groups given by Lemmas 5.2.1 and 5.2.3 .
Suppose first that @xmath . Then as in the proof of Proposition 5.1.3
and also by Remark 5.1.4 , the factors @xmath are disconnected
generalised Paley graphs, @xmath is the corresponding generalised Paley
partition, and so (1) holds. From now on, we will assume that @xmath .

Then @xmath is one of the groups listed in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 , with
corresponding graphs @xmath as in Defintion 5.2.6 . Furthermore, by
Lemma 5.2.8 as well as the results shown under the “Remark” columns of
Tables 5.3 and 5.4 , the homogeneous factors @xmath are as listed in
@xmath - @xmath above. Finally, by Lemma 5.2.5 , all the factors @xmath
in @xmath are connected. ∎

###### Remark 5.2.10.

For a finite set @xmath , we say that two partitions @xmath and @xmath
of @xmath are equivalent if there exists @xmath Sym @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath . Now, even though the factors in @xmath and @xmath of
Proposition 5.2.9 are generalised Paley graphs and twisted generalised
Paley graphs respectively, we have not decided if their corresponding
partitions @xmath are equivalent to the generalised Paley partitions or
the twisted generalised Paley partitions. (Note that we first have to
identify @xmath with the finite field @xmath .) Although we are
primarily interested in identifying the structure of the factors that
arise from an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of a complete
graph, it would be interesting to know if isomorphic homogeneous factors
(from two homogeneous factorisations @xmath and @xmath such that there
is a bijection between @xmath and @xmath ) can give rise to
non-equivalent partitions.

### 5.3 Case @xmath

Here we are looking at the scenario where @xmath and @xmath is an
extraspecial subgroup of order @xmath . Also @xmath and @xmath denotes
the set of nonzero vectors in @xmath . Now @xmath , and under the
canonical homomorphism @xmath , we have @xmath where @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Lemma 5.3.1.

@xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

The group @xmath has 5 orbits of length 8 in the set @xmath of 1-spaces
in @xmath . By Theorem 2.2.1 @xmath , @xmath , and hence also @xmath ,
act transitively on @xmath , and so @xmath and @xmath are transitive on
the 5 orbits of @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath contains the elementary
abelian subgroup @xmath of order 16, it follows that @xmath divides
@xmath . Now @xmath (checked using Magma ) and @xmath . It follows that
if @xmath is a maximal subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath , then
@xmath is not divisible by 5 and @xmath contains a subgroup isomorphic
to @xmath . From the Atlas [ 13 ] , we find that @xmath . Then, by
checking through the list of maximal subgroups of @xmath in the Atlas [
13 ] , only the subgroup isomorphic to @xmath contains @xmath . Since
@xmath is obviously normal in @xmath , we have that @xmath . In fact,
this is the full normaliser of @xmath in @xmath (see Remark 5.3.2 below)
and so is equal to @xmath . Finally since @xmath and @xmath , it follows
that @xmath must contain a subgroup isomorphic to @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 5.3.2.

We could use Magma to arrive at the above result and this is the first
way the result was obtained. First compute the normaliser @xmath , of
the elementary abelian group @xmath , of order @xmath in @xmath . Now
@xmath has order @xmath . Clearly @xmath . Upon inspecting the maximal
subgroups (there are 5 conjugacy classes of maximal subgroups) of @xmath
, only one (isomorphic to @xmath ) does not contain @xmath as a
subgroup. For such a subgroup @xmath , we have @xmath . Since @xmath ,
the result follows.

###### Corollary 5.3.3.

The full pre-image of @xmath in @xmath is @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
.

###### Proof.

From Lemma 5.3.1 , @xmath . The pre-image of @xmath is @xmath . Let
@xmath be the full pre-image of @xmath with respect to @xmath . It
follows that, since @xmath , we have @xmath . This implies that @xmath
and @xmath . Thus the full pre-image of @xmath is @xmath . ∎

Since @xmath (Corollary 5.3.3 ), we have @xmath where @xmath , and
@xmath where @xmath (note that @xmath does not necessarily contain the
scalars @xmath ). By Lemma 5.3.1 , @xmath (and @xmath ) have order
divisible by 5, so @xmath and @xmath are divisible by 5. Now @xmath and
since @xmath is divisible by 5, it follows that @xmath is isomorphic to
one of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (the Frobenius group, @xmath ), @xmath
or @xmath . Using Magma , we can easily check that all these (possible)
subgroups @xmath are transitive on the set @xmath of 1-spaces.

Now the pre-image of @xmath contains @xmath which also contains the
scalars @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath has 5 orbits of length @xmath in
@xmath , it follows that @xmath then has @xmath orbits of length 16 in
@xmath . Also, since @xmath (or @xmath ) permutes transitively the set
of @xmath -orbits in @xmath , it follows that @xmath (the pre-image of
@xmath under @xmath ) is transitive on @xmath (note that the
extraspecial subgroup @xmath of @xmath contains @xmath , and so even if
@xmath does not contain the scalars @xmath , @xmath is still transitive
on @xmath ³ ³ 3 In fact, using Magma , we can show that there exist a
group ( @xmath ) whereby @xmath does not contain the scalars. ). Now
@xmath and @xmath is not transitive on @xmath . Under the canonical
homomorphism @xmath , we have @xmath where @xmath . The following result
determines the possibilities for @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.3.4.

Suppose @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath . Further, @xmath or @xmath , and @xmath or @xmath
respectively.

###### Proof.

By the discussion in the above paragraph, we have that @xmath where
@xmath , and the possibilities for @xmath are as listed above.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath divides @xmath . Then @xmath must contain
@xmath (otherwise we have @xmath and so @xmath whereas elements of order
5 do not centralise @xmath ). Now if 5 divides @xmath , then by the
previous argument, we have @xmath . However, as mentioned earlier, the
pre-image of @xmath is transitive on @xmath , which is a contradiction
since @xmath is intransitive on @xmath . Hence @xmath and so we have
@xmath . It follows that @xmath or @xmath .

If @xmath , then the full pre-image of @xmath is @xmath (since we
require that @xmath is even, so we must have @xmath ). If @xmath , then
@xmath is either @xmath or @xmath . The latter case is not possible
since @xmath does not contain an elementary abelian subgroup of order
@xmath . So @xmath . ∎

Now we are ready to state our main result for this case. (Identification
of the isomorphism type of the factors @xmath in the case where @xmath
will be done by referring to the main result in Chapter 6 : Theorem
6.2.5 .)

###### Proposition 5.3.5.

Let @xmath be an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with factors @xmath . Suppose @xmath is an affine @xmath
-transitive permutation group on @xmath such that @xmath is as in case
@xmath of Theorem with @xmath . Then @xmath are Cayley graphs @xmath for
all @xmath and @xmath where either @xmath or @xmath . Furthermore, we
have one of the following.

1.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and each @xmath is a @xmath disconnected
    @xmath generalised Paley graph @xmath , or

2.  @xmath , @xmath and each homogeneous factor @xmath is isomorphic to
    the Hamming graph @xmath @xmath see Definition @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.3.1 (1), @xmath for all @xmath . Also, the possibilities for
@xmath are given in Lemma 5.3.4 . Suppose @xmath , then as in the proof
of Proposition 5.1.3 and also by Remark 5.1.4 , the factors @xmath are
disconnected generalised Paley graphs. Moreover, as @xmath acts
regularly on @xmath for each @xmath , it follows that @xmath and so
@xmath . Thus (1) holds.

Now suppose @xmath . Then since @xmath has 5 orbits of equal length 16
in @xmath (with @xmath leaving the orbits of @xmath invariant and
permuting them transitively; see also Lemma 2.3.1 ), it follows that the
homogeneous factorisation has index @xmath . Furthermore, by Theorem
6.2.5 , we have that @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 5.3.6.

Note that for part (1) of the above Proposition, we can easily work out
the structure of the connected components of the @xmath . As the @xmath
are generalised Paley graphs, we can identify @xmath as the finite field
@xmath . Here @xmath (seen as a multiplicative subgroup of @xmath ) acts
semiregularly by field multiplication on @xmath and regularly on @xmath
. Suppose @xmath is such that @xmath . Then @xmath and it follows that
the @xmath -span of @xmath equals @xmath . Thus the connected components
of @xmath , and hence of all the @xmath , are isomorphic to @xmath .

### 5.4 Summing up the cases

Finally, we sum up the results from Sections 5.1 to 5.3 in the following
theorem.

###### Theorem 5.4.1.

Let @xmath be an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath with factors @xmath . Suppose @xmath is an affine @xmath
-transitive permutation group on @xmath such that @xmath is in one of
the cases @xmath of Theorem . Then @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is
even if @xmath is odd, and @xmath is such that precisely one of the
following holds.

1.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and each @xmath is a @xmath disconnected
    @xmath generalised Paley graph @xmath .

2.  @xmath is as in Tables and , the @xmath are connected, and one of
    the following holds.

    1.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
        or @xmath .

    2.  @xmath where @xmath and @xmath or @xmath .

    3.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

    4.  @xmath and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

3.  @xmath and @xmath and the homogeneous factors @xmath are all
    isomorphic to the Hamming graph @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.3.1 (1), @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Furthermore,
since we require each @xmath to be undirected, we have @xmath and so
@xmath is even if @xmath is odd. The fact that one of @xmath to @xmath
holds now follows from Propositions 5.1.3 , 5.2.9 and 5.3.5 . Finally to
see that the factors arising from @xmath belong to exactly one of the
above cases, we note the following.

The graphs/factors from case (1) are not connected, they are not
isomorphic to those connected ones found in cases (2) and (3). Also, as
mentioned in Section 5.2.1 , the graphs for different parts within case
(2) are not isomorphic as they correspond to different choices of @xmath
. Finally, the factors isomorphic to @xmath in case (3) are not
isomorphic to those found in (2); since for case (3), @xmath but there
is no graph in (2) which has the same parameters. ∎

## Chapter 6 Hamming graphs as arc-transitive homogeneous factors

We saw in Section 5.2.1 that there is a homogeneous factorisation of
@xmath of index @xmath in which each of the factors is a Hamming graph
@xmath . In Chapter 4 , we showed that the generalised Paley graphs, of
which some are isomorphic to the Hamming graphs (see Theorem 3.1.5 ),
also arise as factors of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations of
complete graphs. However, of these two examples, only the former one
occurs with factors arising from a homogeneous factorisation @xmath
where @xmath is not a one-dimensional affine group (even though @xmath
is isomorphic to the generalised Paley graph @xmath ). Such a situation
also arises for the complete graph @xmath .

Recall from Section 5.3 that there exists an arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisation @xmath of @xmath of index @xmath where @xmath , and @xmath
is an extraspecial subgroup of @xmath of order @xmath . In particular,
in Proposition 5.3.5 , it is claimed (by using Theorem 6.2.5 in this
chapter) that the homogeneous factors that arise in this case are
isomorphic to the Hamming graphs @xmath . The aim of this chapter is to
show that the claim is true.

### 6.1 Some representation theory

As in Section 5.3 , let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath acting on @xmath
, where @xmath is an extraspecial subgroup of @xmath of order @xmath .
Let @xmath (for @xmath ) be the @xmath -arc-transitive factors that
arise from the arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of
index @xmath in Section 5.3 . We will show that the @xmath are all
isomorphic to the Hamming graph @xmath .

It is well known that the Hamming graph @xmath is isomorphic to a
Cartesian product of complete graphs @xmath (see also Definition 2.8.6
). By a Cartesian product @xmath of graphs @xmath and @xmath , we mean
the graph with vertex set @xmath and edge set @xmath @xmath @xmath . The
following result is taken from [ 27 ] .

###### Proposition 6.1.1.

[ 27 , Proposition 3.3] If @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is the Cayley
graph on @xmath with generating set @xmath .

Note that the group @xmath contains @xmath as a subgroup. Moreover,
since @xmath , it follows that @xmath is normal in @xmath . We first
show (in Lemma 6.2.2 ) that @xmath (as a subgroup of @xmath acting on
@xmath ) does not have an irreducible @xmath -representation of degree
4. To do that, we need to recall some basic concepts from representation
theory (for more details of which, see for example [ 28 ] and [ 32 ] ).

For any arbitrary field @xmath and any group @xmath , an @xmath -module
@xmath is said to be irreducible if it is non-zero and it has no @xmath
-submodules apart from @xmath and @xmath (otherwise it is called
reducible ). A representation of @xmath over @xmath is a homomorphism
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath , that is, @xmath (we often refer to @xmath
as an @xmath -representation or an @xmath -representation of the group
@xmath ). The degree of the representation @xmath is the integer @xmath
. A representation @xmath is said to be irreducible if the corresponding
@xmath -module is irreducible. In other words, a representation @xmath
is irreducible if its corresponding @xmath -module @xmath is non-zero
and it has no @xmath -submodules apart from @xmath and @xmath that is
invariant under @xmath . The @xmath -character or character @xmath of
@xmath afforded by the @xmath -representation @xmath is the function
given by @xmath where @xmath is the trace of the matrix @xmath for all
@xmath . If the @xmath -representation @xmath is irreducible, then we
call the corresponding @xmath -character afforded by @xmath an
irreducible character of @xmath over @xmath .

Suppose now @xmath and @xmath is an @xmath -character of a group @xmath
afforded by some @xmath -representation. We write @xmath to denote the
subfield of @xmath generated by @xmath and the character values @xmath
for @xmath . In fact, @xmath is the smallest extension of @xmath
containing all @xmath , where @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath and @xmath
is an @xmath -representation of @xmath , then we may view @xmath as an
@xmath -representation of @xmath . As such, we denote it by @xmath .

Let @xmath be an @xmath -representation of a group @xmath . Then @xmath
is absolutely irreducible if @xmath is irreducible for every field
@xmath . The field @xmath is a splitting field for @xmath if every
irreducible @xmath -representation of @xmath is absolutely irreducible.

###### Lemma 6.1.2.

[ 32 , Corollary 9.15] Let @xmath have exponent @xmath and assume the
polynomial @xmath splits into linear factors in the field @xmath . If
@xmath has prime characteristic, then it is a splitting field for @xmath
. @xmath Note that the exponent of @xmath is the least positive integer
@xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . @xmath

###### Lemma 6.1.3.

The finite field @xmath is a splitting field for @xmath .

###### Proof.

The group @xmath has exponent @xmath and the finite field @xmath has
characteristic @xmath . Since @xmath in @xmath where @xmath is a
primitive element of @xmath , the result then follows from Lemma 6.1.2 ∎

###### Lemma 6.1.4.

[ 3 , Lemma 34.3 (1)] Let @xmath be a finite group and @xmath be a
splitting field for @xmath such that the characteristic does not divide
@xmath . Then the number of equivalence classes of irreducible @xmath
-representations is equal to the number of conjugacy classes of @xmath .

By Lemma 6.1.3 , @xmath is a splitting field for @xmath . Since the
characteristic of @xmath does not divide @xmath , by Lemma 6.1.4 , the
number of non-isomorphic irreducible @xmath -representations is equal to
the number of conjugacy classes of @xmath . Now @xmath has five
conjugacy classes. Thus we have exactly five non-isomorphic irreducible
representations of @xmath over @xmath . Let @xmath be the five
non-isomorphic irreducible @xmath -representations of @xmath and @xmath
be their respective irreducible characters. Furthermore (using the fact
that @xmath is a splitting field for @xmath with characteristic not
dividing @xmath ) from [ 3 , Lemma 34.2 and 34.4] , we have @xmath where
@xmath is the degree of the irreducible @xmath -representation @xmath .
Thus it is easy to see that @xmath has four non-isomorphic (irreducible)
representations of degree 1 and one (unique) irreducible representation
of degree 2 over @xmath . The four representations of degree 1 are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We note that @xmath for each @xmath . Thus @xmath for each character
@xmath afforded by @xmath .

The irreducible @xmath -representation of degree 2 is @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath . Thus @xmath for the character @xmath afforded by
@xmath .

### 6.2 @xmath as arc-transitive factors

We are now ready to show that @xmath does not have an irreducible @xmath
-representation of degree @xmath . To do that, we need the concept of an
irreducible constituent of a possibly reducible representation. Briefly
(see [ 3 , p. 37] or [ 32 , p. 146 - 147] for more details), an
irreducible constituent of an @xmath -representation @xmath (with
corresponding @xmath -module @xmath ) is the restriction @xmath of
@xmath to the composition factor @xmath of the composition series @xmath
(and each composition factor @xmath is an irreducible @xmath -module).
Clearly the irreducible constituents of the @xmath -representation
@xmath of degree @xmath are irreducible @xmath -representations of
degrees @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.1.

[ 32 , Corollary 9.23] Let @xmath be fields of prime characteristic. Let
@xmath be an irreducible @xmath -representation of @xmath which affords
the character @xmath . Let @xmath be an irreducible @xmath
-representation such that @xmath is a constituent of @xmath . Then
@xmath . In particular, if @xmath , then @xmath is similar to @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.2.

Each irreducible @xmath -representation has degree at most @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Suppose there exists a degree @xmath irreducible @xmath
-representation: @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Let @xmath be
an irreducible constituent of @xmath which affords the character @xmath
. It is easy to see that the irreducible constituent @xmath of @xmath is
one of the irreducible @xmath -representations @xmath (as defined
above), affording characters @xmath respectively. Applying Lemma 6.2.1 ,
we have @xmath where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is a contradiction since @xmath . Thus the result follows. ∎

By Lemma 6.2.2 , the group @xmath does not have an irreducible @xmath
-representation of degree @xmath . Now in @xmath , the group @xmath acts
semiregularly (by conjugation) on @xmath . So @xmath has 10 orbits of
length 8 in @xmath . Let @xmath be the orbits of @xmath in @xmath . We
will show that @xmath for some @xmath (note that by @xmath , we mean the
@xmath -span of vectors in @xmath ).

###### Lemma 6.2.3.

Suppose @xmath are orbits of @xmath in @xmath @xmath where @xmath @xmath
. Then there exists an @xmath such that @xmath , and moreover @xmath is
the set of non-zero vectors in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since the characteristic of @xmath does not divide @xmath , then by
Maschke’s Theorem [ 3 , Theorem 12.9] , every @xmath -module is
semisimple, that is, every @xmath -module is the direct sum of
irreducible submodules. So @xmath , where each @xmath is an irreducible
submodule of @xmath . By Lemma 6.2.2 , we know that all irreducible
@xmath -representations have degree at most @xmath . Thus @xmath .
Suppose now all @xmath have dimension 1. So @xmath . Let @xmath be the
corresponding (completely reducible) @xmath -representation with respect
to @xmath . Then @xmath splits into a direct sum of irreducible @xmath
-representations of degree 1, and with respect to an appropriate basis,
@xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath acts faithfully on @xmath , we have
@xmath . This is clearly not possible since @xmath is non-abelian. Thus
there exists a @xmath -invariant irreducible @xmath -submodule, say
@xmath , such that @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath .
Observe that @xmath and since @xmath , it follows that @xmath and @xmath
. ∎

###### Lemma 6.2.4.

Let @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -orbit in @xmath . Let @xmath @xmath
where @xmath @xmath be an @xmath -orbit in @xmath . Then @xmath where
@xmath is an @xmath -orbit in @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , the group @xmath leaves the set @xmath of @xmath -orbits
in @xmath invariant. Now @xmath with @xmath . As the set of @xmath
-orbits is invariant under @xmath , there exists an @xmath such that
@xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -orbit and @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath , it follows that we have @xmath . ∎

We are now ready to prove the following result.

###### Theorem 6.2.5.

Let @xmath @xmath for @xmath be the @xmath -arc-transitive homogeneous
factors as in Section , where @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath for all
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath @xmath @xmath be the @xmath -arc-transitive homogeneous
factors as in Section , where @xmath and @xmath (recall that the
homogeneous factorisation has index @xmath ; see also Proposition 5.3.5
). Let @xmath be a @xmath -orbit in @xmath such that @xmath (such a
@xmath -orbit exists by Lemma 6.2.3 ). Since each @xmath is an @xmath
-orbit in @xmath , it follows that by Lemma 6.2.4 , we have @xmath for
some @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath for some @xmath . Furthermore,
@xmath , and @xmath is the set of all non-zero vectors in @xmath . Since
@xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath . So @xmath . Without loss of
generality we may suppose @xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath where @xmath .
Since @xmath , it is easy to see that @xmath where @xmath is the
complete graph of order 9. From Proposition 6.1.1 , we have @xmath .
Thus the homogeneous factor @xmath is the Cartesian product of 2
complete graphs of order 9 and this is isomorphic to the Hamming graph
@xmath . Finally, as all the @xmath -arc-transitive homogeneous factors
@xmath are pairwise isomorphic, it follows that @xmath for all @xmath .
∎

### 6.3 @xmath-Designs

In this section, we will show that the homogeneous factorisation found
in Proposition 5.3.5 (2) (where the factors are Hamming graphs @xmath ;
see also Theorem 6.2.5 ) gives rise to an edge partition of @xmath into
@xmath copies of @xmath . Interestingly, this partition also corresponds
to a point-transitive 2-design.

###### Definition 6.3.1.

A @xmath design @xmath is a system consisting of a finite set @xmath of
@xmath points and a collection @xmath of @xmath -subsets of @xmath
called blocks such that any @xmath -subset of @xmath is contained in
exactly one block. We will always assume that @xmath . Furthermore,
given a @xmath design @xmath , let @xmath denote the number of blocks
and @xmath the number of blocks containing a given point. Finally, the
order of a @xmath design is the integer @xmath .

A permutation @xmath of the points of a @xmath design @xmath is called
an automorphism of @xmath if @xmath whenever @xmath . The set of all
automorphisms of @xmath constitutes a group which is called the
automorphism group of @xmath and is denoted by @xmath . Note that every
automorphism of a design induces a permutation of the block set. So
elements of @xmath can also be seen as permutations on @xmath . We say
that @xmath is point-transitive if @xmath is transitive on the point set
@xmath .

###### Theorem 6.3.2.

The arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath into @xmath
factors, each isomorphic to the Hamming graph @xmath @xmath see
Proposition @xmath @xmath , gives rise to an edge partition of @xmath
into @xmath copies of @xmath . This edge partition corresponds to a
@xmath design @xmath with point set @xmath and blocks the @xmath copies
of @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is a @xmath -point, @xmath -transitive
affine plane isomorphic to the exceptional nearfield plane of order
@xmath where @xmath , and @xmath has a normal extraspecial subgroup
@xmath of order @xmath .

###### Remark 6.3.3.

For a definition of the exceptional nearfield plane , see [ 35 , p. 72]
and the references therein. We identify our design with this plane by
applying Kantor’s classification in [ 35 ] of point 2-transitive, @xmath
designs.

From Theorem 6.2.5 , we know that the Hamming graph @xmath occurs as a
factor of an arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath of @xmath
of index @xmath . Furthermore, the group @xmath (where @xmath is the
extraspecial subgroup of order @xmath ) acts arc-transitively on each
factor, with @xmath (where @xmath contains @xmath as a normal subgroup;
case @xmath of Theorem 2.2.1 ) permuting the 5 isomorphic factors @xmath
transitively. We shall show that this factorisation gives rise to a
@xmath design.

Before we proceed to show that the factorisation of @xmath into 5 copies
of Hamming graphs @xmath gives rise to a 2-design, we need the following
result about maximal cliques in @xmath . (A clique @xmath of a graph
@xmath is a complete subgraph of @xmath . We say that a clique @xmath in
@xmath is maximal if there is no larger clique in @xmath containing
@xmath .)

###### Lemma 6.3.4.

Let @xmath be complete graphs on @xmath vertices with vertex sets @xmath
and @xmath respectively. Then the Hamming graph @xmath contains @xmath
maximal cliques @xmath such that each edge of @xmath is in exactly one
of these maximal cliques. Moreover these maximal cliques @xmath are
unique.

###### Proof.

Given any edge @xmath in @xmath , there are exactly 7 vertices adjacent
to both @xmath and @xmath , and these 9 vertices form a clique.
Therefore there is exactly one @xmath -clique (or @xmath ) on each edge
and no larger cliques. Furthermore, each 9-clique has 36 edges and since
@xmath has 648 edges, it follows that there are @xmath @xmath in @xmath
. ∎

We shall now prove Theorem 6.3.2 .

Proof of Theorem 6.3.2 By Proposition 5.3.5 (2), there exists an
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of index 5 such that
each factor @xmath (where @xmath ) is isomorphic to the Hamming graph
@xmath . By Lemma 6.3.4 , each @xmath contains 18 edge-disjoint copies
of (unique) maximal cliques @xmath and each edge of @xmath is contained
in exactly one of them. As there are 5 factors of @xmath isomorphic to
@xmath , we have an edge partition of @xmath into 90 copies of
edge-disjoint @xmath ’s which are maximal cliques of some @xmath . Let
@xmath be the set of vertex sets of the 90 maximal cliques @xmath . Then
each @xmath has size 9, and each edge of @xmath (a 2-subset of @xmath )
lies in precisely one block in @xmath . Thus the factorisation given in
Proposition 5.3.5 (2) gives rise to a @xmath design @xmath .

We recall that @xmath where @xmath permutes the 5 factors @xmath
transitively. So elements in @xmath induce isomorphisms between each
pair of factors. Suppose @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath (where @xmath and
@xmath are not necessarily distinct). Then it follows that @xmath will
map a maximal clique @xmath (belonging to @xmath ) in @xmath to a (not
necessarily distinct) maximal clique @xmath (also belonging to @xmath )
in @xmath . Thus @xmath leaves the block set @xmath invariant and so
@xmath . Moreover, @xmath is 2-transitive on the point set @xmath of
@xmath .

Finally, @xmath and @xmath (where @xmath is the vertex set of @xmath ).
Then by [ 14 , p. 57] , which says that @xmath (where @xmath is as in
Definition 6.3.1 ), we have @xmath . Note that for the above @xmath
design @xmath , the order of @xmath is @xmath , and by [ 14 , 2.2.6] ,
@xmath is an affine plane. (Simply, an affine plane is any @xmath
design.) By Kantor’s classification of point 2-transitive @xmath designs
in [ 35 ] , it follows that @xmath is the “exceptional near field
plane”. ∎

### 6.4 Final remarks

In this section, we shall make a few comments and observations on the
results obtained in this chapter.

(1)  Note that by Proposition 4.4.2 , the generalised Paley graphs
@xmath ( @xmath ) are factors of an arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisation @xmath of @xmath of index @xmath , where @xmath . By
Theorem 3.1.5 , it follows that @xmath . Thus the factors arising from
the arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation in Section 5.3 , which are
isomorphic to the Hamming graphs @xmath by Theorem 6.2.5 , are in fact
isomorphic to the generalised Paley graphs @xmath . However, we have not
decided if the partition @xmath in Section 5.3 is equivalent to the
generalised Paley partition @xmath . (See Remark 5.2.10 for definition
of equivalent partition.)

(2)  The homogeneous factorisation of @xmath into three Hamming graphs
@xmath in Section 5.2.1 also gives a similar edge partition to those
described in the previous section. In this case, the edge set @xmath (of
@xmath ) is partitioned into @xmath copies of @xmath and we have a
@xmath design @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is a @xmath -point,
2-transitive affine plane of order @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . (The
proof is analogous to that of Theorem 6.3.2 .) Also, by looking up
Kantor’s classification of point 2-transitive @xmath designs in [ 35 ] ,
we know that @xmath is a Desarguesian affine plane.

(3)  Similar observations (using an analogous approach to the proof of
Theorem 6.3.2 ) can also be made for homogeneous factorisations of
@xmath into generalised Paley graphs. By Theorem 3.1.5 , the generalised
Paley graphs @xmath such that @xmath where @xmath and @xmath , are
isomorphic to the Hamming graphs @xmath . Now if @xmath , then @xmath
and @xmath . Now the generalised Paley graphs are factors of
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath of @xmath . Thus it
follows that whenever a complete graph @xmath is factorised into @xmath
( @xmath ), then its edge set is partitioned into @xmath copies of
@xmath and we have a @xmath design @xmath . Similar to the previous
observation, @xmath is also a @xmath -point, 2-transitive affine plane
of order @xmath where @xmath . Finally, by Kantor’s result in [ 35 ] ,
@xmath is a Desarguesian affine plane.

## Chapter 7 The one-dimensional affine case

The only case remaining from the list in Theorem 2.2.1 is case @xmath ,
which we call the one-dimensional affine case. Here, @xmath is a @xmath
-transitive subgroup of @xmath acting on @xmath where @xmath is a finite
field @xmath of order @xmath for some prime @xmath and @xmath . As in
the previous chapter, we need to determine all possible transitive
normal subgroups @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath (which is also normal
in @xmath ) is not transitive on @xmath and @xmath has even order if
@xmath is odd. Also as in the previous chapter, the problem of
determining @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is equivalent to the problem of
finding @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is transitive on
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath is not transitive on @xmath .

In this chapter, we give generic constructions for both @xmath and
@xmath in terms of a fixed set of parameters and use them to construct
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath of @xmath where @xmath
and @xmath .

### 7.1 Generic constructions for @xmath and @xmath

For the sake of completeness, we shall start off by repeating the
explanations of the notations used in Section 3.1 (see also Section 4.4
).

Let @xmath and @xmath be as above. For a fixed primitive element @xmath
in @xmath , we let @xmath be the corresponding scalar multiplication
@xmath for all @xmath . Then let @xmath be the multiplicative subgroup
of @xmath generated by the element @xmath where @xmath and @xmath (note
that @xmath , @xmath ). Since for each @xmath , there is a corresponding
@xmath , we shall use @xmath to denote the set @xmath . Note that for
@xmath , we will use @xmath and @xmath to denote the corresponding
scalar multiplications. Also, we let @xmath denote the Frobenius
automorphism of @xmath , that is, @xmath . Finally, we note that the
group @xmath is generated by the scalar multiplication map @xmath and
the Frobenius automorphism @xmath . Thus @xmath .

The following result from [ 17 ] tells us that each subgroup @xmath of
@xmath can be expressed in the form @xmath where the integers @xmath and
@xmath can be chosen in a unique manner.

###### Lemma 7.1.1.

Let @xmath of @xmath . Then there exist unique integers @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath such that @xmath , and the following hold:

1.  @xmath and @xmath ;

2.  @xmath and @xmath ;

3.  @xmath and @xmath @xmath @xmath .

###### Definition 7.1.2.

(Standard Form) If @xmath and the integers @xmath and @xmath satisfy
conditions (1)-(3) of Lemma 7.1.1 , then the representation @xmath is
said to be in standard form .

###### Remark 7.1.3.

In subsequent results (for example, see Lemmas 7.1.4 - 7.1.7 ), we will
always require a subgroup @xmath of @xmath to be in standard form.
Otherwise, it will cause ambiguities especially when certain
restrictions or conditions are placed on the 3-tuple @xmath . For
example, if @xmath then @xmath is not expressed in standard form since
condition (1) of Lemma 7.1.1 fails. The standard form for this subgroup
@xmath is @xmath and by Lemma 7.1.1 , we know that this expression in
standard form is unique.

To determine the 2-transitive subgroups @xmath of @xmath , we need to
know the conditions under which @xmath is transitive on @xmath , that
is, we need the possible integers @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is
in standard form and is transitive on the set of non-zero elements of
@xmath . The transitivity criteria in Lemma 7.1.4 may be found in [ 18 ,
Section 3] . We provide a proof here as we need the details for
determining the possibilities for @xmath .

Let @xmath be in standard form and consider the orbits of @xmath in
@xmath . Since @xmath acts semiregularly on @xmath , it follows that
@xmath has @xmath orbits of length @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath be the
set of @xmath -orbits in @xmath . Now @xmath induces a permutation on
the set @xmath and @xmath is transitive on @xmath if and only if @xmath
has one orbit in @xmath . Consider the action of @xmath on @xmath . To
determine the image of @xmath under @xmath , we simply need to find the
“coset” of @xmath containing @xmath . Now @xmath lies in @xmath where
@xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath . Further computations yield @xmath . In
the proof below, we shall use this observation for the case where @xmath
.

###### Lemma 7.1.4.

(Transitivity) Suppose @xmath is in standard form. Then @xmath is
transitive on @xmath if and only if either @xmath @xmath so @xmath
@xmath , or both of the following hold @xmath

1.  @xmath , @xmath divides @xmath , and

2.   if @xmath , then @xmath does not divide @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose first that @xmath . Then @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that
@xmath fixes each orbit of @xmath in @xmath setwise. Thus, @xmath is
transitive on @xmath if and only if @xmath , that is, @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath . Then @xmath is transitive on @xmath if and
only if @xmath is transitive on @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is as
defined above. Using the information above about the action of @xmath on
@xmath , we have:

  -- -- -------- -- --
        @xmath      
                    
        @xmath      
                    
        @xmath      
                    
  -- -- -------- -- --

Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath . So

  -- -- -------- -- --
        @xmath      
                    
  -- -- -------- -- --

∎

Recall that, given a finite 2-transitive permutation group @xmath which
permutes the factors of some homogeneous factorisation of @xmath , we
need to determine the possible normal subgroups @xmath of @xmath that
are vertex transitive and arc transitive on each factor. In particular,
given a subgroup @xmath of @xmath which is transitive on @xmath , we
want to know the possible normal subgroups @xmath of @xmath that are not
transitive on @xmath . Let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath expressed in
standard form. Then the following results tell us the conditions on the
integers @xmath and @xmath under which the subgroup @xmath is a normal
subgroup of @xmath . We also calculate the length of the @xmath -orbits
in @xmath under the assumption that @xmath is normal in @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.1.5.

(Containment) Suppose @xmath and @xmath are subrgroups of @xmath
expressed in standard form. Then @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath if and
only if

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

3.   and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are elements of @xmath . Let
@xmath . Then @xmath contains @xmath , so @xmath divides @xmath and
hence @xmath . Also, we have @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , it
follows that @xmath .

Given that @xmath divides @xmath (as shown above), we have @xmath . Now
by [ 18 , Lemma 2.1] , for each @xmath , @xmath where @xmath (mod @xmath
), and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath , @xmath , we see that @xmath and this is true if and
only if @xmath .

Conversely, suppose the three conditions of the lemma are satisfied.
Then since @xmath , there exists an integer @xmath such that @xmath .
Thus @xmath . Now @xmath and @xmath . As above, by [ 18 , Lemma 2.1] ,
we get @xmath . However, we know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath , forcing @xmath to be in
@xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 7.1.6.

(Normality) Suppose @xmath is in standard form and is a subgroup of
@xmath @xmath so Lemma holds @xmath . Then @xmath is normal in @xmath if
and only if

1.  @xmath and

2.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

Now @xmath is normal in @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath . Since @xmath whenever @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath , it
follows that @xmath is normal in @xmath if and only if @xmath for all
@xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath , we have that @xmath is normal in
@xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath . Now

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Next consider @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath if and only if @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath is normal in @xmath if and only if (1) @xmath and (2) @xmath
. ∎

###### Lemma 7.1.7.

(Orbit Length) Let @xmath and @xmath be subgroups of @xmath expressed in
standard form. Suppose also that @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath
and @xmath is transitive on @xmath . Then @xmath has @xmath orbits of
equal length @xmath in @xmath , where if @xmath then @xmath ; and if
@xmath , then @xmath is defined by @xmath

1.  @xmath and

2.  @xmath for @xmath .

Note that conditions (1) and (2) above certaintly define an integer
@xmath , since by Lemma 7.1.1 (3) applied to @xmath , @xmath divides
@xmath .

###### Proof.

( of Lemma )  Suppose @xmath . We first determine the orbits of @xmath
in @xmath . Now @xmath acts semiregularly on @xmath , so @xmath has
@xmath orbits of length @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of @xmath -orbits
in @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath induces a permutation on the set
@xmath . Let @xmath be the length of the @xmath -orbit in @xmath
containing @xmath . We claim that all the @xmath -orbits in @xmath have
equal length @xmath and hence @xmath .

Now @xmath is characteristic in @xmath (any subgroup of a cyclic group
is characteristic) and since @xmath , we have @xmath . Thus @xmath is
invariant under @xmath and @xmath is transitive on @xmath . From [ 61 ,
Theorem 10.3] we know that every nontrivial normal subgroup of a
transitive group is half-transitive (that is, orbits have equal length).
Since @xmath and @xmath fixes @xmath ‘pointwise’, the group induced by
@xmath on @xmath is equal to the group induced by @xmath . Thus the
@xmath -orbits in @xmath have equal length @xmath and so @xmath .

Furthermore, the group @xmath has orbits in @xmath of equal length
@xmath , and @xmath is such that all of the following conditions hold:

1.  @xmath fixes @xmath and

2.  if @xmath , then @xmath does not fix @xmath .

Using similar arguments to those in the proof of Lemma 7.1.4 , we have

  -- -- -------- -- --
        @xmath      
                    
  -- -- -------- -- --

Now suppose @xmath . Then since @xmath fixes each of the orbits of
@xmath in @xmath setwise, @xmath has @xmath orbits of equal length
@xmath in @xmath . ∎

We want to make some observations pertaining to Lemma 7.1.7 .

###### Remark 7.1.8.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as in Lemma 7.1.7 .

1.  Note that @xmath is transitive on @xmath when @xmath , @xmath , and
    also when @xmath , @xmath .

2.  Suppose that @xmath (where @xmath and @xmath ) is an arc-transitive
    homogeneous factorisation of @xmath of index @xmath with factors
    @xmath . Suppose also that @xmath of @xmath are expressed in
    standard form. Then the @xmath are Cayley graphs @xmath (Lemma 4.3.1
    ) such that @xmath is transitive on each of the @xmath (which are
    the @xmath -orbits in @xmath ), with @xmath and @xmath even when
    @xmath is odd. Now from Lemma 7.1.7 , the normal subgroup @xmath of
    @xmath has @xmath orbits of equal length @xmath in @xmath where
    @xmath and @xmath if @xmath . Thus it follows (by considering the
    equality @xmath ) that @xmath .

We shall now use the above results (Lemmas 7.1.1 - 7.1.7 ) on @xmath and
@xmath to prove the following theorem.

###### Theorem 7.1.9.

Let @xmath and @xmath be subgroups of @xmath @xmath @xmath acting on
@xmath where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are in
standard form and @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath if and only if
the following conditions are satisfied @xmath

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath @xmath @xmath .

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath and

-   @xmath .

Furthermore, given that @xmath is in standard form, @xmath is transitive
on @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath or both of the following
conditions hold @xmath

-   @xmath , @xmath divides @xmath , and

-    if @xmath , then @xmath does not divide @xmath .

In this case, @xmath has @xmath orbits of equal length @xmath in @xmath
, where if @xmath then @xmath ; and if @xmath , then @xmath is defined
by @xmath

-   @xmath and

-   @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , @xmath are in standard form and @xmath is a normal subgroup
of @xmath , then conditions (1) to (8) follow from Lemmas 7.1.1 , 7.1.5
and 7.1.6 . Further by Lemma 7.1.4 , @xmath is transitive on @xmath if
and only if either @xmath , @xmath or conditions (9) and (10) hold.

Conversely suppose that conditions (1) to (8) hold. Then by Lemma 7.1.1
, conditions (1) to (3) above imply that @xmath is in standard form. We
claim that conditions (1) - (6) imply that @xmath is also in standard
form.

It is easy to see that conditions (1) and (4) imply @xmath ; while
conditions (2) and (5) imply @xmath . Also, from (6), we have @xmath ,
and hence (multiplying by @xmath (an integer by (2)))

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now by conditions (3) and (4), we have that @xmath . Thus it follows
(using @xmath ), that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so the three conditions of Lemma 7.1.1 are satisfied and @xmath is
in standard form.

Next, conditions (4) to (6) and Lemma 7.1.5 imply that @xmath , and
conditions (7) – (8) and Lemma 7.1.6 imply that @xmath is a normal
subgroup of @xmath .

Finally, the results on the number and length of @xmath -orbits in
@xmath follows immediately from Lemma 7.1.7 . ∎

###### Construction 7.1.10.

(Generic Construction) Let @xmath be a complete graph with vertex set
@xmath . Suppose @xmath and @xmath are subgroups of @xmath acting on
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are as in Theorem (that is, @xmath
and @xmath satisfy all the conditions listed in Theorem ). Suppose also
that @xmath has even order if @xmath is odd. Then let @xmath be the set
of all @xmath -orbits in @xmath , and for each @xmath , we define @xmath
. Finally, let @xmath where @xmath .

We shall prove that the generic construction given above for the case
where @xmath and @xmath are contained in @xmath gives rise to
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations, and that all such
factorisations in the one-dimensional case arise in this way.

###### Theorem 7.1.11.

The @xmath -tuple @xmath from Construction is a homogeneous
factorisation of @xmath of index @xmath @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
are as in Theorem @xmath such that each factor @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath is undirected and @xmath -arc-transitive. Conversely, each
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisation @xmath of @xmath of index
@xmath , with factors @xmath , @xmath a @xmath -transitive subgroup of
@xmath and @xmath even, can be constructed using Construction .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the 4-tuple given by Construction 7.1.10 . By Theorem
7.1.9 , @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath such that @xmath is
intransitive on @xmath while @xmath is transitive on @xmath . Thus it
follows that @xmath is 2-transitive on @xmath while @xmath is not (but
@xmath is transitive on @xmath ). Furthermore, since @xmath is even if
@xmath is odd, it follows that @xmath has even order.

Now observe that the translation group @xmath fixes each @xmath setwise.
Furthermore, as each @xmath is an @xmath -orbit in @xmath , it follows
that each @xmath admits @xmath as a subgroup of automorphisms and is
@xmath -arc-transitive (see Lemma 2.8.4 ). Thus each arc set @xmath is a
nontrivial @xmath -orbital. Since @xmath is 2-transitive with normal
subgroup @xmath such that @xmath is even, it follows by Proposition
4.1.2 that all nontrivial @xmath -orbitals in @xmath are self-paired. So
elements of each @xmath come in the form @xmath and by definition,
@xmath is undirected. Also by Theorem 7.1.9 , the number of @xmath
-orbits in @xmath is @xmath (where @xmath and @xmath are as in Theorem
), and so @xmath .

Next we show that @xmath form a partition of the edge set @xmath of
@xmath . Note that each @xmath corresponds to an @xmath -orbit @xmath in
@xmath , where @xmath for @xmath . It then follows that @xmath for
@xmath . Now take an edge @xmath . Then we must have @xmath for some
@xmath , and so @xmath . Thus @xmath forms a partition of the edge set
@xmath .

Finally as @xmath and @xmath is transitive on @xmath , it follows by
Lemma 2.3.1 that @xmath permutes the the elements of the set @xmath
transitively. Now suppose @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath for some @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath and so @xmath . Thus @xmath and it follows that
@xmath . Since @xmath fixes each @xmath setwise, it follows that @xmath
acts on @xmath . As @xmath is transitive on the sets @xmath , we have
@xmath acting transitively on @xmath . Finally, as @xmath fixes each
@xmath set-wise and @xmath is transitive on @xmath , the result on
@xmath being a homogeneous factorisation with @xmath -arc-transitive
factors @xmath follows.

Conversely, suppose @xmath is an arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisation of @xmath of index @xmath , with factors @xmath ( @xmath
), @xmath acting @xmath -transitively on @xmath and @xmath even.

Then @xmath and @xmath (and hence @xmath and @xmath ) can be constructed
as subgroups of @xmath by checking that all the conditions in Theorem
7.1.9 are satisfied.

Suppose now that the groups @xmath and @xmath are constructed using
Theorem 7.1.9 . Then as the factors are @xmath -arc-transitive Cayley
graphs @xmath , it follows that the set @xmath are all @xmath -orbits in
@xmath ; now using Construction 7.1.10 , both @xmath and @xmath can be
constructed for a given @xmath . Lastly, the partition @xmath , which
are the edge sets of @xmath , are also given by Construction 7.1.10 . ∎

Even though in principle (in light of Theorem 7.1.11 ), Theorem 7.1.9
and Construction 7.1.10 enable us to construct all possible
arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath where @xmath is an
one-dimensional affine 2-transitive group, explicit classification is
still far from complete and seems difficult. Indeed, we are only able to
give (later in this chapter) some families of examples. Thus the
question of complete explicit classification is still open.

###### Problem 7.1.12.

Give an explicit classification of all arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisations @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath are
as in Theorem 7.1.9 . That is to say, find explicitly all solutions to
the divisibility conditions @xmath to @xmath in Theorem 7.1.9 .

### 7.2 Some explicit examples

We now use the results in Theorem 7.1.9 to derive necessary and
sufficient conditions for certain subgroups @xmath and @xmath of @xmath
to satisfy properties that will enable us to construct interesting
examples of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations. Note that in the
following, @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.2.1.

Let @xmath be any prime number, @xmath a positive integer, and @xmath be
an integer which divides @xmath such that if @xmath is odd, then @xmath
is even. Let @xmath and @xmath be subgroups of @xmath acting on @xmath .
Then @xmath and @xmath are in standard form and @xmath is a normal
subgroup of @xmath . Moreover the following hold.

1.  @xmath is transitive on @xmath .

2.  @xmath has @xmath orbits of equal length @xmath in @xmath , and if
    @xmath is odd, then @xmath is even.

###### Proof.

The assertions about @xmath and @xmath being in standard form and @xmath
follow immediately by checking through conditions of Theorem 7.1.9 .

Since @xmath , it follows by the assumption of the lemma that if @xmath
is odd, then @xmath is even. Now part (1) and the rest of part (2) of
the above lemma follow since @xmath is regular on @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 7.2.2.

Let @xmath @xmath be a prime and @xmath be an odd positive integer. Let
@xmath and @xmath be subgroups of @xmath acting on @xmath . Suppose also
that @xmath and @xmath is even. Then the following hold.

1.  @xmath and @xmath are in standard form and @xmath is a normal
    subgroup of @xmath .

2.  @xmath is transitive on @xmath , and @xmath has @xmath orbits of
    equal length @xmath .

3.  @xmath is even.

###### Proof.

(1) We shall go through conditions listed in Theorem 7.1.9 . For ease of
notation, we will denote by C1 to C10, the conditions (1) to (10) listed
in Theorem 7.1.9 respectively. (Following the notations of Theorem 7.1.9
, we have @xmath and @xmath .)

( C1 ) Since @xmath is even, condition (C1) follows immediately by the
assumption @xmath .

( C2, C4, C5 and C7 ) Trivially satisfied.

( C3 ) Here, we need @xmath . Now @xmath , is a sum of @xmath odd
integers (recall that @xmath is an odd prime). Since @xmath (mod 4) and
@xmath is even, it follows that @xmath holds.

( C6 ) Here we need @xmath . As @xmath is an odd integer. The condition
is satisfied.

( C8 ) For this case we need @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath is even and @xmath odd, so the expression @xmath is a
sum of @xmath odd integers and hence is even. It follows that @xmath (as
given in the assumption) and @xmath , and so @xmath .

Thus conditions (C1) to (C8) of Theorem 7.1.9 are satisfied and part (1)
of the lemma holds.

(2) It is easy to check that conditions (C9) and (C10) of Theorem 7.1.9
are satisfied for @xmath . So @xmath is transitive on @xmath .

From Lemma 7.1.7 (see also the last part of Theorem 7.1.9 ), @xmath has
@xmath orbits of length @xmath in @xmath where @xmath is such that:

-   @xmath and

-   @xmath for all @xmath .

We shall now proceed to determine the possible values for @xmath (and
hence @xmath ). Clearly @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath . Since @xmath
(mod 4), we have @xmath , and so it follows that @xmath , and hence
@xmath (since @xmath ).

(3) Now @xmath . Since @xmath , we have that @xmath and so @xmath is an
integer. As @xmath is even, it follows that @xmath is also even. ∎

Recall that in Section 4.4 , we make use of the results in Lemmas 7.2.1
and 7.2.2 to construct two examples of arc-transitive homogeneous
factorisations @xmath of complete graphs where the group @xmath . They
are the infinite examples of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations
(where @xmath is the one-dimensional affine group) that correspond to
the generalised Paley partition @xmath and the twisted generalised Paley
partition @xmath (see Propositions 4.4.2 and 4.4.4 ). ¹ ¹ 1 Note that
the approach in the proofs for Propositions 4.4.2 and 4.4.4 are
essentially the same as that found in the proof of Theorem 7.1.9 . The
arc-transitive factors are respectively called the generalised Paley
graphs and twisted generalised Paley graphs. For completeness, we shall
repeat the definitions of these graphs here.

(Generalised Paley graph) Let @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be an
integer which divides @xmath and is such that, if @xmath is odd, then
@xmath is even. Let @xmath be a fixed primitive element in @xmath . The
graph @xmath is the Cayley graph @xmath with connecting set @xmath and
is called a generalised Paley graph with respect to @xmath .

(Twisted generalised Paley graph and partition) Again, let @xmath and
@xmath be as previously defined and @xmath be a primitive element in
@xmath . Let @xmath be an even integer and @xmath (mod 4). Let @xmath be
an odd integer such that @xmath . Let @xmath (observe that @xmath even
and @xmath imply that @xmath ). The twisted generalised Paley graph ,
denoted as @xmath , with respect to @xmath is the Cayley graph @xmath .

We also recall that both of the above graphs are undirected, and a
generalised Paley graph @xmath admits @xmath as an subgroup of
automorphisms; while a twisted generalised Paley graph @xmath admits
@xmath as a subgroup of automorphisms.

Furthermore, if @xmath , then @xmath is the familiar Paley graph with
full automorphism group @xmath (see for example [ 50 ] ). If @xmath ,
then the @xmath is the self-complementary, arc-transitive graph, called
the @xmath -graph, studied by Peisert in [ 50 , Section 3] . Also in [
50 ] , it was proved that in general, except for one case (see Lemma
7.2.3 below), @xmath (note that @xmath ) is not isomorphic to @xmath
(where @xmath ).

###### Lemma 7.2.3.

[ 50 , Lemma 6.4] Suppose @xmath . Then @xmath .

We shall later show that the for @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath is odd), the
twisted generalised Paley graphs are not isomorphic to the generalised
Paley graphs.

### 7.3 Non-isomorphism

Let @xmath be a twisted generalised Paley graph where @xmath and @xmath
(mod 4). Recall that from the definition of twisted generalised Paley
graphs, @xmath is an odd integer, @xmath and @xmath is even (so @xmath
). Also, @xmath has valency equal to @xmath (see Proposition 4.4.4 ).
Suppose @xmath is isomorphic to a generalised Paley graph @xmath . Then
we must have @xmath and so it follows that @xmath . As @xmath , it
follows that @xmath . Now we can invoke Theorem 3.1.8 which we proved in
Chapter 3 .

Suppose @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is even (since @xmath is defined
for even @xmath ). The case where @xmath has already been resolved by
Peisert in [ 50 ] . Thus in our proof we shall assume that @xmath . Then
since @xmath is even and @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath . We will
use Theorem 3.1.8 to arrive at a contradiction, and hence show that, for
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Note that @xmath . Since we assume @xmath , then @xmath is
permutationally isomorphic to a subgroup of @xmath (when applying
Theorem 3.1.8 since @xmath ). In particular, @xmath is permutationally
isomorphic to a subgroup of @xmath in its action on @xmath .

###### Theorem 7.3.1.

For @xmath even, @xmath @xmath mod @xmath , and @xmath odd such that
@xmath , @xmath except for the case @xmath , when we have @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 7.2.3 , @xmath . Assume now that @xmath and that @xmath . Then
as discussed above, the stabiliser @xmath is permutation isomorphic to a
subgroup @xmath of @xmath in its action on @xmath . Moreover we have
@xmath and hence @xmath is an odd permutation. Since @xmath is odd,
@xmath and @xmath are even permutations while @xmath is an odd
permutation.

Suppose first that @xmath is an odd permutation. Then @xmath consists
entirely of even permutations. It follows that @xmath is contained in
@xmath . Now @xmath has order @xmath which equals @xmath . Hence @xmath
. Consider the case where @xmath . Then @xmath becomes @xmath (since
@xmath for @xmath ) which is abelian. Thus @xmath (permutationally
isomorphic to @xmath ) is also abelian and so we must have @xmath . It
follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This implies that @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath . So @xmath ,
which is only possible when @xmath . However, this contradicts the fact
that we have @xmath .

Next consider the case when @xmath . Let @xmath be a @xmath of @xmath
(note that @xmath is odd, and @xmath exists since @xmath and @xmath ,
see Definition 3.5.5 ). Since @xmath is divisible by @xmath and @xmath
(because @xmath , see [ 24 , Remark 1.1 (a)] ), it follows that @xmath
has a unique cyclic Sylow @xmath -subgroup @xmath such that @xmath .
Thus @xmath also has a unique (cyclic) Sylow @xmath -subgroup contained
in @xmath , say @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath conjugates a generator of
@xmath to its @xmath th power. Hence some element of @xmath also
conjugates an element of @xmath to its @xmath th power. Let @xmath where
@xmath for some @xmath . Let @xmath be such that @xmath . Now @xmath for
some @xmath and @xmath . So

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It follows that @xmath . However, this contradicts the fact that @xmath
(by definition of @xmath , since @xmath ).

Now suppose that @xmath is an even permutation. Then @xmath consists
entirely of even permutations. However, @xmath is an odd permutation,
and as @xmath is permutationally isomorphic to @xmath for which all
elements are even permutations, we again have a contradiction. Thus
@xmath . ∎

To conclude this chapter, we have shown in Theorem 7.3.1 that the class
of generalised Paley graphs and the class of twisted generalised Paley
graphs have exactly one graph in common. This implies that the
corresponding partitions (the generalised Paley partition @xmath and the
twisted generalised Paley partition @xmath ) give rise to two infinite
and different families of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations of
complete graphs. It would be interesting to find if there are any other
infinite examples of arc-transitive homogeneous factorisations @xmath
where @xmath (see Problem 7.1.12 ).

## Appendix: Computations using MAGMA

This chapter contains some Magma codes that were used for computations
required in the thesis. Although not all the codes used for performing
our computations are written here, we provide examples that sufficiently
illustrate how the rest of results may be obtained (see especially
Sections A3 and A4 ). We also note that the codes presented here are by
no means the most efficient, but merely written to serve their purposes.
Lastly, the version of Magma being used is V2.9-21.

### A1: MAGMA code for constructing an orbital graph

To construct an @xmath -orbital graph given a permutation group @xmath
(or            PermGp           in Magma ).

    > Stab_M:=Stabilizer(M,1);
    //Construct the point-stabiliser Stab_M of "1" in M.
    //(Note that M acts on the set {1,2,....,n} where n is the degree of M.)

    > Set:=Orbit(M,2);
    //Construct the orbit of Stab_M containing the point "2".

    > O:=OrbitalGraph(M,1,Set);
    //Construct an M-orbital graph containing the edge {1,2}.

    > A:=AutomorphismGroup(O);
    //Determine full automorphism group of the orbital graph O.

### A2: MAGMA code for Remark 4.2.2

    > Num:=NumberOfPrimitiveGroups(28);
    > for i:= 1 to Num by 1 do;
        > G:=PrimitiveGroup(28,i);
        > if #G eq 504 then;
            > print i;
            > end if;
        > end for;
    2
    //Thus there is only one primitive group: PrimitiveGroup(28,2),
    //of degree 28 with order 504.
    > G:=PrimitiveGroup(28,2);
    > StabG:=Stabilizer(G,1);
    > Orbits(StabG);
    [
        GSet{ 1 },
        GSet{ 2, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 15, 19, 27 },
        GSet{ 3, 6, 10, 11, 17, 22, 23, 24, 25 },
        GSet{ 4, 5, 14, 16, 18, 20, 21, 26, 28 }
    ]
    > Set:=Orbit(StabG,2);
    > O:=OrbitalGraph(G,1,Set);
    > A:=AutomorphismGroup(O);
    > #A;
    504
    //Evaluating the order of the group A.
    > Num:=#Subgroups(A: IsRegular:=true);
    //Compute the number of regular subgroups on 28 points in A.
    > Num;
    0
    //Thus, there is no regular subgroup on 28 points in A.

### A3: MAGMA codes used for computing Tables 5.1 and 5.2

#### A3-1

The             PFind(G,H)            function below enables us to
“locate” either @xmath or @xmath in @xmath where @xmath is as in case
@xmath of Theorem 2.2.1 (see Section 5.2 ). Note that
            G            @xmath and             H            @xmath or
@xmath . Also, if the function returns a warning “
            More than one                        group            ”,
then our             PFind(G,H)            function fails. For our
investigation in Section 5.2 , the function always returns the desired
group we are seeking.

    > function PFind(G,H);
    //G:=PGammaL(2,q) and H:=PSL(2,5) or PSL(2,3).
    > j:=1;
    > h:=[];
    > k:=[];
    > Sub:=Subgroups(G: OrderEqual:= #H);
    //Locating subgroups of G with order equal |H|.
    > for i:= 1 to #Sub by 1 do;
        > k[i]:=Sub[i]‘subgroup;
        > ISM:=IsIsomorphic(k[i],H);
    //Determine if a subgroup k[i] is isomorphic to H=PSL(2,5) or PSL(2,3).
        > if ISM eq true then;
            > Norm:=Normalizer(G,k[i]);
    //Compute the normaliser Norm of H=PSL(2,5) or PSL(2,3) in G=PGammaL(2,q).
            > TN:=IsTransitive(Norm);
    //Check if Norm is transitive on the set of 1-spaces of V=V(2,q).
            > if TN eq true then;
                > h[j]:=k[i];
                > j:=j+1;
                > end if;
            > end if;
        > end for;
    > if j eq 2 then;
        > return h[j-1];
    //If there is only one group (up to conjugacy classes) in G that is
    //isomorphic to H, and that the normaliser of H in G is transitive on
    //the set of 1-spaces, then the function returns H as a subgroup of G.
        > else
        > return "More than one group";
    //If there are 2 or more groups in G isomorphic to H with the desired
    //property described earlier, then the function returns a warning.
        > end if;
    > end function;

#### A3-2

We give examples on how some results in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 are obtained
by using the             PFind            function.

Example A3-2(i) : We will show that @xmath in @xmath is transitive on
the set of 1-spaces of @xmath (see Table 5.1 ).

    > g:=PGammaL(2,9);
    > h:=PSL(2,5);
    > D:=PFind(g,h);
    > ISM:=IsIsomorphic(D,PSL(2,5));
    //Check to see if D is isomorphic to PSL(2,5).
    > ISM;
    true
    > IsTransitive(D);
    true
    //PSL(2,5) in PGammaL(2,9) is transitive in the set of 1-spaces.

Example A3-2(ii) : We will show that @xmath in @xmath has 3 orbits of
length 2 in the 1-spaces of @xmath (see line 1 of Table 5.2 ). Note that
we utilised the fact that @xmath has orbits of equal length in the set
of 1-spaces (since it is normal in @xmath which acts transitively on the
1-spaces).

    > g:=PGL(2,5);
    > h:=PSL(2,3);
    > D:=PFind(g,h);
    > D;
    > ISM:=IsIsomorphic(D,PSL(2,3));
    //Check to see if D is isomorphic to PSL(2,3).
    > ISM;
    true
    > N:=Normalizer(g,D);
    //Construct the normaliser N of PSL(2,3) in PGL(2,5).
    > Sub:=Subgroups(N: IsElementaryAbelian:=true, OrderEqual:=4);
    > Sub;
    Conjugacy classes of subgroups
    ------------------------------
    [1]     Order 4            Length 1
            Permutation group acting on a set of cardinality 6
            Order = 4 = 2^2
                (2, 3)(4, 5)
                (1, 6)(4, 5)
    [2]     Order 4            Length 3
            Permutation group acting on a set of cardinality 6
            Order = 4 = 2^2
                (1, 6)(2, 4)(3, 5)
                (2, 3)(4, 5)
    > V4_1:=Sub[1]‘subgroup;
    > V4_2:=Sub[2]‘subgroup;
    //Setting V4_1 and V4_2 to be the above two elementary abelian
    //subgroups of order 4.
    > Orbits(V4_1);
    [
        GSet{ 1, 6 },
        GSet{ 2, 3 },
        GSet{ 4, 5 }
    ]
    > Orbits(V4_2);
    [
        GSet{ 1, 6 },
        GSet{ 2, 3, 4, 5 }
    ]
    //Thus the group V4_1 is the desired group and has 3 orbits of length 2.

### A4: MAGMA codes used for computing Tables 5.3 and 5.4

#### A4-1

The             Find(G,H,q)            function below enables us to
“locate” either @xmath or @xmath in @xmath where @xmath is as in case
@xmath of Theorem 2.2.1 (see also Section 5.2 ). Note that if the
function returns “
            This function does not work for           
            your case            ”, then we will have to look at the
case separately. However, for our investigation in Section 5.2 , the
            FindGroup            function always return the group that
we are seeking.

    > function Find(G,H,q);
    //To determine T:SL(2,5) or T:SL(2,3) in AGammaL(2,q), where T is
    //the translation group acting on V(2,q). Note that the input is
    //G:= AGammaL(2,q) and H:=SL(2,5) or SL(2,3). (Note that G and H must
    //be permutation groups on V(2,q)).
    > StG:=Stabilizer(G,1);
    > Set:=Orbit(StG,2);
    > j:=0;
    > n:=#H * q^2;
    //Computing the order of T:H (where H=SL(2,5) or SL(2,3)) in G.
    //Also, we let n :=|T:H|.
    > Sub:=Subgroups(G: OrderEqual:=n);
    //Finding subgroups (up to conjugacy classes) of order n=|T:H| in G.
    > for i:= 1 to #Sub by 1 do;
        > A:=Sub[i]‘subgroup;
        > StA:=Stabilizer(A,1);
        > T:=IsIsomorphic(StA,H);
    //Determine if the subgroup A is isomorphic to the desired group T:H
    //in AGammaL(2,q).
        > if T eq true then;
            > N:=Normalizer(StG,StA);
            > TN:=IsTransitive(N,Set);
    //Determine if the the normaliser of A in G is 2-transitive.
    //If yes, then j will acquire a value of 1 or more.
            > if TN eq true then;
                > j:=j+1;
                > Q:=A;
                > end if;
            > end if;
        > end for;
    > if j eq 1 then;
        > return Q;
    //If j=1, then there is only 1 group (T:SL(2,5) or T:SL(2,3)) in
    //AGammaL(2,q) with the desired property. The function will then
    //return the group that we want, that is, Q=T:SL(2,5) or T:SL(2,3).
        > else
    //Note that if j is greater than 1, then this means that there
    //are more than 1 group with the desired properties. In that case,
    //the function will return a warning (see below).
        > return "This function does not work for your case.";
        > end if;
    > end function;

#### A4-2

The             Gen(G,H)            function below enables us to
generate all possible @xmath (and @xmath ) in @xmath (and @xmath ). Note
that @xmath , where @xmath is as in case @xmath of Theorem 2.2.1 (see
Section 5.2 ). Also, @xmath is normal in @xmath and @xmath contains
either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath (see Lemmas 5.2.1 and 5.2.3 ). The
function also determines the orders of @xmath and @xmath , and computes
the number of @xmath -orbits in @xmath (where @xmath ). See Tables 5.3
and 5.4 .

    > function Gen(G,H);
    //To determine all possible M_0 and M. Note that the input is H:=SL(2,5)
    //or SL(2,3), and G is the normalizer of T:SL(2,5) or T:SL(2,3) in
    //AGammaL(2,q) (where T:SL(2,5) or T:SL(2,3) in AGammaL(2,q) is determined
    //by the Find(G,H,q) function).
    > j:=1;
    > h:=[];
    > sh:=[];
    > k:=[];
    > sk:=[];
    > w:=[];
    > StG:=Stabilizer(G,1);
    > Set:=Orbit(StG,2);
    > Sub:=Subgroups(G: IsTransitive:=true);
    //Find all transitive subgroups of G.
    > for i:= 1 to #Sub by 1 do;
        > k[i]:=Sub[i]‘subgroup;
        > sk[i]:=Stabilizer(k[i],1);
        > T:=IsTransitive(k[i],2);
    //Get rid of the subgroups of G that are 2-transitive.
        > if T eq false then;
            > TC:=IsCyclic(sk[i]);
    //Get rid of the subgroups of G whose point-stabilisers are scalars.
            > if TC eq false then;
                > Norm:=Normalizer(G,k[i]);
                > sNorm:=Stabilizer(Norm,1);
                > TN:=IsTransitive(Norm,2);
    //Get rid of the subgroups of G whose normalisers (sNorm) in G
    //are not 2-transitive.
                > if TN eq true then;
                    > SubsNorm:=Subgroups(sNorm: OrderEqual:=#H);
    //Determine the subgroups of sNorm with same order as the group H,
    //where H=SL(2,5) or SL(2,3).
                    > for y:= 1 to #SubsNorm by 1 do;
                        > A:=SubsNorm[y]‘subgroup;
                        > TNN:=IsIsomorphic(A,H);
    //Determine if sNorm contains subgroups isomorphic to H.
                        > if TNN eq true then;
                            > h[j]:=k[i];
                            > sh[j]:=sk[i];
                            > w[j]:=i;
    //Note that w[j]=i tells us the "group number" of k[i] in
    //"Sub:=Subgroups(G: IsTransitive:=true);" (see Example 4(i)).
                            > j:=j+1;
                            > end if;
                        > end for;
                    > end if;
                > end if;
            > end if;
        > end for;
    > for c:= 1 to j-1 by 1 do;
            > print c, "(i)=", w[c], " Order of M=", #h[c],
    " Order of M_0=", #sh[c], " No. of orbits in V^*=", #Orbits(sh[c],Set);
        > end for;
    > return "================";
    > end function;

#### A4-3

The             GPaley(p,R,k)            function below enables us to
construct a generalised Paley graph @xmath with given parameters
(integers) @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

    > function GPaley(p,R,k);
    > G:=AGL(1,p^R);
    > StG:=Stabilizer(G,1);
    > Set:=Orbit(StG,2);
    > Order:=(p^R-1)/k;
    //This the the order of the group <w^k> (see definition of
    //generalised Paley graphs).
    > j:=0;
    > h:=[];
    > sh:=[];
    > k:=[];
    > sk:=[];
    > O:=[];
    > SubG:=Subgroups(G: IsTransitive:=true);
    //Find all subgroups of G=AGammaL(1,p^R) that are transitive.
    > for i:= 1 to #SubG by 1 do;
        > k[i]:=SubG[i]‘subgroup;
        > sk[i]:=Stabilizer(k[i],1);
        > if #sk[i] eq Order then;
    //Check if the point stabiliser of k[i] (a transitive subgroup of G)
    //has the same order as that of <w^k>.
            > TS:=IsSemiregular(sk[i],Set);\
            > if TS eq true then;
    //Check if sk[i] acts semiregularly on V^* (since <w^k> acts
    //semiregularly on V^*). If yes, then j will acquire a value of 1 or more
                > h[j]:=k[i];
                > sh[j]:=sk[i];
                > SetO:=Orbit(sk[i],2);
                > O[j]:=OrbitalGraph(k[i],1,SetO);
    //Construct the orbital graph using the group k[i].
                > j:=j+1;
                > end if;
            > end if;
        > end for;
    > if j eq 1 then;
        > return O[j-1];
    //If j=1 (that is, only one graph is constructed and there is only
    //one group in AGammaL(1,p^R) whose point stabiliser has the same
    //properties as that of <w^k>) then the function returns the
    //desired graph.
        > else
        > return "More than 2 graphs.";
    //This happens only when the function fails. However for our
    //investigation, we always get the desired graph.
        > end if;
    > end function;

#### A4-4

We will show by giving examples on how the functions
            Find(G,H,q)            ,             Gen(G,H)            and
            GPaley(p,R,k)            are used to give us the results in
Tables 5.3 and 5.4 .

Example A4-4(i) : Line @xmath of Table 5.3 ( @xmath ).

    > g:=AGammaL(2,9);
    > h:=Stabilizer(ASL(2,5),1);
    > D:=Find(g,h,9);
    > #D;
    9720
    > N:=Normalizer(g,D);
    //Compute the normaliser of T:SL(2,5) in AGammaL(2,9).
    > Gen(N,h);
    1 (i)= 100  Order of M= 9720  Order of M_0= 120  No. of orbits in V^*= 2
    //Note that the "(i) = 100" tells us that M is the #100 group
    //in "Subgroups(N: IsTransitive:=true)".
    2 (i)= 107  Order of M= 19440  Order of M_0= 240  No. of orbits in V^*= 2
    3 (i)= 111  Order of M= 38880  Order of M_0= 480  No. of orbits in V^*= 2
    ================
    > Sub:=Subgroups(N: IsTransitive:=true);
    > M111:=Sub[111]‘subgroup;
    //We are letting M111 be the #111 group in
    //"Subgroups(N: IsTransitive:=true)".
    > M100:=Sub[100]‘subgroup;
    > M107:=Sub[107]‘subgroup;
    > sM100:=Stabilizer(M111,1);
    > sM100:=Stabilizer(M100,1);
    > sM107:=Stabilizer(M107,1);
    > Set111:=Orbit(sM111,2);
    > Set100:=Orbit(sM100,2);
    > Set107:=Orbit(sM107,2);
    > OG111:=OrbitalGraph(M111,1,Set111);
    > OG100:=OrbitalGraph(M100,1,Set100);
    > OG107:=OrbitalGraph(M107,1,Set107);
    //Constructing the orbital graphs of M111, M100 and M107,
    //that is, the M-orbital graphs where M=M111, M100 or M107.
    > IsIsomorphic(OG100,OG107);
    true
    > IsIsomorphic(OG111,OG107);
    true
    //So all 3 orbital graphs are isomorphic to one another.
    //The next step is to show that the orbital graphs just constructed
    //are isomorphic to a corresponding TGPaley graph. We note that this
    //TGPaley graph is self-complementary (since index k=2) and admits
    //T:<w^4,wa> as an arc-transitive subgroup of automorphisms (see relevant
    //section on the TGPaley graphs). Also <w^4,wa> has a cyclic normal
    //subgroup <w^4> of order 20 such that the quotient <w^4,wa>/<w^4> is a
    //cyclic subgroup of order 4. Moreover, <w^4,wa> has 2 orbits of equal
    //length in V^*. We will make use of all these facts in our construction
    //of the required TGPaley graph.
    > G:=AGammaL(1,81);
    > subG:=Subgroups(G: OrderEqual:=6480);
    //Note that |T:<w^4,wa>|=81*80=6480.
    > for i:=1 to #subG by 1 do;
        > A:=subG[i]‘subgroup;
        > sA:=Stabilizer(A,1);
        > TC:=IsCyclic(sA);
        > if TC eq false then;
    //Since <w^4,wa> is not cyclic.
            > num:=#Orbits(sA);
            > if num eq 3 then;
    //Since <w^4,wa> has 2 orbits in V^* (or 3 orbits in V).
                > subA:=CyclicSubgroups(A: OrderEqual:=20);
    //Since <w^4,wa> has a cyclic subgroup of order 20.
                > k:=#subA;
                > if k ge 1 then;
                    > print i;
                    > end if;
                > end if;
            > end if;
        > end for;
    1
    5
    //Thus groups #1 and #5 are possible candidates for T:<w^4,wa>.
    > nsA1:=NormalSubgroups(sA1: IsCyclic:=true, OrderEqual:=20);
    > nsA5:=NormalSubgroups(sA5: IsCyclic:=true, OrderEqual:=20);
    //We make use of the fact that <w^4> is cyclic and normal in <w^4,wa>.
    > #nsA1;
    1
    > #nsA5;
    1
    > N1:=nsA1[1]‘subgroup;
    > N5:=nsA5[1]‘subgroup;
    > F1:=sA1/N1;
    > F5:=sA5/N1;
    //Taking quotients. Note that <w^4,wa>/<w^4> is a cyclic
    //subgroup of order 4.
    > #F1;
    4
    > #F5;
    4
    > IsCyclic(F1);
    false
    > IsCyclic(F5);
    true
    //Thus A5 is our desired group T:<w^4,wa>.
    > SetO:=Orbit(sA5,2);
    > OT:=OrbitalGraph(A5,1,SetO);
    //Constructing the corresponding TGPaley graph.
    > IsIsomorphic(OG111,OT);
    true
    //This shows that the 3 orbital graphs (OG111, OG100, OG107) are
    //isomorphic to a TGPaley graph.

Example A4-4(ii) : Lines @xmath of Table 5.4 ( @xmath and @xmath ).

    > g:=AGL(2,7);
    > h:=Stabilizer(ASL(2,3),1);
    > D:=Find(g,h,7);
    > #D;
    1176
    > N:=Normalizer(g,D);
    > Gen(N,h);
    1 (i)= 12  Order of M= 392  Order of M_0 = 8  No. of orbits in V^*= 6
    2 (i)= 20  Order of M= 1176  Order of M_0 = 24  No. of orbits in V^*= 2
    3 (i)= 21  Order of M= 1176  Order of M_0 = 24  No. of orbits in V^*= 2
    4 (i)= 28  Order of M= 3528  Order of M_0 = 72  No. of orbits in V^*= 2
    =====================
    > Sub:=Subgroups(N: IsTransitive:=true);
    > s12:=Sub[12]‘subgroup;
    > s20:=Sub[20]‘subgroup;
    > s21:=Sub[21]‘subgroup;
    > s28:=Sub[28]‘subgroup;
    > Set12:=Orbit(Stabilizer(s12,1),2);
    > Set20:=Orbit(Stabilizer(s20,1),2);
    > Set21:=Orbit(Stabilizer(s21,1),2);
    > Set28:=Orbit(Stabilizer(s28,1),2);
    > O12:=OrbitalGraph(s12,1,Set12);
    > O20:=OrbitalGraph(s20,1,Set20);
    > O21:=OrbitalGraph(s21,1,Set21);
    > O28:=OrbitalGraph(s28,1,Set28);
    > IsIsomorphic(O20,O21);
    true
    > IsIsomorphic(O20,O28);
    true
    //Thus the graphs O20, O21 and O28 are pair-wise isomorphic.
    //Note that by using the same approach as in Example 4(i), it can
    //also be shown that they are all TGPaley graphs.

Example A4-4(iii) : Test for isomorphism in Line @xmath of Table 5.4 (
@xmath ).

    > O:=GPaley(11,2,5);
    //Construct generalised Paley graph with p=11, R=2, k=5.
    > A:=AutomorphismGroup(O);
    > A;
    Permutation group A acting on a set of cardinality 121
    Order = 5808 = 2^4 * 3 * 11^2
    > g:=AGL(2,11);
    > h:=Stabilizer(ASL(2,3),1);
    > D:=Find(g,h,11);
    > #D;
    2904
    > N:=Normalizer(g,D);
    > #N;
    29040
    > Gen(N,h);
    1 (i)= 14   Order of M= 968   Order of M_0 = 8   No. of orbits in V^*= 15
    2 (i)= 24   Order of M= 2904   Order of M_0 = 24   No. of orbits in V^*= 5
    3 (i)= 25   Order of M= 4840   Order of M_0 = 40   No. of orbits in V^*= 3
    4 (i)= 29   Order of M= 5808   Order of M_0 = 48   No. of orbits in V^*= 5
    =====================
    > SUB:=Subgroups(N: IsTransitive:=true);
    > M24:=SUB[24]‘subgroup;
    //Let M24 be the #24 group in
    //"Subgroups(N: IsTransitive:=true)".
    > M29:=SUB[29]‘subgroup;
    > Set24:=Orbit(Stabilizer(M24,1),2);
    > Set29:=Orbit(Stabilizer(M29,1),2);
    > O24:=OrbitalGraph(M24,1,Set24);
    > O29:=OrbitalGraph(M29,1,Set29);
    > ISM:=IsIsomorphic(O24,O29);
    > ISM;
    true
    //This shows that the orbital graphs for M24 and M29 are isomorphic.
    > ISM:=IsIsomorphic(O,O29);
    > ISM;
    false
    //This shows that the orbital graphs for M24 and M29 are not isomorphic
    //to a GPaley graph with corresponding parameters. We do not need to
    //check if they are isomorphic to a TGPaley graphs since the index k of
    //the homogeneous factorisation is odd (homogeneous factorisation into
    //TGPaley graphs always has even index).

Example A4-4(iv) : To show that the orbital graph ( @xmath ) in Line
@xmath of Table 5.4 is isomorphic to a @xmath -orbital graph where
@xmath . (We can employ a similar approach for Line @xmath of Table 5.4
( @xmath )).

    > g:=AGL(2,23);
    > h:=ASL(2,3);
    > SL:=Stabilizer(h,1);
    > D:=Find(g,h,23);
    > #D;
    12696
    > N:=Normalizer(g,D);
    > Gen(N,SL);
    1 (i)= 10  Order of M= 4232  Order of M_0= 8  No. of orbits in V^*= 66
    2 (i)= 18  Order of M= 12696  Order of M_0= 24  No. of orbits in V^*= 22
    3 (i)= 19  Order of M= 46552  Order of M_0= 88  No. of orbits in V^*= 6
    4 (i)= 23  Order of M= 25392  Order of M_0= 48  No. of orbits in V^*= 11
    5 (i)= 25  Order of M= 139656  Order of M_0= 264  No. of orbits in V^*= 2
    ================
    >
    > Sub:=Subgroups(N: IsTransitive:=true);
    > M19:=Sub[19]‘subgroup;
    //Note that our desired group has 6 orbits in V^*.
    > sM19:=Stabilizer(M19,1);
    > Set19:=Orbit(sM19,2);
    > O19:=OrbitalGraph(M19,1,Set19);
    > A19:=AutomorphismGroup(O19);
    > #A19;
    46552
    //Computing the full automorphism group of O19 (or the graph G(23^2,6)).
    > OGP:=GPaley(23,2,6);
    //Constructing the corresponding GPaley graph (note that we do not need
    //to consider the TGPaley case; see explanation in Section 5.2.1).
    > IsIsomorphic(O19,OGP);
    false
    //Thus our orbital graph is not a generalised Paley graph.
    > G:=AGammaL(1,23^2);
    > SubG:=Subgroups(G: OrderEqual:=46552);
    //We want to find a subgroup of AGammaL(1,23^2) that has the same
    //order as the full automorphism group of O19, whose point stabiliser
    //is non-cyclic (since the graph is non-GPaley) and has 6 orbits in V^*.
    > for i:= 1 to #SubG by 1 do;
        > A:=SubG[i]‘subgroup;
        > sA:=Stabilizer(A,1);
        > TC:=IsCyclic(sA);
        > if TC eq false then;
            > num:=#Orbits(sA);
            > if num eq 7 then;
                > print i;
                > end if;
            > end if;
        > end for;
    3
    > A:=SubG[3]‘subgroup;
    > sA:=Stabilizer(A,1);
    > #Orbit(sA,2);
    88
    > Set:=Orbit(sA,2);
    > OA:=OrbitalGraph(A,1,Set);
    > IsIsomorphic(O19,OA);
    true
    //Thus O19 (or the graph G(23^2,6)) is isomorphic to a K-orbital graph
    //where K < AGammaL(1,23^2).