# 1 Introduction

Although there exists a theory of differential geometry of
supermanifolds ² ² 2 There exist various versions of supergeometry; the
formalism we use is the sheaf-theoretic approach by Berezin, Kostant and
Leites [ Ber 1987 ] , [ Kost 1975 ] , [ Lei 1980 ] . – see Deligne and
Morgan [ DelMor 1999 ] , Schmitt [ Schm 1984 ] or Varadarajan [ Var 2004
] – a notion of Riemannian metric for supermanifolds only seldom occurs
in the literature. More precisely, beyond the existence of a Levi-Civita
connection – see Monterde and Sánchez-Valenzuela [ MonSan 1996 ] – no
general theory of Riemannian supermanifolds is available.

The motivation for the development of such a theory came from the
physicists: in 1996, Zirnbauer [ Zir 1996 ] defined Riemannian symmetric
superspaces to be a quotient of complex Lie supergroups, together with
some distinguished Riemannian symmetric space embedded into the
underlying manifold.

Our aim is to give a definition of these objects similar to the standard
theory, namely as Riemannian supermanifolds with a symmetry property,
and afterwards recognize them as special homogeneous superspaces. But
before that, various fundamental concepts have to be introduced and
studied, e.g. geodesics, isometry groups and invariant metrics on Lie
supergroups and homogeneous superspaces.

It is to be mentioned that the non-linear theory developed in this
thesis already has some infinitesimal counterpart in the mathematical
literature; for example, Cortés [ Cor 2003 ] defines a notion of
infinitesimal pseudo-Riemannian symmetric superspace, and Serganova [
Ser 1983 ] lists up involutive automorphisms of the simple Lie
superalgebras over @xmath and @xmath .

In the sections 2 and 3 we review the basics of differential
supergeometry and Lie supergroups; we assume some familiarity with
linear superalgebra, see e.g. Varadarajan [ Var 2004 ] or Deligne and
Morgan [ DelMor 1999 ] .

Acknowledgements. This paper essentially is my thesis which I wrote
under the supervision of G. Thorbergsson at the University of Cologne.
He deserves my gratitude for the constantly encouraging support during
the last years.

## 2 Foundations of Supergeometry

### 2.1 Supermanifolds and their Morphisms

The model in the category of supermanifolds is the space @xmath , which
is by definition the ringed space consisting of the topological space
@xmath and the sheaf of super @xmath -algebras @xmath .

A supermanifold (graded manifold) of dimension @xmath is a ringed space
@xmath , where @xmath is a topological space (Hausdorff, countable base)
and the structural sheaf @xmath is a sheaf of super @xmath -algebras
with unity, locally isomorphic to @xmath . Sections of the structural
sheaf are referred to as superfunctions on @xmath ; if there is no
danger of confusion, we simply call them functions .

Let @xmath and @xmath be supermanifolds. A morphism @xmath is a morphism
of ringed spaces: @xmath , where @xmath is a continuous map between the
underlying topological spaces and @xmath is a morphism of sheaves of
@xmath -super algebras with unity. The morphism is not determined by the
map between the topological spaces; nevertheless, the map on global
sections @xmath determines the whole morphism, i.e. @xmath and @xmath ,
cf. [ Kost 1975 ] , p. 208.

The nilpotent functions define an ideal sheaf @xmath of @xmath , and the
ringed space @xmath is a differentiable manifold. We call it the reduced
or underlying manifold or the support of @xmath . The quotient map
@xmath defines a morphism @xmath sending a superfunction @xmath on
@xmath to a smooth function @xmath on the reduced manifold. The value of
a superfunction @xmath at some point @xmath is defined to be @xmath ,
which coincides with the unique real number @xmath such that @xmath is
not invertible as an element of the stalk @xmath ; sometimes, we simply
write @xmath for the value of @xmath of @xmath although this might be
misleading – since @xmath is not determined by all its values,
associating to @xmath the function sending @xmath to @xmath is not an
injective mapping. Hence, this does not provide us with a realization of
@xmath as a sheaf of ordinary real-valued functions.

If @xmath is such that @xmath and coordinates @xmath of the reduced
manifold on @xmath are given, then we call @xmath coordinates of @xmath
on @xmath . Note that our convention is to give roman indices for even
(here: the even coordinates @xmath ) and greek indices for odd objects
(here: the odd coordinates @xmath ) – this will be convenient for
notation purposes. However, if no distinction between even and odd
coordinates is necessary, we simply write @xmath .

A supermanifold of dimension @xmath is an ordinary differentiable
manifold of dimension @xmath , so at any time we may (and should) test
the soundness of our theory by setting @xmath .

One way of constructing examples of supermanifolds is the following: If
@xmath is an ordinary differentiable manifold and @xmath a vector
bundle, then @xmath is a supermanifold, where @xmath is the sheaf of
sections of the exterior bundle @xmath . Note that @xmath possesses a
natural @xmath -grading; in regarding it as the structural sheaf of a
supermanifold, we retain only the induced @xmath -grading. Although the
Theorem of Batchelor [ Bat 1979 ] asserts that every supermanifold over
a differentiable manifold @xmath is isomorphic to one constructed in
this way from some vector bundle over @xmath , we prefer the definition
given above since this isomorphism is non-canonical.

### 2.2 Tangent Sheaf and Vector Fields

For a super @xmath -algebra @xmath , we give the endomorphisms @xmath of
@xmath the structure of a super vector space via the natural grading

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that a homogeneous element @xmath is a homogeneous derivation if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , where for a homogeneous element @xmath of some graded
object, @xmath denotes the parity of @xmath . An element @xmath is a
derivation if its homogeneous components are homogeneous derivations.

If @xmath is a supermanifold of dimension @xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the @xmath -super module of derivations of @xmath . For @xmath there is
a natural restriction map @xmath turning @xmath into a sheaf of @xmath
-super modules, see [ Schm 1984 ] , p.160. The @xmath -module @xmath is
locally free of dimension @xmath , cf. [ DelMor 1999 ] , @xmath . The
sections of @xmath are called vector fields . We will refer to @xmath
itself either as the tangent sheaf or the tangent bundle of the
supermanifold @xmath ; this is not too much abuse of language, as is
pointed out in [ DelMor 1999 ] , @xmath

On @xmath we have a bracket @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It satisfies the graded Jacobi identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus turns @xmath into a Lie superalgebra.

For every point @xmath of @xmath , the tangent space @xmath of @xmath at
@xmath is defined to be the space of derivations @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the stalk of @xmath at @xmath . For @xmath , there is a
natural mapping @xmath sending a vector field @xmath to its value @xmath
at @xmath ; nevertheless, a vector field is not determined by its values
at all points. The tangent spaces are the fibres of a bundle @xmath of
rank @xmath which canonically splits as the direct sum of the tangent
bundle of the reduced manifold, @xmath , and a bundle @xmath with the
odd parts of the tangent spaces as fibres. For a vector field @xmath on
@xmath , we denote by @xmath the associated section of @xmath .

The cotangent bundle of a supermanifold @xmath is by definition the dual
@xmath of @xmath . As in [ DelMor 1999 ] , we will write the duality
pairing between the tangent and cotangent bundle as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath for @xmath . Then, as usual, we define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A vector field along a morphism @xmath on @xmath is a morphism of super
vector spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that its homogeneous components satisfy the derivation property

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , cf. [ CarFig 1997 ] . The set of such vector fields
will be denoted by @xmath and the corresponding sheaf of vector fields
along @xmath by @xmath .

There are two standard ways of constructing vector fields along @xmath :
If @xmath is a vector field on @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a vector field along @xmath ; a vector field @xmath on @xmath yields
one by attaching @xmath on the other side: we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is a diffeomorphism, we often use the same notation for the
vector field @xmath on @xmath .

If @xmath is a morphism of supermanifolds, then we have induced linear
maps @xmath . We call @xmath an immersion at @xmath if @xmath is
injective, and a submersion at @xmath if @xmath is surjective. See [ Var
2004 ] , p.148 for the local structure of immersions and submersions.

The sheaf @xmath is a locally free sheaf of @xmath -modules over @xmath
of the same rank as @xmath . More precisely, if @xmath are local
coordinates on @xmath , then @xmath is a basis of @xmath : any @xmath
can be written uniquely as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath [ CarFig 1997 ] . Note that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all vector fields @xmath on @xmath .

## 3 Lie Supergroups

### 3.1 Lie Supergroups and their Lie Superalgebras

A Lie supergroup is a group object in the category of supermanifolds,
i.e. a supermanifold @xmath together with morphisms @xmath and @xmath
representing the multiplication map, the inverse map and the unit
element such that the usual group axioms are satisfied. The
associativity law for example reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

cf. Varadarajan [ Var 2004 ] .

The reduced morphisms turn the reduced manifold @xmath into a Lie group.
A Lie supergroup @xmath is a Lie subsupergroup of a Lie supergroup
@xmath if @xmath is a Lie subgroup of @xmath and the inclusion map of
@xmath into @xmath is a morphism that is an immersion everywhere.

In classical Lie theory, a vector field @xmath on a Lie group @xmath is
left-invariant if and only if @xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath is
left translation by @xmath . We have to reformulate this in a way not
using the elements of @xmath before generalizing the definition. A short
calculation shows that it is equivalent to the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a vector field on @xmath , defined in the obvious way by
acting only on the second component. This is now taken as the definition
of left-invariant vector field on a Lie supergroup @xmath ; analogously,
we say that @xmath is right-invariant if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lie (super)algebra of @xmath is by definition the Lie superalgebra
@xmath of all left-invariant vector fields on @xmath . The usual
isomorphism between the Lie algebra of @xmath and the tangent space of
@xmath in the identity is still valid, as is proven in [ Var 2004 ] ,
p.276f: The map @xmath is a linear isomorphism of super vector spaces.
The converse map is also given: If @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the left invariant vector field with @xmath ; here, for a germ @xmath
at @xmath , @xmath is considered as a germ at @xmath so that @xmath can
be applied.

We thus see that a Lie supergroup comes along with two objects we are
more familiar with: its underlying Lie group and its Lie superalgebra.
It would be nice if a Lie supergroup was already determined by this
data.

### 3.2 Harish-Chandra Pairs

A Harish-Chandra pair is a pair @xmath , consisting of a Lie group
@xmath and a Lie superalgebra @xmath with @xmath and a representation
@xmath of @xmath on @xmath such that

1.  it extends the usual adjoint action of @xmath on its Lie algebra and

2.  the differential of the action in the identity is equal to the Lie
    superbracket, restricted to @xmath .

Note that if @xmath is connected, the first condition follows from the
second.

It is clear how to associate a Harish-Chandra pair to a given Lie
supergroup @xmath : Take the underlying Lie group @xmath , together with
the Lie superalgebra @xmath of @xmath . The importance of the notion of
Harish-Chandra pair results now from this functor being an equivalence
of categories, cf. [ DelMor 1999 ] , §3.8. See [ Kosz 1982 ] and [
BagSta 2002 ] for the construction of the Lie supergroup associated to a
Harish-Chandra pair.

### 3.3 Actions and Representations

An action of a Lie supergroup on a supermanifold is a morphism @xmath
such that the usual axioms are satisfied.

In the language of Harish-Chandra pairs, such an action consists of an
action of the reduced Lie group @xmath on the supermanifold @xmath ,
together with a morphism from @xmath to the opposite to the Lie
superalgebra of vector fields on @xmath , which are compatible in the
sense that the differential of the action of the reduced group at the
identity agrees with the restriction to the Lie algebra @xmath , see [
DelMor 1999 ] , p. 80.

If an action @xmath is given, this morphism @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

note that it really is a morphism of Lie superalgebras, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, a representation of a Lie supergroup @xmath on a super vector
space @xmath consists of representations of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath
such that the differential of the representation of @xmath coincides
with the even part of the representation of @xmath .

### 3.4 Examples

In this section, we define those Lie supergroups and their Lie
superalgebras that will be of importance for us in terms of their
Harish-Chandra pairs. The adjoint action of the Lie group on the Lie
superalgebra is always the standard one.

The general linear supergroup @xmath is defined to be the Lie supergroup
associated to the Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Lie superalgebra consisting of block matrices @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath real @xmath -, @xmath -, @xmath - and @xmath
-matrices, respectively. The gradation is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the bracket is the usual (anti-)commutator: for homogeneous elements
@xmath we define @xmath .

The special linear supergroup @xmath is the Lie subsupergroup of @xmath
with reduced group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and Lie superalgebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the supertrace @xmath of a matrix @xmath is given by @xmath . Note
that the reduced group of @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath via @xmath .

In the case of @xmath , the identity matrix @xmath is an even element of
the Lie superalgebra @xmath and generates a one-dimensional ideal;
dividing this out, we obtain a Lie superalgebra denoted by @xmath . The
corresponding Lie supergroup @xmath is given by the Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The orthosymplectic supergroup @xmath is the Lie subsupergroup of @xmath
given by the Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, the real symplectic group @xmath is the group of those
transformations of @xmath leaving invariant the standard symplectic
form. The special orthosymplectic supergroup @xmath is the connected
component of @xmath .

The unitary supergroup @xmath is the Lie supergroup associated to the
Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## 4 Riemannian Supergeometry

### 4.1 Metrics

A scalar superproduct on a super vector space @xmath over a field @xmath
(we will be interested almost exclusively in the case @xmath ) is a
non-degenerate graded-symmetric even @xmath -bilinear form @xmath .
Here, the condition of graded symmetry is supposed to mean

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all homogeneous @xmath . Since @xmath is considered as a purely even
object, i.e. @xmath , being even means @xmath for homogeneous @xmath of
different parity. Note that a graded scalar product on @xmath is the sum
of a non-degenerate symmetric bilinear form @xmath on @xmath and a
symplectic (i.e. non-degenerate alternating bilinear) form @xmath on
@xmath . In particular, the existence of a scalar superproduct on @xmath
forces @xmath to be even-dimensional.

###### Remark.

Note that a scalar superproduct on a purely even vector space is not the
same as a scalar product since we do not impose any kind of positivity –
@xmath may be indefinite. See also [ Cor 2003 ] .

We define a graded Riemannian metric on a supermanifold @xmath as a
graded-symmetric even non-degenerate @xmath -linear morphism of sheaves

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the non-degeneracy meaning that the mapping @xmath is an isomorphism
@xmath . A supermanifold equipped with a graded Riemannian metric is
called a Riemannian supermanifold .

For each @xmath the morphism @xmath defines a scalar superproduct @xmath
on the real super vector space @xmath . As always, this family of scalar
superproducts does not determine the graded Riemannian metric unless the
odd dimension of @xmath is zero.

Let us do the usual consistency check: A graded Riemannian metric
induces in a natural way a pseudo-Riemannian metric on the underlying
manifold @xmath : take @xmath on @xmath . Furthermore, on a usual
differentiable manifold, the notion of graded Riemannian metric equals
the notion of pseudo-Riemannian metric.

###### Remark.

The choice of name for our metrics is justified by the fact that the
natural metrics on Lie supergroups and homogeneous superspaces induced
by the Killing form almost never have a definite sign, see 4.10 . The
class of metrics on supermanifolds such that the underlying manifold is
Riemannian (and not only pseudo-Riemannian) seems to play only a minor
role. See also [ MonSan 1996 ] and [ MonSan 1997 ] .

We also remark that there is another way of defining metrics having the
nice property that the positive linear combination of metrics again is a
metric – which in our context obviously is not fulfilled. By passing to
complexifications one may apply a definition of Tuynman in the context
of cs manifolds, see [ Tuy 2004 ] , p. 188ff.

If a morphism @xmath and a graded Riemannian metric on @xmath are given,
we can naturally evaluate vector fields along @xmath with the metric via
the morphism @xmath given in coordinates @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 4.2 Connections

Let @xmath be a supermanifold and @xmath a locally free sheaf of @xmath
-super modules on @xmath . A connection on @xmath (cf. [ DelMor 1999 ] )
is an even morphism @xmath of sheaves of @xmath -super vector spaces
that satisfies the Leibniz rule

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all sections @xmath of @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . If we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any vector field @xmath , where @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the case @xmath (in this case we speak of a connection on @xmath ) we
define the torsion of a connection @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

An easy calculation shows that for any superfunction @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the tensorial property, namely that the values of the tensor
depend only on the values of the inserted vector fields, is true in this
context; nevertheless, it is less useful since a vector field cannot be
reconstructed from its values.

The curvature of @xmath is by definition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is furnished with a graded Riemannian metric @xmath , we call
a connection @xmath metric if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We also have the usual notion of Christoffel symbols : If @xmath is a
system of coordinates (both even and odd) on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

gives well-defined elements @xmath of parity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

If it is necessary to distinguish between the even and the odd
coordinates, in order not to let the notation explode the indices (latin
or greek) have to indicate which Christoffel symbol is meant, e.g.
@xmath .

Note that a connection on @xmath in a natural way induces a connection
on the vector bundle @xmath by reduction of the coefficient functions.

The following theorem, whose proof is – apart from the additional signs
– the same as in standard (pseudo-)Riemannian geometry, can be found in
[ MonSan 1996 ] :

###### Theorem 4.1.

On a supermanifold @xmath with a graded Riemannian metric, there exists
a unique torsionless and metric connection @xmath (which will be called
the L evi-Civita connection of the metric). It is implicitly defined by
the formula

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.10)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The Levi-Civita connection of the metric induces the standard
Levi-Civita connection of the induced pseudo-Riemannian metric on @xmath
, as can be seen by regarding ( 4.10 ) on the level of the even tangent
spaces @xmath – there, the formula becomes the usual formula defining
the Levi-Civita connection.

Consequently, if we are in coordinates @xmath on @xmath , the
projections of the Christoffel symbols @xmath on @xmath are the
Christoffel symbols of the Levi-Civita connection on @xmath with respect
to the corresponding coordinates on @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.

Let @xmath be a supermanifold with a graded Riemannian metric and the
corresponding Levi-Civita connection. Then the following equalities hold
for all vector fields @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Except for the additional signs, these relations are proven just like in
the standard theory; as an example, we calculate one part of ( 4.11 ).

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that ( 4.12 ) is a consequence of ( 4.11 ) and ( 4.13 ) – this
calculation is explicitly carried out in [ Cor 2003 ] , Lemma 1. ∎

### 4.3 Covariant Derivatives along Supercurves

Let @xmath be a supercurve in a supermanifold with a connection @xmath .
Let @xmath be the standard coordinates on @xmath . Recall ( 2.5 ) that
if @xmath are coordinates on @xmath (for the moment we do not
distinguish between even and odd coordinates), then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the covariant derivative of a vector field @xmath along @xmath
with respect to the even coordinate by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the @xmath are sections of @xmath over @xmath , i.e. elements
of @xmath ; furthermore, they are homogeneous and hence either elements
of @xmath or @xmath , depending on the parity given by ( 4.9 ).

Analogously to ( 4.14 ), we can define the covariant derivative along a
curve with respect to the odd coordinate – we only have to take into
account that it has to become an odd operator:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is now assumed to be Riemannian and equipped with a metric
connection, we get the following:

###### Proposition 4.3.

For vector fields @xmath and @xmath along a supercurve @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Formula ( 2.5 ) and the metricity yield

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

the second equality is proven analogously. ∎

### 4.4 Geodesics

Before giving with ( 4.21 ) the right condition for being a
supergeodesic we start with some false ones at first sight resembling
the known condition from Riemannian geometry.

Let a supermanifold @xmath be equipped with a graded Riemannian metric
and the corresponding Levi-Civita connection. One generalization of the
ordinary definition of geodesics would be to demand the vanishing of the
term @xmath and possibly additionally of some of the three terms @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . Let us first regard supercurves @xmath that
satisfy only @xmath . In local coordinates, this condition is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . It is quite useful to write these equations separately
for the even and the odd coordinates. If such @xmath are fixed, we have
@xmath and @xmath for some @xmath . Then for the even coordinates, the
geodesic equations are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we used ( 4.9 ) for the second and third sum – there, we have
Christoffel symbols with an odd number of greek indices. These are the
usual geodesic equations of the underlying Riemannian manifold, which is
an argument in favor of the definition: a geodesic in a supermanifold
should be a supercurve with the underlying curve being an ordinary
geodesic and satisfying some kind of additional odd condition.

We also write down the equations for the odd coordinates:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In each of the summands appears exactly one @xmath so we reduced the
equations to ordinary differential equations of second order.

What are the initial conditions for geodesics of this kind in
coordinate-free notation? The value of @xmath at @xmath is (in
coordinates) given by the tuple @xmath . Let us write @xmath in
coordinates:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used that the values of nilpotent functions are zero at any
point. We thus see that such a geodesic is not determined by its value
and the value of its differential at one point. One might argue that
this is unavoidable because of the unimportant role of points in the
world of supermanifolds, but then one would have to accept that the
initial conditions can not be written in a natural way in
coordinate-free notation. It would thus be favourable if the odd
geodesic equations ( 4.18 ) were differential equations of first order.

The additional vanishing of some of the three terms @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath does not solve the problem described above, whereas it is solved
via the following definition - recall that the tilde means passing to
the reduced level.

###### Definition 4.4.

A curve @xmath is a (super)geodesic if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Easy calculations in coordinates show that for all supercurves @xmath ,
we have @xmath and @xmath

###### Proposition 4.5.

A curve @xmath is a supergeodesic if and only if the underlying curve
@xmath is a geodesic and @xmath ; in coordinates, the second condition
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath (the so-called odd geodesic equations ).

Furthermore, for every @xmath and every tangent vector @xmath , there
exists a unique supergeodesic @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first statement is clear by simply writing it down in coordinates.
Since the odd differential equations ( 4.22 ) are of first order, the
second statement follows by ( 4.19 ) and ( 4.20 ). ∎

The formal consequences of this definition are thus just what we wanted
them to be; on the other hand, this notion of supergeodesic seems highly
unnatural compared to the ones suggested before. Nevertheless, it will
turn out that it reflects the bundle structure of a supermanifold in a
very natural way.

If a supermanifold @xmath is given, the Theorem of Batchelor allows us
to find a vector bundle @xmath such that @xmath is given by the sheaf of
sections of the exterior bundle @xmath , cf. 2.1 . The data of a
supercurve @xmath is now the same as the data of an ordinary curve
@xmath : If a local basis @xmath of @xmath is given (which at the same
time is a local system of odd coordinates of @xmath ), then @xmath for
some @xmath -functions @xmath . Then we define a lift @xmath of @xmath
by @xmath ; note that the expression @xmath makes sense since we regard
the @xmath as local sections of @xmath . Clearly, this correspondence
between supercurves in @xmath and curves in @xmath is one-to-one.

We want to justify Definition 4.4 by proving that the property of @xmath
being a supergeodesic is equivalent to a natural property of the
associated curve @xmath . The vector bundle @xmath carries a natural
connection induced from the connection on the supermanifold @xmath ,
defined as follows: Let @xmath be coordinates on @xmath such that the
@xmath are a local basis of the vector bundle @xmath . For a vector
field @xmath on @xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the superscript @xmath is supposed to mean the following: write
the odd vector field @xmath in coordinates, reduce the coefficient
functions and replace @xmath by @xmath to arrive at a section of @xmath
. As an example, @xmath . Note that @xmath really is a connection on
@xmath . Now Proposition 4.5 shows that @xmath is a supergeodesic if and
only if @xmath is the horizontal lift of a geodesic in @xmath , where
horizontality is meant with respect to @xmath .

### 4.5 Parallel Displacement

A vector field @xmath along a supercurve @xmath in a Riemannian
supermanifold @xmath , equipped with the Levi-Civita connection, is
called parallel if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proposition 4.6.

For each tangent vector @xmath there is a unique parallel vector field
@xmath along @xmath with value @xmath at @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath
is homogeneous, @xmath is homogeneous of the same parity.

###### Proof.

Writing the conditions ( 4.23 ) for a vector field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

along @xmath (where @xmath and @xmath are smooth functions) in
coordinates @xmath , we see that @xmath is parallel if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . The initial condition is given by the tuples @xmath and
@xmath , so the unique existence follows. If @xmath is even, all the
@xmath are equal to @xmath . Thus, the @xmath and @xmath vanish
completely and hence @xmath is even. If @xmath is odd, all the @xmath
are equal to @xmath and thus the @xmath and @xmath vanish, so @xmath is
odd. ∎

We thus may define parallel displacement @xmath just like in the
standard theory: if @xmath is given, let @xmath be the unique parallel
vector field along @xmath with @xmath and define @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.7.

Parallel displacement is an isometry.

###### Proof.

For any two parallel vector fields @xmath and @xmath along @xmath , the
superfunction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is nilpotent. Thus, the function @xmath is constant. ∎

### 4.6 Isometries

Let @xmath and @xmath be Riemannian supermanifolds, equipped with their
Levi-Civita connections. We say that a diffeomorphism @xmath is an
isometry if it respects the metric: @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all vector fields @xmath on @xmath . (Recall the different
definitions for @xmath given in 2.2 – since @xmath is a diffeomorphism
we regard it as a vector field on @xmath .)

If @xmath is an isometry, @xmath is in particular affine , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all vector fields @xmath on @xmath , as can be seen by regarding the
formula defining the Levi-Civita connection, ( 4.10 ). Consequently, if
@xmath are coordinates on @xmath , @xmath the Christoffel symbols with
respect to these coordinates and @xmath the Christoffel symbols with
respect to the coordinates @xmath on @xmath , then @xmath .

The following lemma is clear.

###### Lemma 4.8.

Let @xmath be a supergeodesic and @xmath an isometry. Then @xmath is a
supergeodesic.

###### Lemma 4.9.

Let @xmath be a supermanifold, @xmath local coordinates on @xmath and
@xmath some point of @xmath . Let furthermore @xmath be a function on
@xmath of degree one with respect to these coordinates. If for all
supergeodesics @xmath starting at @xmath we have @xmath , then @xmath on
some neighbourhood of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Write @xmath in these coordinates: @xmath for some @xmath -functions
@xmath . Assume that @xmath is not zero in any neighbourhood of @xmath ;
then we can find some @xmath near @xmath such that there exists an
(ordinary) geodesic @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and such that not all
@xmath . Let @xmath be the supergeodesic with underlying curve @xmath
that satisfies the following condition: If @xmath for some smooth
functions @xmath , then @xmath (recall that the odd differential
equations ( 4.22 ) are of first order). Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which contradicts the assumption. Here, for a superfunction @xmath on
@xmath written in coordinates, @xmath shall denote the element of @xmath
one gets by inserting @xmath into the coefficient functions, i.e. @xmath
. ∎

###### Remark.

For superfunctions of degree zero, i.e. @xmath -functions, the analogous
statement follows directly from the fact that the exponential map is a
local diffeomorphism. For superfunctions of higher degree, the lemma is
false.

Before we are able to prove that isometries are determined by the data
at one point (just as geodesics, cf. Proposition 4.5 ), we need a
technical lemma:

###### Lemma 4.10.

Let @xmath be a supermanifold with odd dimension @xmath and @xmath
coordinates on @xmath . If @xmath are superfunctions on @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , then all the @xmath are the sum of functions of degree
at most one (with respect to the chosen coordinates).

###### Proof.

Assume the contrary, i.e. at least one of the functions contains some
summand of degree higher than one, say @xmath . Then there are @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for superfunctions @xmath not containing @xmath and @xmath with at least
@xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some function @xmath not containing @xmath . Note also that we see
from ( 4.24 ) that @xmath does not contain @xmath since both @xmath and
@xmath do not contain @xmath . Analogously,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath not containing @xmath . But then on the one hand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and on the other hand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a contradiction since @xmath and @xmath and @xmath do not
contain @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 4.11.

An isometry of a connected Riemannian supermanifold @xmath is determined
by its value and its derivative at one point.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an isometry and @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . We
have to show @xmath . The corresponding result in the standard theory
says that @xmath .

Fix coordinates on some open set @xmath containing @xmath and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath -functions @xmath . For every supergeodesic @xmath
starting at @xmath , we have @xmath because of Lemma 4.8 and Proposition
4.5 . In coordinates, this means

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Lemma 4.9 now says that @xmath , probably after
restricting @xmath . But since the @xmath are linearly independent as
elements of the @xmath -module @xmath , @xmath . Summing up, we have
shown

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We continue by showing that the terms of higher degree vanish, starting
with the smallest: Writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is homogeneous of degree @xmath with respect to the @xmath
-grading, we calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the @xmath -notation is to be understood for the coefficient
functions, when the vector fields are expressed in the basis @xmath .
Since @xmath is an isometry,

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The matrix @xmath is invertible, so we get @xmath for all @xmath . Since
@xmath is homogeneous of degree @xmath , this is only possible if @xmath
. Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we deal with the odd coordinates: From

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some homogeneous functions @xmath of degree @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

But now Lemma 4.10 shows that @xmath for all @xmath . Since the matrix
@xmath is invertible, all the @xmath ; we have shown

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that we can proceed inductively on the degree the same way,
alternatingly dealing with the even and odd coordinates – we only used
that the @xmath and @xmath are homogeneous of degree greater than one.
Then we see that @xmath is the identity on @xmath ; an easy argument
using the connectedness of @xmath now proves that @xmath is the identity
on the whole of @xmath .∎

### 4.7 Graded Killing Fields

Before attacking the problem of introducing more structure to the
isometry group of a Riemannian supermanifold, we deal with the
corresponding infinitesimal objects: the Killing vector fields.

Let @xmath be a Riemannian supermanifold. A graded Killing vector field
on @xmath is a vector field @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . Thus, using the properties of the Levi-Civita
connection @xmath , @xmath is a graded Killing vector field if and only
if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The super vector space of all graded Killing vector fields becomes a Lie
superalgebra, if we define the bracket to be induced from the Lie
superalgebra of all vector fields. Following usual conventions, we will
denote by the Lie superalgebra of graded Killing vector fields the
opposite to this Lie superalgebra, i.e. the Lie superalgebra with the
same underlying vector space and the new bracket the negative of the old
bracket.

We denote the second covariant derivative by @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Lemma 4.12.

Let @xmath be a Killing vector field. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This is a direct calculation using ( 4.26 ) several times. ∎

###### Proposition 4.13.

Let @xmath be a Killing vector field. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof is analogously to [ Pet 1998 ] , p.216, with a lot of
additional signs; it uses Lemma 4.12 , formula ( 4.27 ) and the
symmetries of the curvature tensor collected in Proposition 4.2 . Since
no new idea enters, we again omit the calculation. ∎

###### Proposition 4.14.

Let @xmath be a Killing vector field on a Riemannian supermanifold. If
there exists a point @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Remark.

In standard Riemannian geometry, this is proven either via the flow of
@xmath or the fact that @xmath , restricted to any geodesic, is a Jacobi
field. Since we did not introduce Jacobi fields and flows of odd vector
fields, we need a different proof.

###### Proof.

Consider first the case of @xmath even. Pick coordinates @xmath around
@xmath and write @xmath in coordinates; we assume that the degree of
@xmath is @xmath . Proposition 4.13 , written in coordinates, is a
system of second order differential equations; it yields the vanishing
of the coefficient functions of degree @xmath and @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Recall that the @xmath -notation is to be understood for the
coefficient functions.) Then on the one hand @xmath and on the other
hand

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since the matrix @xmath is invertible, we conclude @xmath for all @xmath
and @xmath . Thus, @xmath , since the function was assumed to be
homogeneous of positive degree.

Attacking the remaining term of smallest degree we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then on the one hand @xmath and on the other hand

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Lemma 4.10 yields the vanishing of the @xmath via the same argument as
in the last part of the proof of Proposition 4.11 ; then induction
finishes the case of @xmath even.

If @xmath is odd, we can argue very similarly, with only some signs
changing. First of all, the same argument shows the vanishing of the
coefficient functions of degree @xmath and @xmath . Applying @xmath to
the superfunctions @xmath yields the vanishing of the @xmath ;
thereafter applying @xmath to @xmath shows that @xmath . As usual we
continue by induction. ∎

### 4.8 The Isometry Group

In this section we want to define the isometry group @xmath of a
Riemannian supermanifold @xmath ; naturally, it shall become not a Lie
group but a Lie supergroup. Staying consistent with the ungraded case,
the Lie superalgebra of @xmath has to be the Lie superalgebra of graded
Killing vector fields.

The set of all isometries (cf. 4.6 ) of a Riemannian supermanifold
@xmath clearly is a group. Our task now is to show that there is a
natural Lie structure on it. Then we will equip this Lie group with the
Lie superalgebra of graded Killing vector fields to get a Harish-Chandra
pair – this will by definition give us the isometry supergroup of @xmath
.

In spirit of this, we denote by @xmath the group of isometries of @xmath
, although we have not yet defined @xmath . This is not to be mixed up
with @xmath , which is simply the usual isometry group of the
pseudo-Riemannian manifold @xmath . Recall that the isometry group of a
conventional pseudo-Riemannian manifold, endowed with the compact-open
topology, is a Lie group, see e.g. Ballmann [ Bal 2000 ] : it is a
closed subgroup of the group of affine diffeomorphisms with respect to
the Levi-Civita connection of the metric.

It would be nice to say that we equip @xmath with the compact-open
topology; but since topological notions like compactness and openness
make sense only for the underlying manifold, this is not possible. In
the following we therefore want to realize @xmath as a closed subgroup
of an automorphism group of the parallelization of some ordinary
differentiable manifold and then use the general result of Ballmann,
namely that such groups are Lie groups.

Let us briefly recall the definitions of [ Bal 2000 ] : If @xmath is a
conventional @xmath -dimensional manifold together with a
parallelization @xmath , any @xmath induces a so-called constant vector
field @xmath . The automorphism group @xmath of @xmath then is the group
of all diffeomorphisms @xmath such that @xmath for all constant vector
fields @xmath , equipped with the compact-open topology.

The following is an extension of Example @xmath of [ Bal 2000 ] : Let
@xmath be an @xmath -dimensional Riemannian supermanifold with
Levi-Civita connection @xmath and consider the vector bundle @xmath with
@xmath -dimensional fibres @xmath (we may regard it as a bundle of
@xmath -dimensional super vector spaces). Recall that the connection on
@xmath induces a connection on @xmath . Let @xmath be the @xmath
-principal fibre bundle of graded frames; the fibre over @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to find a parallelization of the conventional manifold @xmath
such that affine diffeomorphisms of the supermanifold @xmath induce
diffeomorphisms of @xmath respecting the parallelization.

The vertical distribution @xmath of @xmath given by the kernel of @xmath
is trivialized via the mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to find a corresponding (trivializable) horizontal
distribution @xmath (which will be of rank @xmath ). For any @xmath and
@xmath , let @xmath , where @xmath . Choose a curve @xmath in @xmath
through @xmath with @xmath and let @xmath be the unique parallel frame
along @xmath such that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives a trivialization

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of a horizontal distribution @xmath . The pair @xmath therefore is a
parallelization of @xmath . If @xmath is a diffeomorphism of the
supermanifold @xmath , it induces a diffeomorphism @xmath of @xmath
sending a frame @xmath to @xmath ; if @xmath is affine, this
diffeomorphism is an element of @xmath .

We thus get a mapping @xmath , which is injective by Proposition 4.11 .

###### Proposition 4.15.

The image of the natural inclusion @xmath is closed in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a sequence of isometries of the supermanifold @xmath such
that the induced mappings @xmath converge against some @xmath with
respect to the compact-open topology.

The space @xmath is a Fréchet space via the family of semi-norms @xmath
defined as follows: for any compact subset @xmath and any differential
operator @xmath , we set @xmath , see Kostant [ Kost 1975 ] , p.199. By
writing the condition of being an isometry in coordinates, an isometry
can be viewed as a solution of some system of ordinary differential
equations. Since the @xmath converge, also these solutions converge in
the sense that for any @xmath , the sequence @xmath converges against
some @xmath . Then, the mapping @xmath defines an isometry @xmath of
@xmath such that the induced mapping @xmath equals @xmath . ∎

Thus, by giving @xmath the induced topology of @xmath , the results of [
Bal 2000 ] introduce the structure of Lie group on @xmath .

###### Remark.

Another possible way of turning @xmath into a Lie group is the
following: Give it the coarsest topology such that for all @xmath , the
mapping @xmath is continuous – here, @xmath carries the structure of a
Fréchet space mentioned in the proof above. Then, @xmath is a locally
compact topological group without small subgroups. It is known that such
groups are Lie groups, see [ MonZip 1965 ] , p.107 and the references
given there.

To complete the construction of the isometry supergroup we have to equip
this Lie group with a suitable Lie superalgebra.

Let us first calculate the Lie algebra of @xmath . If we take a left
invariant vector field @xmath on @xmath , it defines a unique
one-parameter group @xmath in @xmath . Then the associated vector field
@xmath is an even Killing field; this correspondence is an isomorphism
from the Lie algebra of @xmath to the Lie algebra of even Killing fields
on @xmath .

The isometry group @xmath of @xmath is now the Lie supergroup associated
to the Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Lie superalgebra of all graded Killing vector fields
on @xmath . We have already verified that the Lie algebra of @xmath is
equal to @xmath , so what is left is to specify the action of @xmath on
@xmath . For a graded Killing vector field @xmath on @xmath and an
isometry @xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On @xmath , this coincides with the action of @xmath on its Lie algebra.
Note that if @xmath is a usual manifold, @xmath is the usual isometry
group.

There is a natural action of @xmath on @xmath which we give in terms of
the above Harish-Chandra pair, cf. 3.3 : The Lie group @xmath clearly
acts on @xmath ; in fact, it is defined as a group of diffeomorphisms of
@xmath . We have to define a compatible morphism from the Lie
superalgebra of graded Killing vector fields on @xmath to the opposite
of the Lie superalgebra of vector fields on @xmath . Here, we simply
take the inclusion.

### 4.9 Invariant Metrics on Lie Supergroups

Given an ordinary Lie group @xmath , a pseudo-Riemannian metric @xmath
on @xmath is called left-invariant if the left translations are
isometries. Equivalent to this is the condition that for all
left-invariant vector fields @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is a constant
function on @xmath (i.e. a real multiple of the unit in the algebra of
global functions on @xmath ). We take this to be the definition of
left-invariance in the case of Lie supergroups. Analogously, we define
right-invariance and then bi-invariance.

The left-invariant graded Riemannian metrics on a Lie supergroup @xmath
are in one-to-one correspondence with the scalar superproducts on @xmath
: for @xmath regard the real number @xmath as a constant function on
@xmath and extend the metric linearly with respect to superfunctions.

A scalar superproduct @xmath on @xmath is called @xmath -invariant if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and all @xmath . It is @xmath -invariant if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Of course, if @xmath is connected, @xmath -invariance
implies @xmath -invariance. We call the scalar superproduct @xmath
-invariant or simply @xmath -invariant if it is @xmath - and @xmath
-invariant.

As an example, @xmath with the Lie supergroup structure given in
symbolic notation by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

does not admit any bi-invariant metric; its Lie algebra admits @xmath
-invariant but no @xmath -invariant scalar superproducts.

The equivalence of the bi-invariance of a metric and the @xmath
-invariance of the induced supersymmetric bilinear form at @xmath ,
which is very easily proven in the standard case, requires some
preparation before we can establish it in Theorem 4.19 .

###### Lemma 4.16.

Let @xmath be a Lie supergroup. Then for any left-invariant vector field
@xmath and any right-invariant vector field @xmath , we have @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be the corresponding left-invariant vector fields.
The differential of the inverse map @xmath interchanges left- and
right-invariant vector fields, so it suffices to show @xmath ; this is
an easy calculation using ( 3.3 ). ∎

###### Proposition 4.17.

Let @xmath be a Lie supergroup, equipped with a left-invariant graded
Riemannian metric such that the induced scalar superproduct on @xmath is
@xmath -invariant. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all left-invariant vector fields @xmath .

###### Remark.

Note that we do not yet prove the statement for bi-invariant metrics!

###### Proof.

This is – again apart from the additional signs – the standard proof via
( 4.10 ). ∎

###### Lemma 4.18.

Let @xmath be a Lie supergroup with a left-invariant graded Riemannian
metric @xmath such that the induced scalar superproduct on @xmath is
@xmath -invariant. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all right-invariant vector fields @xmath and all tangent vectors
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath and denote by @xmath and @xmath the corresponding
left- and right-invariant vector fields. Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the first and second line we used the properties of the Levi-Civita
connection. Then we applied Lemma 4.16 and used the fact that for vector
fields @xmath and @xmath , the value of @xmath at some point depends
only on the value of @xmath at that point. In the last line we finally
used Proposition 4.17 and the @xmath -invariance of the induced scalar
superproduct. ∎

###### Theorem 4.19.

Let @xmath be a Lie supergroup with a left-invariant graded Riemannian
metric @xmath . Then the metric is bi-invariant if and only if @xmath is
@xmath -invariant.

###### Proof.

If the metric is left-invariant (resp. right-invariant), left (resp.
right) translations with elements of @xmath are isometries of @xmath ;
thus, if @xmath is bi-invariant, @xmath is @xmath -invariant. To prove
the @xmath -invariance, calculate for @xmath as follows ( @xmath and
@xmath are again the corresponding left- and right-invariant vector
fields):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that we used Lemma 4.16 for the fourth and the right-invariance of
@xmath for the fifth equality.

Let now @xmath be @xmath -invariant. We want to show the bi-invariance
of @xmath . The left-invariance of @xmath , together with the @xmath
-invariance of @xmath shows that for all right-invariant vector fields
@xmath and @xmath , the @xmath -part of the superfunction @xmath is
constant. We have to show that the superfunction itself is constant.

Fix a basis @xmath consisting of homogeneous right-invariant vector
fields; assume that the value of @xmath at @xmath is @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for superfunctions @xmath and @xmath . First of all, let us have a look
at the case that @xmath is even and @xmath is odd. We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath -functions @xmath . Our first goal is to show that
@xmath . On the one hand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the sum of a constant function and nilpotent terms. Consequently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

according to Lemma 4.18 . Since the matrix @xmath is invertible (as
@xmath is a basis) we conclude that all the @xmath must vanish.

Let us now have a look at the case when @xmath and @xmath are both even
or both odd. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some homogeneous function @xmath of degree @xmath (in the chosen
coordinates). Then for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But because

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

consists only of terms of degree at least three by what we have shown
before, and because the matrix @xmath is invertible, we see that @xmath
for any @xmath . The superfunction @xmath is homogeneous of degree
@xmath , so @xmath .

We proceed by induction: Consider the case of @xmath even and @xmath
odd, write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some homogeneous superfunction @xmath of degree @xmath , apply all
the @xmath and conclude that @xmath . The analogous argument as above
for the case of @xmath and @xmath of the same parity finishes the
induction. ∎

###### Corollary 4.20.

Let @xmath be a Lie supergroup with a bi-invariant graded Riemannian
metric. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all left-invariant vector fields @xmath .

As the last result in this section, we state the following easy
generalization of Proposition 1.6 b) of [ CahPar 1980 ] – it will reduce
the amount of calculation needed for the last example in 4.14 . Up to
signs, the proof is the same as there. This result also appears as
Theorem 4 in [ Cor 2003 ] ; note that there the assumption of the
adjoint representation being faithful is missing.

###### Proposition 4.21.

Let @xmath be a Lie superalgebra such that @xmath and the adjoint
representation of @xmath on @xmath is faithful. Then any non-degenerate
@xmath -invariant skew-symmetric bilinear form @xmath on @xmath uniquely
extends to an @xmath -invariant scalar superproduct @xmath on @xmath .

### 4.10 The Killing Form

Let @xmath be a finite-dimensional Lie superalgebra. We define the
Killing form of @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the supertrace. The Killing form is an even
graded-symmetric @xmath -invariant bilinear form; the @xmath -invariance
meaning

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath .

It is known (see e.g. [ Sche 1979 ] ), that on @xmath , the Killing form
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is non-degenerate for @xmath but identically zero for @xmath .
Nevertheless, the supertrace @xmath induces a non-degenerate even
graded-symmetric @xmath -invariant bilinear form on @xmath where @xmath
is the @xmath unit matrix.

On @xmath , the Killing form is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is non-degenerate if @xmath and identically zero for @xmath . Here,
the supertrace is non-degenerate and @xmath -invariant for all @xmath
and @xmath .

Note that there exist Lie superalgebras with degenerate (even vanishing)
Killing form that nevertheless admit an @xmath -invariant scalar
superproduct.

### 4.11 Homogeneous Superspaces

If @xmath is a Lie supergroup and @xmath a closed Lie subsupergroup (a
Lie subsupergroup such that @xmath is closed in @xmath ), we know from
the standard theory that @xmath is a manifold. Consider the canonical
projections @xmath and @xmath and the right action of @xmath on @xmath ,
@xmath , i.e. the composition of the multiplication morphism with the
inclusion of @xmath into @xmath . We equip @xmath with the sheaf of
@xmath -invariant superfunctions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a supermanifold, see [ Kost 1975 ] , Theorem 3.9. There is a
canonical morphism of supermanifolds @xmath , where the sheaf morphism
is given by inclusion. The surjective morphism @xmath has kernel @xmath
and thus yields a canonical identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The adjoint representation of @xmath restricts to a well-defined
representation @xmath of @xmath on @xmath , i.e. compatible
representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is an action of a Lie supergroup @xmath on a supermanifold
@xmath and @xmath , we define the isotropy group @xmath to be the Lie
subsupergroup of @xmath given by the Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is evaluation at @xmath ; cf. also 3.3 . In other words,
@xmath consists of those left-invariant vector fields @xmath on @xmath
such that the infinitesimal action of @xmath at @xmath is trivial.

As usual we have the isotropy representation of @xmath on @xmath : On
the level of the underlying Lie group, @xmath acts on @xmath in an
obvious manner; the Lie superalgebra @xmath acts on @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this is a well-defined action compatible with the @xmath
-action, so they fit together to a representation of the Lie supergroup
@xmath .

Let @xmath be an action on a supermanifold @xmath and fix @xmath . We
can define the orbit @xmath as follows: The usual orbit @xmath inherits
its differentiable structure via the canonical mapping @xmath . The
supermanifold @xmath is now defined to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is no surprise that also the superstructure has to be passed over
from @xmath . If we denote the inclusion @xmath by @xmath , the orbit
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the point @xmath gives a well-defined sheaf morphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the orbits @xmath become submanifolds of @xmath via this
inclusion morphism @xmath .

An action @xmath is said to be transitive (cf. [ Oni 1994 ] , p. 295) if
the reduced action @xmath is transitive and if for all @xmath , the
mapping

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

is surjective. It is known from the standard theory that in the case of
a connected supermanifold, the first condition is equivalent to the even
part of the second condition, i.e. the surjectivity of the mapping
@xmath . We say that a supermanifold is @xmath -homogeneous if it is
acted on transitively by @xmath ; we say it is homogeneous if it is
@xmath -homogeneous for some Lie supergroup @xmath . If @xmath is
already assumed to be Riemannian, it is homogeneous if it is @xmath
-homogeneous.

Note that if @xmath is @xmath -homogeneous, the natural morphism @xmath
is an isomorphism.

###### Proposition 4.22.

Let @xmath be @xmath -homogeneous. Then the isotropy representation of
@xmath on @xmath is equivalent to the adjoint representation on @xmath
via the natural isomorphism @xmath .

###### Proof.

First we have a look at the representations of the underlying Lie group.
For any @xmath and any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are left and right multiplication with @xmath ,
and the diffeomorphism of @xmath induced by the action of @xmath is
again denoted by @xmath .

The equivalence of the representations at the level of Lie superalgebras
is the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and all @xmath , cf. ( 4.34 ), which follows directly
from ( 3.5 ). ∎

### 4.12 Invariant Metrics on Homogeneous Superspaces

In the standard theory a Riemannian metric on a @xmath -homogeneous
space @xmath is called @xmath -invariant if every @xmath acts on @xmath
by isometries. The characterization of actions in the world of
supermanifolds in terms of Harish-Chandra pairs immediately motivates
the following definition:

A graded Riemannian metric on a @xmath -homogeneous superspace @xmath is
@xmath -invariant if every @xmath acts on @xmath by isometries and the
image of the morphism @xmath lies in the subalgebra of graded Killing
fields.

###### Theorem 4.23.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -homogeneous superspace, fix @xmath and let
@xmath . Then there is a 1-1-correspondence between @xmath -invariant
graded Riemannian metrics on @xmath and @xmath -invariant scalar
superproducts on the space @xmath .

###### Remark.

By definition, @xmath -invariance means @xmath - and @xmath -invariance.
If @xmath is connected, @xmath -invariance implies @xmath -invariance.
Nevertheless, the converse is not true – @xmath -invariance only implies
@xmath -invariance.

###### Proof.

First of all, take a @xmath -invariant graded Riemannian metric @xmath
on @xmath ; we have to show that the induced scalar superproduct on
@xmath is @xmath - and @xmath -invariant.

Since the action of any element @xmath and thus in particular of any
element @xmath is isometric, Proposition 4.22 immediately shows that
@xmath is @xmath -invariant.

Let @xmath . If the action is denoted by @xmath , then @xmath is a
Killing field with value @xmath at @xmath . Pick @xmath and extend them
to vector fields @xmath on a neighbourhood of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

note that the expressions in the second line are well-defined since
@xmath vanishes at @xmath . Translating the situation to @xmath with the
help of Proposition 4.22 gives the @xmath -invariance.

We now show the injectivity of the correspondence: Assume that there are
@xmath -invariant graded Riemannian metrics @xmath and @xmath that
induce the same scalar superproduct on @xmath . The fact that every
@xmath acts on @xmath by isometries with respect to both metrics
immediately implies that they induce the same scalar superproduct on
every tangent space. But that does not suffice to show that the metrics
are equal. To achieve that, take two local vector fields @xmath on
@xmath . We know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath . Furthermore, for any Killing field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Applying further Killing fields @xmath , we see analogously

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since there only appear scalar products of some iterated Lie brackets,
evaluated at @xmath . The @xmath -homogeneity of @xmath now gives the
existence of enough Killing fields to conclude @xmath .

It remains to show the surjectivity of the correspondence. Let @xmath be
an @xmath -invariant scalar superproduct on @xmath , which by
Proposition 4.22 is the same as a scalar superproduct on @xmath ,
invariant under the isotropy representation of @xmath , i.e. invariant
under @xmath and @xmath , where the second condition is @xmath . The
action of @xmath now induces well-defined scalar superproducts @xmath on
@xmath for all @xmath : for @xmath with @xmath we set @xmath . These are
invariant unter the action of the respective isotropy groups – on the
level of Lie groups this follows directly from @xmath ; on the level of
Lie superalgebras we calculate for @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be a basis of the Lie algebra @xmath and consider the
associated vector fields @xmath . If @xmath are coordinates on some open
set @xmath , we can express @xmath as a linear combination of the @xmath
, since @xmath is @xmath -homogeneous:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may assume that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and @xmath . Of course, there is no unique way of doing
so, but if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

are two representations of the same vector field, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath by definition of @xmath ( 4.33 ).

Distinguish now between even and odd coordinates @xmath and @xmath and
take two vector fields @xmath and @xmath on @xmath . Our strategy is as
follows: Under the assumption of its existence we compute @xmath in
terms of the scalar superproducts at all points @xmath ; then we show
that the resulting expressions provide us with a well-defined @xmath
-invariant metric.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing some representation of @xmath in terms of the @xmath , ( 4.36
), we calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The right-hand side now defines a @xmath -function @xmath ; it is
independent of the representation of @xmath in the @xmath since the
scalar superproduct at @xmath is @xmath -invariant.

Again assuming the existence of @xmath , we compute the part of degree
two:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We define a @xmath -function @xmath by this expression and have to show
that it is independent of the choice of representation ( 4.36 ). Taking
a second representation as in ( 4.38 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used the parity convention ( 4.37 ). In other words,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . Using the @xmath -invariance of the scalar superproduct
at @xmath , a short calculation shows that @xmath is independent of the
choice of representation.

Similar but longer calculations give well-defined smooth functions
@xmath for any @xmath -tuple @xmath . Then we can define a @xmath
-invariant metric by ( 4.39 ).∎

### 4.13 Riemannian Symmetric Superspaces

A conventional Riemannian manifold @xmath is called a Riemannian
symmetric space if for every point @xmath there exists an isometry
@xmath of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Translating this into the
world of supermanifolds we arrive at the following definition deviating
from the usual one by the additional infinitesimal odd part: A
Riemannian supermanifold @xmath is called symmetric or a (Riemannian)
symmetric superspace if for any point @xmath there exists an isometry
@xmath of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath and if for any odd tangent
vector @xmath there exists a Killing vector field @xmath on @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath . In the standard theory, the Killing vector fields
@xmath with @xmath are exactly those defined by transvections (which in
turn are constructed via the geodesic symmetries) so the existence of
Killing fields of this type is the correct infinitesimal counterpart of
the existence of the geodesic symmetries.

###### Remark.

Infinitesimal versions of this definition already exist in the
mathematical literature, see e.g. [ Cor 2003 ] or [ Ser 1983 ] .

Just like in the standard theory, a symmetric superspace is homogeneous
(the surjectivity of the mappings @xmath is trivially fulfilled).

Let @xmath be a symmetric superspace and set @xmath , the identity
component of the isometry group of @xmath . Let @xmath , the isotropy
group of some point @xmath . Conjugation with @xmath induces a morphism
@xmath with @xmath . Clearly, @xmath is involutive.

We define the fixed point group @xmath of @xmath to be the Lie
subsupergroup of @xmath given by the Harish-Chandra pair @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.24.

Under these conditions, we have @xmath

###### Proof.

The first inclusion can be verified on the level of Lie algebras: If
@xmath is a Killing field on @xmath such that @xmath , i.e. @xmath , the
value of @xmath at @xmath clearly has to vanish since @xmath .

Let @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are isometries of @xmath sending
@xmath to itself and having the same differential at @xmath ; because of
Proposition 4.11 , they are equal, i.e. @xmath .

We have to show that @xmath , the Lie algebra of @xmath , is contained
in @xmath , so let @xmath be a Killing field that vanishes at @xmath .
Then @xmath is a Killing field also vanishing at @xmath and satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath ; Proposition 4.14 thus yields @xmath . ∎

Since @xmath is an involutive automorphism, @xmath splits as the sum of
its @xmath - and @xmath -eigenspace – we can write any @xmath as @xmath
. We showed that the @xmath -eigenspace coincides with the Lie algebra
of @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The usual relations @xmath and @xmath hold.

###### Lemma 4.25.

The space @xmath is the space of all Killing vector fields @xmath on
@xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a Killing vector field with @xmath . Then @xmath and
@xmath are Killing fields having the same value and by ( 4.41 ) the same
derivative at @xmath ; Proposition 4.14 thus yields @xmath .

If conversely @xmath is given, ( 4.41 ) immediately shows @xmath for all
@xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 4.26.

A Riemannian supermanifold @xmath is symmetric if and only if it is
homogeneous and there exists a point @xmath with an isometry @xmath
leaving @xmath fixed and satisfying @xmath .

Let @xmath be a connected Lie supergroup and @xmath a closed Lie
subsupergroup. Then the pair @xmath is a symmetric pair if there exists
an involutive automorphism @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath , where
@xmath is the group of fixed points of @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.27.

Let @xmath be a symmetric pair and @xmath a @xmath -invariant graded
Riemannian metric on @xmath . Then @xmath is a Riemannian symmetric
superspace.

###### Remark.

We do not state that such an invariant metric always exists!

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the morphism induced by @xmath . More precisely, for
@xmath we set @xmath ; this is well-defined because of @xmath , where
the morphisms @xmath and @xmath are the same mappings as in ( 4.32 ).
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the canonical projection. Differentiating this equation
at @xmath , we get @xmath . In view of Corollary 4.26 , it remains to
show that @xmath is an isometry.

For any @xmath we will write @xmath for left translation with @xmath .
Let @xmath , pick vector fields @xmath and @xmath around @xmath and
define @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is the standard action, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus in particular @xmath . This yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we used the @xmath -invariance of the metric for the last two
equalities.

For any @xmath , the vector field @xmath is a Killing field because of
the @xmath -invariance of the metric. Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

so in particular @xmath is a Killing field. Thus we may calculate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used ( 4.43 ). The same calculation shows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . The @xmath -invariance of the metric, together with the
@xmath -homogeneity of @xmath shows that there are enough Killing vector
fields induced by the action to conclude @xmath . ∎

### 4.14 Examples

The trivial examples are the following: Clearly, any Riemannian
symmetric space is a Riemannian symmetric superspace. Furthermore,
@xmath with the standard metric is a Riemannian symmetric superspace.
Thus, the exterior bundle of the trivial bundle @xmath over a Riemannian
symmetric space @xmath gives rise to a Riemannian symmetric superspace
since in our language it is merely @xmath , the product of two such
spaces.

Just like in the standard theory, groups that admit bi-invariant metrics
give a class of examples.

###### Proposition 4.28.

A Lie supergroup with a bi-invariant graded Riemannian metric is a
Riemannian symmetric superspace.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a Lie supergroup with a bi-invariant graded Riemannian
metric. Since the metric is left-invariant, @xmath is homogeneous. The
bi-invariance shows that the inverse map @xmath is an isometry (it
interchanges left-invariant vector fields with right-invariant vector
fields and its differential @xmath is minus the identity) and thus gives
the symmetry at @xmath . ∎

Inspired by the Zirnbauer list [ Zir 1996 ] , we now present examples of
series of Riemannian symmetric superspaces. Note that his notion of
Riemannian symmetric superspace is in so far different from ours since
he defines them as quotients of complex Lie supergroups with a certain
additional condition. We emphasize that the following list is no attempt
of a complete classification – more examples can for example be given by
duality. The classification problem is related to the problem of
classifying pseudo-Riemannian symmetric spaces [ CahPar 1980 ] , which
is solved in the semi-simple case [ Ber 1957 ] but e.g. not in the
solvable case, see [ KatOlb 2004 ] .

#### 4.14.1 The RSSS @xmath (@xmath)

Consider on the Lie superalgebra @xmath the involution @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -, @xmath -, @xmath - and @xmath
-matrices, respectively. An easy calculation shows that @xmath is an
automorphism. The decomposition into the eigenspaces of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath

The involution @xmath is induced by an isometry of @xmath : On the level
of the underlying Lie groups, the involutive automorphism of @xmath
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , restricts to an involutive automorphism of the reduced
group @xmath with @xmath as differential and @xmath as (connected) fixed
point group. Since the question of extending a morphism of Lie
superalgebras to a morphism of Lie supergroups concerns only the
underlying Lie group ( [ DelMor 1999 ] , p. 69), @xmath is induced by an
involutive automorphism of @xmath (which is also denoted by @xmath ).
Thus, @xmath is a symmetric pair.

In view of Proposition 4.27 and Theorem 4.23 , we have to find an @xmath
-invariant scalar superproduct on @xmath . Clearly, the supertrace
induces an invariant supersymmetric bilinear form @xmath ; we have to
show its non-degeneracy. To show the non-degeneracy of its even part,
note that the even part of @xmath splits as @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an orthogonal decomposition with respect to the supertrace. On the
first two summands, the supertrace clearly is non-degenerate; on the
third, it is so because @xmath . To prove the non-degeneracy of the odd
part, we define for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

an element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to get @xmath . We have thus shown that @xmath , with the metric induced
by the supertrace, is a Riemannian symmetric superspace for @xmath .
Note that the Killing form is a non-zero multiple of the supertrace
since @xmath (see 4.10 ) so in this example the Killing form also gives
an invariant metric.

#### 4.14.2 The RSSS @xmath

The automorphism @xmath , defined as in the previous example, induces an
automorphism of @xmath . Then the same argumentation as above introduces
the structure of a Riemannian symmetric superspace on @xmath ; by
passing to the quotient @xmath of @xmath we achieve that the supertrace
is non-degenerate. Note that here we do not have a metric induced by the
Killing form since the Killing form of @xmath vanishes, cf. 4.10 .

#### 4.14.3 The RSSS @xmath

The involution @xmath on the Lie superalgebra @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an automorphism. The corresponding decomposition of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

is embedded into @xmath via

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the space @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the level of Lie groups,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , is an involution of @xmath which restricts to an
involution of @xmath with fixed point group @xmath and differential
@xmath . Thus, @xmath is induced by an involution of @xmath . Defining
the Lie supergroup @xmath to be given by the Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we thus see that @xmath is a symmetric pair.

The supertrace @xmath is an invariant scalar superproduct on @xmath ;
the induced invariant metric gives the structure of a Riemannian
symmetric superspace.

Note that for @xmath , the Killing form vanishes and thus would not be
appropriate. In this case, note also that we may write this Riemannian
symmetric superspace as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath in @xmath means passing to the Lie supergroup obtained
by factoring out the one-dimensional center generated by the identity
matrix.

#### 4.14.4 The RSSS @xmath

Write the elements of @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -, @xmath - and @xmath -matrices,
respectively, satisfying the relations @xmath and @xmath .

The involutive automorphism @xmath of @xmath , given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

yields the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that the unitary superalgebra @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can identify it with @xmath via

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the @xmath and @xmath are real matrices.

On the level of Lie groups,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an automorphism of @xmath with differential @xmath and fixed point
group isomorphic to @xmath . Thus, there is an automorphism of the Lie
supergroup @xmath turning @xmath into a symmetric pair.

This example somehow plays an extraordinary role since on @xmath , the
supertrace is negative definite:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is non-degenerate on the odd part since for any non-vanishing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, equipped with the metric induced by the negative of the
supertrace, @xmath becomes a Riemannian symmetric superspace such that
the reduced manifold is a Riemannian symmetric space (the product of one
of compact type and one of non-compact type, @xmath ).

#### 4.14.5 The RSSS @xmath

Writing the elements of @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath , we define an involutive automorphism @xmath of
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The induced decomposition is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is embedded into @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the level of Lie groups,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , is an automorphism of the reduced Lie group @xmath with
fixed point group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and differential @xmath . Via the corresponding automorphism of the Lie
supergroup @xmath , the pair @xmath becomes a symmetric pair – here,
@xmath is the connected component of @xmath . Again, the supertrace
induces an invariant metric on the corresponding homogeneous superspace
@xmath and thus turns it into a Riemannian symmetric superspace.

#### 4.14.6 The Exceptional RSSS @xmath

We also give one example of a family of Riemannian symmetric superspaces
not occurring in the Zirnbauer list. The corresponding infinitesimal
objects are taken from the tables of Serganova.

The exceptional Lie superalgebra @xmath , where @xmath is defined as
follows: The even and odd part of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the @xmath -module structure given by the threefold tensor product
of the standard representation of @xmath on @xmath . The dependence on
the parameter @xmath is hidden in the remaining part of the Lie bracket,
@xmath , see [ Sche 1979 ] , Example 5 of Chapter 1, §1: Let @xmath be
the non-degenerate skew-symmetric bilinear form given by @xmath , where
@xmath is the standard basis of @xmath . Let @xmath be the @xmath
-invariant bilinear mapping given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Then we define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the @xmath are some real numbers not equal to zero depending on
@xmath and satisfying @xmath .

We define an involutive automorphism of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined by @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath -part of the
corresponding decomposition @xmath is @xmath .

Let @xmath be the Lie supergroup given by the Harish-Chandra pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the adjoint representation is the standard one. The automorphism
@xmath clearly is induced by an automorphism of @xmath turning

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

into a symmetric pair.

The invariant metric is constructed as follows: Let @xmath be the
non-degenerate @xmath -invariant skew-symmetric bilinear form given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Proposition 4.21 , it extends to an @xmath -invariant scalar
superproduct @xmath on @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath and since
@xmath is an automorphism, it follows that @xmath is orthogonal with
respect to @xmath on the whole of @xmath . Consequently, @xmath is
orthogonal to @xmath as these spaces are eigenspaces of @xmath .
Restricting @xmath to @xmath , we get an @xmath -invariant scalar
superproduct which induces an invariant metric on @xmath turning it into
a Riemannian symmetric superspace with underlying manifold @xmath .