This thesis concerns the study of homogeneous factorisations of complete
graphs with edge-transitive factors. A factorisation of a complete graph
@xmath is a partition of its edges into disjoint classes. Each class of
edges in a factorisation of @xmath corresponds to a spanning subgraph
called a factor. If all the factors are isomorphic to one another, then
a factorisation of @xmath is called an isomorphic factorisation. A
homogeneous factorisation of a complete graph is an isomorphic
factorisation where there exists a group @xmath which permutes the
factors transitively, and a normal subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that
each factor is @xmath -vertex-transitive. If @xmath also acts
edge-transitively on each factor, then a homogeneous factorisation of
@xmath is called an edge-transitive homogeneous factorisation. The aim
of this thesis is to study edge-transitive homogeneous factorisations of
@xmath . We achieve a nearly complete explicit classification except for
the case where @xmath is an affine @xmath -homogeneous group of the form
@xmath , where @xmath . In this case, we obtain necessary and sufficient
arithmetic conditions on certain parameters for such factorisations to
exist, and give a generic construction that specifies the homogeneous
factorisation completely, given that the conditions on the parameters
hold. Moreover, we give two constructions of infinite families of
examples where we specify the parameters explicitly. In the second
infinite family, the arc-transitive factors are generalisations of
certain arc-transitive, self-complementary graphs constructed by Peisert
in 2001.
