By taking advantage of the laws of physics it is possible to
revolutionize the way we communicate (transmit), process or even store
information. It is now known that quantum computers, or computers built
from quantum mechanical elements, provide new resources to solve certain
problems and perform certain tasks more efficiently than todayâ€™s
conventional computers. However, on the road to a complete understanding
of the power of quantum computers there are intermediate steps that need
to be addressed. The primary focus of this thesis is the understanding
of the possibilities and limitations of the quantum-physical world in
the areas of quantum computation and quantum information processing.

First I investigate the simulation of quantum systems on a quantum
computer (i.e., a quantum simulation) constructed of two-level quantum
elements or qubits. For this purpose, I present algebraic mappings that
allow one to efficiently obtain physical properties and compute
correlation functions of fermionic, anyonic, and bosonic systems with
such a computer. By studying the amount of resources required for a
quantum simulation, I show that the complexity of preparing a quantum
state which contains the desired information is crucial at the time of
evaluating the advantages of having a quantum computer over a
conventional one. As a small-scale demonstration of the validity of
these results, I show the simulation of a fermionic system using a
liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) device.

Remarkably, the conclusions obtained in the area of quantum simulations
can be extended to general quantum computations by means of the notion
of generalized entanglement. This is a generalization based on the idea
that quantum entanglement (i.e., the existence of non-classical
correlations) is a concept that depends on the accesible information,
that is, relative to the observer. Then I present a wide class of
quantum computations that can be efficiently simulated on a conventional
computer and where quantum computers cannot be claimed to be more
powerful. The idea is that a quantum algorithm, performed by applying a
restricted set of gates which do not create generalized entangled states
relative to small (polynomially-large) sets of observables, can be
imitated using a similar amount of resources with a conventional
computer. However, a similar statement cannot be obtained when
generalized entangled states (relative to these sets) are involved,
because this purely quantum phenomena cannot be easily reproduced by
classical-information methods.

Finally, I show how these concepts developed from an information-theory
point of view can be used to study other important problems in many-body
physics. To begin with, I exploit the notion of Lie-algebraic purity to
identify and characterize the quantum phase transitions present in the
Lipkin-Meshkov-Glick model and the spin-1/2 anisotropic XY model in a
transverse magnetic field. The results obtained show how generalized
entanglement leads to useful tools for distinguishing between ordered
and disordered phases in quantum systems. Moreover, I discuss how the
concept of general mean field hamiltonians naturally emerges from these
considerations and show that these can be exactly diagonalized by using
a conventional computer.

In brief, in this thesis I apply several topics developed in the context
of quantum information theory to study the complexity of obtaining
relevant physical properties of quantum systems with a quantum computer,
and to study different physical processes in quantum many-body systems.
