# Preface

“What’s the name again of this quantum effect when one particle on one
side of the universe magically affects a particle on the other side of
the universe?”, I asked while walking out the door to the corridor. I
was on my way to a group of teenagers who were waiting to hear how it is
to study physics at the university. In case someone asked why I found
physics so exciting I could always mention this quantum, non-locality,
spooky action-at-a-distance thing. If I only remembered the name of
it…“That’d be entanglement ”, a graduate student next-door suggested,
using the English term. Yes, that was the word lost in the back of my
mind. I had actually never heard a Norwegian name for it.

This happened one of the last days of October 2003. About a month later
it was decided that my master’s thesis would be about this very
action-at-a-distance thing, or more precisely, about how to quantify
entanglement. From hardly remembering the name of the game to
understanding how an appropriate measure needs to behave has been a long
and interesting journey. In writing this text I have tried to keep in
mind my own state of knowledge as of October 2003. With that I hope that
any 5th year physics student will find it sufficiently understandable
and self-contained as to be able to grasp the main points. Whether I
have succeeded or not is for others to decide.

This thesis is the final work leading up to the degree of Master of
Science in Applied Physics and Mathematics at the Norwegian University
of Science and Technology (NTNU). It was written during the 2004 spring
term.

I would like to thank Jan Myrheim and Stein Olav Skrøvseth for taking
the extra effort to find a topic in quantum information theory for my
thesis, and for supervising it. I would also like to thank Viktor H.
Havik and Henrik Tollefsen for interesting discussions about
entanglement.

###### Contents

-    Preface
-    1 Introduction
-    2 Preliminaries
    -    2.1 The qubit
    -    2.2 Entangled states
    -    2.3 Density operators and mixed states
    -    2.4 The Schmidt decomposition
    -    2.5 Generalised measurements
    -    2.6 Transformation of states and LOCC
        -    2.6.1 Local Operations and Classical Communication
        -    2.6.2 Transformation of a Bell state
        -    2.6.3 Concentrating partial pure state entanglement
        -    2.6.4 Distilling entanglement from mixed states
-    3 Characterisation of bipartite entanglement
    -    3.1 Pure states
    -    3.2 Mixed states
        -    3.2.1 Separable states
        -    3.2.2 Free and bound entanglement
-    4 Measures of bipartite entanglement
    -    4.1 Pure states
        -    4.1.1 von Neumann entropy
        -    4.1.2 Reduced von Neumann entropy – entropy of entanglement
        -    4.1.3 Entanglement cost and distillable entanglement
        -    4.1.4 The uniqueness theorem for measures of entanglement
    -    4.2 Mixed states
        -    4.2.1 Entanglement cost and distillable entanglement for
            mixed states
        -    4.2.2 Axioms for abstract measures
        -    4.2.3 @xmath and @xmath as extreme measures
        -    4.2.4 Relative entropy of entanglement and other distance
            based measures
        -    4.2.5 Entanglement of formation
        -    4.2.6 Negativity
        -    4.2.7 Squashed entanglement
        -    4.2.8 Other entanglement measures
-    5 Beyond bipartite entanglement and finite dimension
    -    5.1 Multipartite systems
        -    5.1.1 Separability
        -    5.1.2 Measures of entanglement
    -    5.2 Continuous variables
-    A Expressions for the quantum relative entropy

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Quantum entanglement was first viewed as a curiosity when it was pointed
out in the attempt by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen [ EPR:1935 ] to show
that quantum mechanics could not be a complete theory. When John Bell
many years later published his now well-known theorem [ bell:1964 ] , it
was hardly noticed in the scientific community. Bell had showed that for
a theory based on local hidden variables, certain correlations were
upper bounded, a result today known as the Bell inequalities. Quantum
mechanics predicted that the inequalities would be violated, thus giving
rise to a way of testing whether the predictions of quantum mechanics or
the assumptions of Einstein et al. were correct. Experiments have later
agreed with quantum mechanics [ aspect:1982 ] , although there are still
critics arguing that there are loopholes in the experimental assumptions
[ chaotic_ball , fair_sampling ] .

Entanglement has since been regarded as a real – albeit strange –
phenomenon of quantum mechanics. It was widely regarded as being the
same as violation of some Bell inequality. However, Werner [ werner:1989
] showed that there exist mixed quantum states that allow for a local
hidden-variable theory, but nevertheless are entangled. This led to new
criteria to decide if a state was separable [ PPT:1996 , HHH:1996 ] .

Parallel to this, the view of entanglement had gradually changed. From
being regarded as a curiosity, it was now seen as an information
processing and communication resource that could be used for performing
tasks that would be impossible without it. Among the possibilities
introduced were quantum cryptography [ qcrypto ] , dense coding [
dense_coding ] , teleportation of a quantum state [ teleportation ] and
exponential speed-up of certain computational tasks [ shor_proceedings ,
shor_journal , grover_proceedings , grover_journal ] . Because
entanglement was now viewed as a resource, it was natural to try to
quantify the entanglement in quantum states.

After the first papers on the quantification of entanglement [
schlienz:1995 , bennett1:1996 , bennett2:1996 , bennett3:1996 ] , the
subject has grown into a whole field of research. The aim of this work
is to describe the entanglement measures that have come out of this. The
main focus is on entanglement between two parties with finite
dimensional Hilbert spaces, as this is the situation where most of the
theory is known. Extensions to entanglement between more than two
parties and entanglement with continuous variables are also briefly
discussed.

In the course of writing this, several reviews of entanglement and
quantum information theory have been of great help. The textbook by
Nielsen and Chuang [ NC00a ] gives a nice introduction to the
prerequisites to understand entanglement theory, but contains little on
entanglement itself. John Preskill’s lecture notes [ preskill ] explain
much of the same, but has a whole chapter devoted to entanglement. The
tutorial by Bruß [ bruss-tutorial:2002 ] gives a short introduction to
most aspects of entanglement, including some entanglement measures. Both
the lecture notes by Eisert [ eisert-lectures:2003 ] and the review
article by Keyl [ keyl:2001 ] include a chapter on entanglement
measures, but the latter is rather technical in nature. The review
article by M. Horodecki about entanglement measures [ mhorodecki:2001 ]
summarises the most of the field in an elegant way, but it requires much
prior knowledge from the reader, and treats almost exclusively two-party
entanglement.

The rest of this work is organised as follows. Chapter 2 gives an
introduction to the concepts needed in the following chapters. A reader
with a basic knowledge in quantum information theory may skip large
portions of this chapter. Chapter 3 describes two-party entanglement
qualitatively, preparing the ground for chapter 4 which describes the
ways to quantify two-party entanglement. Finally, in chapter 5 it is
briefly indicated how the notions from the previous chapters may be
extended to systems of continuous variables and to multi-party systems.

Unless stated otherwise all logarithms are taken base-2.

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries

Before we can understand how to quantify entanglement, we need to have
some concepts and procedures clear. In this chapter we will have a first
look at qubits and entangled states, get used to density operators and
see how quantum states can be transformed into others.

### 2.1 The qubit

The simplest nontrivial quantum mechanical system is a two-state system
which can be described by a vector in two-dimensional complex Hilbert
space. Such a system is called a qubit . The favourite qubit of many
physicists is the spin of a spin-1/2 particle, for instance an electron.
We will use spins of such particles to illustrate entanglement.

If we measure the @xmath -component of the spin, the result is either up
or down. This measurement corresponds to the observable operator which
we call @xmath . After the measurement the state of the particle is an
eigenstate of the observable. We denote these states by @xmath and
@xmath , for spin parallel to and antiparallel to the @xmath -axis. They
are mutually orthogonal, and we take them as the unit basis vectors of
the spin Hilbert space. In addition to the eigenstates, the particle may
be in any superposition of the eigenstates,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that @xmath . When the spin along the @xmath -axis is measured, we
obtain @xmath with a probability of @xmath and @xmath with probability
@xmath (where the spin is in units of @xmath /2). After the measurement
the state is collapses into the corresponding eigenstate.

As the overall phase of a quantum state does not have any physical
significance, only the phase difference between @xmath and @xmath is
important, and for convenience we often choose @xmath to be real. In
order to also include the property @xmath , we can write the spin state
( 2.1 ) of the particle as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gives a nice and intuitive picture of the state space of the
spin-1/2 particle, and thereby any qubit. All possible states are
covered when the parameters are restricted to @xmath and @xmath . Thus,
any state corresponds to a point on the unit sphere, with the azimuthal
angle given by @xmath and the polar angle given by @xmath . Such a
sphere is called a Bloch sphere , and is a very useful tool for
visualising states of a qubit. A Bloch sphere with some states indicated
is shown in figure 2.1 . Note that for @xmath , the phase of ( 2.2 )
changes as @xmath changes, but the state is still the same. This is
reflected on the Bloch sphere, as the azimuthal angle is irrelevant at
the poles.

We may choose another set of orthonormal basis vectors. For instance

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

These are the eigenvectors of the @xmath -operator, and they are the
resulting states if we measure the spin along the @xmath -axis.
Likewise, we may measure the spin along any axis, and find a
corresponding set of eigenvectors. If we denote the basis vectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

then the operators for the spin along the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
axes are nothing more than the Pauli matrices

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the spin along any other unit vector, say @xmath where @xmath , the
spin operator is @xmath . All operators of this form have eigenvalues
@xmath corresponding to spin parallel and antiparallel to the vector.

As already mentioned, other systems are equally good qubits as a
spin-1/2 particle. Among the more popular ones are the polarisation of a
photon and the energy levels of a two-level system. They can be
represented by a Bloch sphere just as well as the spin of an electron
can. The advantage of thinking about a spin-1/2 particle is that the
vectors on the Bloch sphere corresponds to actual spin directions in
real space. Thus, a qubit in a state close to the @xmath -axis on the
Bloch sphere, has, when the qubit is a spin-1/2 particle, a spin
pointing in a direction close to the @xmath -axis.

In general the particular implementation of the qubit is not important
for our purpose, so we simply denote the basis vectors @xmath and @xmath
, which in the case of a spin-1/2 particle are typically @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The superpositions of these states corresponding
to the spin along the @xmath -axis, are often denoted @xmath and @xmath
, according to the sign in the superposition.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Three qubit operators are of special importance, namely the unitary
Pauli operators of ( 2.5 ). In the context of general qubits, they can
be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is also called the bit flip operator as it turns a @xmath into a
@xmath and vice versa. @xmath is called the phase flip operator as it
switches between the states @xmath and @xmath . The Pauli operators are
defined with respect to a particular basis. For instance, in the @xmath
basis, @xmath takes the role of the bit flip operator.

The name qubit comes from quantum bit and it plays the same role in
quantum information theory as the bit does in classical information
theory. The bit is a system which can be in one of two states, usually
denoted 0 and 1. Thus, each bit is capable of storing enough information
to answer exactly one yes/no question. As we have just seen, the qubit
is a much richer structure. In addition to being capable of being in the
states @xmath and @xmath , just as a bit, it can be in a continuum of
superpositions between those states, given by two parameters. Still,
only a single bit of information can be read from a single qubit. When
the spin of a spin-1/2 particle is measured along an axis the only
possible results are parallel and antiparallel to the chosen axis. After
the measurement the state is changed, and from the result of the
measurement we know what it is. No more information about the original
state can be retrieved.

### 2.2 Entangled states

From the simplest quantum systems whatsoever, we now turn to look at the
simplest composite quantum systems. A composite system is a system which
consists of two or more parts, and the simplest one is a system
consisting of two qubits. We call the two systems @xmath and @xmath . In
communication and entanglement theory the convention is to think of the
subsystems as being in the possession of two well separated observers,
called Alice and Bob. Any state of each of the two systems can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath The composite state of the two systems is then
simply the tensor product (or direct product) of the two states.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Such a state is called a product state , but product states are not the
only physically realisable states. If we let the two systems interact
with each other, any superposition of product states is realisable.
Hence, a general composite state can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the sets @xmath and @xmath are orthonormal bases for
the two subsystems. Any composite state that is not a product state is
called an entangled state .

A composite quantum state consisting of two parts only, is called a
bipartite state , as opposed to multipartite states which consist of
more than two parts. For bipartite qubit states, four entangled states
play a major role, namely the singlet state

  ------------------------------ -------- -------- -- ---------
                                 @xmath               (2.11a)
  and the three triplet states                        
                                                      
                                 @xmath   @xmath      (2.11b)
                                 @xmath   @xmath      (2.11c)
                                 @xmath   @xmath      (2.11d)
  ------------------------------ -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have used @xmath as a shorthand notation for @xmath . They are
called Bell states or EPR pairs . Together they form an orthonormal
basis for the state space of two qubits, called the Bell basis . The
Bell states are maximally entangled and one can be converted into
another by applying a unitary transform locally on any one of the
subsystems.

Note that if we measure the state of one qubit in a Bell state (that is,
measure the @xmath operator which has eigenvalues @xmath ), we
immediately know the state of the other particle. In the singlet Bell
state, a measurement of qubit A will yield one of the eigenstates @xmath
and @xmath , each with a probability of 1/2. These results leave qubit B
in state @xmath or @xmath , respectively.

For a single qubit we could always change to another basis where the
outcome of a @xmath measurement would be given. For a spin-1/2 particle
this means that the spin is always pointing in some direction, even
though the state will show up as a superposition in a basis where the
state is not one of the basis states. If the particle is entangled with
another particle, though, the direction of the spin of that particle
alone is not well defined. Actually, for particles in one of the Bell
states, the probability for measuring the spin of the particle to “up”
(while ignoring the other particle) is 1/2 for any direction.

### 2.3 Density operators and mixed states

We want to be able to describe the state of a subsystem that is
entangled with another subsystem to which we do not have access. State
vectors cannot be used for this purpose, and we need another
representation of quantum states, namely density operators . This is not
only useful for describing “locally” a subsystem which is part of an
entangled system for which we know the state. The formalism is also
necessary for describing quantum mechanical experiments – where noise is
inevitable – and doing quantum statistical mechanics. In the laboratory
it is impossible to isolate the quantum systems under study completely.
The systems become entangled with the environment through unwanted, but
unavoidable, interactions. Nevertheless, it is necessary to describe the
system without taking the environment into account.

In the density operator formalism, we describe quantum states by
operators on the system’s Hilbert space instead of unit vectors on it.
For any quantum state vector @xmath , the corresponding density operator
is the projection operator @xmath . As linear operators may be – and
often is – represented by matrices, density operators are also called
density matrices .

So far we have only represented the state in a new way, using density
operators instead of vectors. But what if we do not know exactly in what
state our system is? Imagine, for example, that we have a machine in our
lab which outputs particles in state @xmath (think of it as some
component of a spin). But once in a while events beyond our control and
knowledge (a spike in the electric grid, the turning on of an
electromagnet in a neighbouring lab, etc.) make the machine malfunction
slightly producing states which are close to, but not exactly @xmath .
Let us for simplicity say that the state @xmath is always created when
the machine malfunctions, and that the probability for that to happen to
any given particle is @xmath . Given this uncertainty, the state cannot
be described by a state vector. Still, in terms of density matrices it
is described as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A state that may be represented by a unit vector is called a pure state
. For a pure state we have maximal knowledge of the state. Other states
are convex combinations ¹ ¹ 1 A convex combination of elements @xmath is
an element which can be written @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . A convex
combination of two points is a point on the straight line connecting
them. of pure states, and are called mixed states . To check if a given
density operator, @xmath , represents a pure state, it is sufficient to
check if @xmath , which holds for all pure states and no mixed states.

The density operator does not tell us from what pure states the state
was prepared. For example, we can have a state @xmath or @xmath , each
with probability 1/2. The density operator is then @xmath . The same
density operator can be made by mixing the states @xmath and @xmath in
equal amounts, or the three states @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in amounts
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. We call these different
collections of pure states with corresponding probabilities, @xmath ,
ensembles . Sometimes it is also called a realisation and we say that an
ensemble realises a mixed state. Hence, when we describe a state from an
ensemble by its density operator, we discard the information about which
ensemble the mixed state was made from. The density operator still
describes the mixed state as well as can be done, as states from
different ensembles having the same density operator are experimentally
indistinguishable.

This indistinguishability makes the density operator a perhaps more
intuitive representation of a state than the state vector. For example,
a state vector has an arbitrary overall phase factor, so two vectors
differing by a phase factor represent the same state. Still, when the
vector is put together with its dual vector to form a pure state density
operator, the phase factor vanishes because of the complex conjugation.
Hence, all state vectors representing the same state are represented by
the same density operator.

To complete our discussion about density operators, we should take note
of some of their properties. For a more thorough discussion, see e.g. [
NC00a ] . Density operators are (i) positive ² ² 2 Positive operators
here refer to positive semidefinite operators. Positive definite
operators, on the other hand, satisfy @xmath for any @xmath and have
only positive eigenvalues. , meaning that for any vector @xmath , @xmath
, or equivalently that it is Hermitian with nonnegative eigenvalues.
Also, (ii) the trace of a density operator is unity, @xmath . It turns
out that any operator satisfying these two criteria can be realised by a
pure state ensemble. Hence, we may take these criteria as the defining
properties of a density operator.

We will now see how the density operators are used to describe
individual parts of an entangled system. In fact, we will see that even
when the composite system is in a pure state, if the subsystems are
entangled, the individual subsystems are in mixed states.

Consider a bipartite composite system of two qubits, shared between
Alice and Bob. The qubits are entangled, and the system is in the state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, imagine that Alice loses contact with Bob, and wants to describe
her system without any reference to the qubit in Bob’s lab. Whatever Bob
happens to be doing to his qubit should not have observable consequences
in Alice’s lab. If it had, it could have been used to perform
superluminal communication in some reference frame which would wreak
havoc in physics by allowing consequences to happen before the cause ³ ³
3 This is of course in itself no compelling reason. Even John Bell was
afraid that entanglement might do away with relativity [ whitaker:1998 ]
. The real reason is that quantum mechanics tells us that the
probabilities for outcomes of local measurements on one system do not
change when an arbitrary operation is performed on the other system. .
One of the things Bob might choose to do with his system, is to measure
@xmath in the @xmath basis. If he does, he will get @xmath or @xmath
with probability @xmath or @xmath , respectively. This leaves Alice’s
qubit in the same state as the one Bob measured, but as she wouldn’t
know the result, the state of her qubit would be a mixture of @xmath and
@xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This mixture correctly predicts the probabilities for all measurements
that can be performed locally by Alice, regardless of what Bob really
does to his system.

Formally, ignoring some degrees of freedom in a system (like the ones
corresponding to a particle out of reach) is done by tracing out the
relevant degrees of freedom from the density operator. This is also
called taking the partial trace with respect to the degrees of freedom
that are to be traced out. Any bipartite state can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the partial trace with respect to system @xmath of a bipartite
system is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The density operator obtained by tracing out one part of
the system is called the reduced density operator .

We can perform the partial trace on our example state ( 2.12 ). The
density matrix is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the reduced density matrix becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is just what we expected.

In section 2.2 we saw what we meant by an entangled state as long as the
states were pure. But this leaves the question of when a mixed state is
entangled. Consider for instance the mixture of two Bell states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Written out in an orthonormal product basis, this is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is a mixture of the product states @xmath and @xmath . So the
mixed state can be realised by both an ensemble of maximally entangled
states and an ensemble of product states. We say that a mixed state is
separable if and only if it can be realised as a mixture (convex
combination) of locally prepared states ⁴ ⁴ 4 This definition is due to
Werner [ werner:1989 ] who called them “classically correlated” states.
. That is, it can be written as ⁵ ⁵ 5 In fact it was considered
sufficient that that such a sum approximated the state arbitrarily well.
It was shown in [ HHH:1996 ] , though, that in the finite dimensional
case any separable state could be expressed in @xmath terms, where
@xmath is the dimension of the Hilbert space of the composite system.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath forms a probability distribution; @xmath and @xmath . This
also means ( [ HHH:1996 ] ) that the state can be written as a mixture
of pure product states,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, a mixture of entangled states need not be entangled, but a
mixture of separable states is always separable. Mixture is a process
which destroys entanglement. This is because by discarding information
about which of a number of entangled states the system is in, it can no
longer be distinguished from a mixture of separable states.

### 2.4 The Schmidt decomposition

A useful tool when working with bipartite, pure state entanglement is
the Schmidt decomposition . It is a decomposition into the biorthogonal
basis which gives the smallest possible number of terms for a product
basis.

Given a bipartite pure state @xmath , we may write it in terms of some
product basis, orthonormal in both subsystems

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficients @xmath may be seen as elements in a @xmath matrix
@xmath . Using the singular value decomposition this may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath matrix which is zero except for the diagonal
elements which are real and positive, @xmath is a @xmath unitary matrix
and @xmath a @xmath unitary matrix. This means that @xmath may be
written as @xmath , so the state vector may be written

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We now take as our new basis vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define @xmath to obtain the final form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the Schmidt decomposition. What we have achieved is to write
any state as a linear combination of maximum @xmath product vectors.
Also, not only are the product vectors in the basis orthogonal, the
basis vectors from each subsystem are only used once. These vectors are
still orthogonal as we have only performed a unitary transformation on
the set of basis vectors, making the set of new basis vectors
biorthogonal . The coefficients @xmath are called the Schmidt
coefficients , although in the literature this name is sometimes given
to @xmath

For many purposes the mere existence of the Schmidt decomposition is
enough to make it usable, whereas it sometimes needs to be calculated
explicitly. An example of the former is to show that the eigenvalues of
the two reduced density matrices of a pure, bipartite state are equal.
Actually, it can be seen directly from ( 2.23 ) that by forming the
density matrix and tracing out any one of the two subsystems, the
reduced matrix is already on diagonal form with @xmath as eigenvalues.
It is often easier to calculate the Schmidt coefficients this way than
doing the singular value decomposition explicitly.

### 2.5 Generalised measurements

To facilitate the quantum operations we will generalise the concept of
measurements from the way it is usually treated in courses of
introductory quantum mechanics. In that formalism, which is called
projective measurements , the objects representing the measurements are
Hermitian operators. The result of the measurement is an eigenvalue of
the observable and after the measurement, the new state of the system is
in the eigenstate corresponding to the eigenvalue (or projected into the
eigenspace if the eigenvalue is degenerate). The probability for an
outcome of the measurement is the absolute squared expansion coefficient
when the state is expanded in the eigenstates of the observable.

In the general measurement scheme, a measurement is represented by a set
of linear operators @xmath called measurement operators satisfying the
completeness relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The probability for the outcome to be @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and after the measurement with result @xmath , the new state of the
system is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may, at least in theory, implement any measurement that can be
described by a set of measurement operators. Thus, we may construct
measurements which convert an initial state to a desired state with a
certain probability, discarding the system if that particular outcome
does not occur. As we will see, this is one of the ideas behind
distillation of entanglement.

The projective measurement formalism is a special case of the
generalised measurement scheme. The observable, @xmath , is a Hermitian
operator and can be decomposed according to the spectral theorem.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the eigenvectors of the observable, and @xmath the
corresponding eigenvalues. By taking as measurement operators @xmath ,
the completeness relation ( 2.24 ) is satisfied. The probability for a
given outcome, @xmath , of a measurement is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which is exactly the absolute square of the expansion coefficient of
@xmath for that eigenstate. The state after the measurement is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with an arbitrary phase @xmath . Like @xmath , this is an eigenstate of
@xmath .

The generalised measurement scheme can easily be further generalised to
density operators. For pure states, the generalisation is
straightforward. The density operator corresponding to the pure state
vector @xmath is @xmath . The probability for a given outcome is of
course still the same as in ( 2.25 ), but we write it in terms of the
density operator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

When the state changes after a measurement with result @xmath , the
density operator corresponding to the state vector ( 2.26 ) is obviously

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The probability ( 2.28 ) and new state ( 2.29 ) is also valid if the
density operator represents a mixed state. To see this, we write the
density operator in terms of one of its pure state realisations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The joint probability for the system to be in the pure state @xmath and
measuring a result @xmath is @xmath . Summing over all @xmath we get the
total probability for getting @xmath as the result of the measurement.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Similarly, the new state after the measurement of the mixed state
becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The general measurement scheme covers all operations that can be
performed on a quantum system. A unitary transformation is the special
case of a one-outcome measurement as the measurement operators then will
have to be unitary to satisfy the completeness relation ( 2.24 ).
Performing a different unitary transformation @xmath conditional on the
outcome of a measurement described by the operators @xmath , is
described by the new measurement operators @xmath . It is easy to see
that these operators satisfy the completeness relation, that the
probabilities of the outcomes are the same and that the post measurement
state is what we expect, namely @xmath . Similarly, consecutive
measurements can be put together to form a single set of measurement
operators, even when the measurements to be done depend on the outcome
of the previous ones. When doing this, all possible combinations of
measurement outcomes are considered as single outcomes of the total
measurement.

In applications it depends on the situation whether we use the full
generalised measurement scheme or only consider projective measurements.
Projective measurements are sometimes simpler to handle and combined
with unitary transformations they describe everything that can be
described by generalised measurements. Therefore, both formalisms will
be used in the following.

### 2.6 Transformation of states and LOCC

We will see later that the set of operations that we allow to be
performed on a quantum state is essential to the most basic entanglement
measures. All operations can be described as generalised measurements.
But we will find it useful to describe them as measurements combined
with unitary transformations where the next step in a sequence of
operations may be decided by a previous measurement outcome.

#### 2.6.1 Local Operations and Classical Communication

In the context of entanglement a subclass of quantum operations is
particularly important, namely local quantum operations (LO). When we
have a bipartite or multipartite state, the subsystems may be separated,
or at least well isolated from each other. We may therefore only perform
operations that act locally on each subsystem. That is, the operators
will be of the form @xmath . In addition, the parties sharing a
multipartite state are usually allowed to communicate classically, and
through this classical communication (CC) they may perform different
operations depending on the measurement results of the other parties.
This subclass of operations is called Local Operations and Classical
Communication , usually shortened to LOCC . In the literature it is
sometimes named otherwise, e.g. QLCC or LQCC. LOCC is important in
entanglement theory because entanglement is exactly those correlations
that cannot be created using LOCC.

#### 2.6.2 Transformation of a Bell state

Suppose Alice and Bob share a Bell state @xmath and want to transform it
into the state @xmath . One way of doing this is as follows. Alice
performs a measurement described by the measurement operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the local state vectors are denoted as usual:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operators clearly satisfies the completeness relation ( 2.24 ), as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After the measurement we may have one of two states, depending on the
outcome,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the desired output state. If the result of the
measurement is 2, leaving the system in the state @xmath , Alice applies
the @xmath operator (also called bit flip operator) to her system
converting @xmath into @xmath and vice versa. Then she tells Bob to do
the same through the classical communication channel. The resulting
state is @xmath and their common goal is achieved.

The transformation we just did, transforms a maximally entangled state
into a less or equally entangled state. For @xmath and @xmath the output
state is a product state, which is not entangled at all, whereas for
@xmath and @xmath the output state is also a Bell state.

#### 2.6.3 Concentrating partial pure state entanglement

We may also try to do the transformation the other way around. We begin
with the state @xmath , where we for simplicity suppose that @xmath ,
and want to end up with the Bell state @xmath . The lower boundary of
this interval is a product state for @xmath which cannot possibly be
turned into an entangled state by LOCC. The upper boundary @xmath is the
desired output state and will need no transformation.

The problem is now to construct local measurement operators which give
@xmath as a post measurement state. The operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

will give the desired output, and we want the constant to be as large as
possible to maximise the probability for this output. Still, for the
completeness relation ( 2.24 ) to be satisfied none of the diagonal
elements can be greater than 1. This is because for any @xmath , @xmath
has nonnegative diagonal elements, and each diagonal element needs to
sum up to 1 to get the identity operator in ( 2.24 ). In the valid range
of @xmath , @xmath , so the maximal constant is @xmath . This gives the
optimal measurement operator for the successful outcome

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The remaining set of matrices representing the measurement operators
need to have a vanishing element to the lower right, and the remaining
elements need to be such that the completeness relation is satisfied.
The easiest way to do this is to simply add one more operator, namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The new states after the measurement are proportional to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The probability for the two outcomes are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and the normalised new states are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We see that there is a certain probability for converting a partially
entangled state into a maximally entangled state, but the less entangled
the initial state is, the smaller is the probability. This is consistent
with the fact that LOCC cannot increase the expected entanglement.
Still, we may perform a measurement which may give us a more entangled
state at the risk of losing the entanglement we had. If we have a large
number of bipartite two-qubit systems, we may apply the above procedure
and discard the systems where the output is a product state, thereby
effectively concentrating entanglement.

#### 2.6.4 Distilling entanglement from mixed states

Also mixed state entanglement may be concentrated, or distilled . This
will be important for practical applications, as the channels used to
create entanglement in general will be noisy. A collection of
distillation protocols was introduced in [ bennett1:1996 ] and [
bennett3:1996 ] . We will take a closer look at a slightly modified
version of a distillation protocol introduced in the latter, which for
certain mixed states can yield pure Bell states as output.

Consider a mixed state, as always shared between Alice and Bob, which
can be represented as a collection of @xmath states contaminated with a
portion of @xmath states. The corresponding density operator is then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Alice and Bob now pick two pairs from the ensemble. Each of them will
perform a joint operation on the two subsystems on their side. Then they
measure one of the pairs, thereby destroying any entanglement in that
pair, to decide if the other pair is in the desired output state.

The composite system of the two pairs is described by the density
operator

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the first and third qubit are in Alice’s possession and the second
and fourth are in Bob’s possession. The two first qubits are the first
pair, and the two last are the second pair. It may be written
symbolically as @xmath . Both Alice and Bob applies a CNOT gate to the
two qubits in their possession, using the qubit from the first pair as a
control bit and the second one as the target. A CNOT gate is a unitary
transformation which does nothing when the control bit is zero and flips
the target bit if the control bit is set to 1. The operator is written

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the usual bit flip operator, or Pauli @xmath -operator.
But as Alice’s operator works on the first and third qubit while Bob’s
operator works on the second and fourth, in our basis the operators are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Operationally it only amounts to flipping the third qubit of @xmath in
all terms where the first qubit is 1 and flipping the fourth qubit where
the second qubit is 1. This leaves the new state

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In this state Alice and Bob both measure the state of their qubits
belonging to the target pair. This can be done formally with the set of
measurement operators

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and is equivalent to measuring the observable @xmath as the measurement
operators are constructed from eigenvectors of this observable. The
interesting outcome is when both qubits are measured to 1. The
probability for that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where only the boxed terms of @xmath survive being operated on by the
@xmath and of them only the two diagonal ones give a nonzero
contribution when the trace is taken, giving a probability of @xmath .
The new state after the measurement is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

So by using two entangled pairs in a mixed state Alice and Bob have
obtained a pure state where one of the pairs is in a Bell state. The
probability for this to happen is @xmath , so on average we get a yield
of @xmath Bell states per input pair.

Some additional Bell states may be squeezed out of the mixed states
after using the above protocol. The measurement result 00, with a
probability @xmath , leaves the pair of control qubits in the state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is on the same form as the original input state with a new mixing
ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

These pairs may be run through the same procedure once more with a yield
of @xmath , increasing the total yield with an amount of @xmath , where
the factor @xmath comes from the fact that we use two pairs and only get
one out. This procedure may be iterated, and the total yield converges
quickly so only few iterations are necessary in practice. Figure 2.2
shows the total yield calculated numerically as a function of @xmath .

In general, distillation protocols do not yield pure state pairs after a
finite number of iterations. Likewise, in the above protocol this only
happens when the state can be written as a mixture of a Bell state and
another special state. A general feature, though, is the application of
the bilateral CNOT unitary transformation on two pairs.

The purity of the output states is measured by the fidelity of the state
@xmath , defined as ⁶ ⁶ 6 Sometimes the fidelity is defined as the
square root of this.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the desired output state. Applying a distillation
protocol to an ensemble of states, leaves a subensemble where the
fidelity is higher, along with a subensemble where the fidelity is
lower, often zero. In the limit of reapplying the procedure to the
higher-fidelity states an infinite number of times, the fidelity
approaches unity. This comes at a cost, however, as the yield decreases
as we demand higher fidelity. For the simplest protocols the yield
approaches zero as the fidelity approaches unity. But by combining
protocols and using the already distilled states as a resource, the
limit can be made finite.

## Chapter 3 Characterisation of bipartite entanglement

Before moving on to quantify the entanglement in a bipartite state, we
will try to characterise it more qualitatively. There are a number of
questions which does not have an immediate answer. Given a state, how
can we tell wheter it is entangled? Is there more than one type of
entanglement? Can all entangled states be distilled to Bell states?

### 3.1 Pure states

When we are given a bipartite state the first question of interest is
whether it is entangled or not. This is the question of separability . A
separable state is a state which is not entangled, so each of the
subsystems can be given a description on its own. When it comes to pure
states, a state is separable if and only if it is a product state. As
indicated in 2.2 , a pure state is a product state if it can be written
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any pure states @xmath and @xmath belonging to Alice and Bob,
respectively. If the state is not a product state, it is an entangled
state.

In practice, though, one needs to find the right basis vectors to be
able to write a product state as in ( 3.1 ). A simpler criterion is
desired. The Schmidt decomposition (section 2.4 ) is helpful in this
respect. The number of terms in the Schmidt decomposition is called the
Schmidt number , sometimes also Schmidt rank . That is, the number
@xmath in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Schmidt number is at most @xmath , where @xmath ( @xmath ) is the
dimension of subsystem @xmath ( @xmath ). But when some of the Schmidt
coefficients are zero, those terms may be skipped giving a lower Schmidt
number. Remember that the Schmidt coefficients are simply the square
root of the eigenvalues of any of the reduced density matrices. Hence,
the Schmidt number is simply the number of nonzero eigenvalues of @xmath
or @xmath .

What the Schmidt number tells us physically is basically how many
degrees of freedom that are entangled. And as a product state can be
written as ( 3.1 ) it is obvious that its Schmidt number is 1. For pure
states this is a necessary and sufficient criterion for separability.

It turns out that entanglement from any pure entangled state can be
concentrated into Bell states. This may be done by using the procedure
similar to the one described in section 2.6.3 , or a more advanced
procedure that operates on more partially entangled pairs at the same
time to give a higher yield (see e.g. [ bennett2:1996 ] ). Bell states
may again be used to produce other entangled states by means of LOCC.
Because of this, and the easy identification through the Schmidt number,
the only classification we make for bipartite pure states is in
separable and entangled states.

### 3.2 Mixed states

Some properties of mixed states were discussed in section 2.3 . The
structure of mixed state bipartite entanglement is richer than its pure
state equivalent. For instance there are entangled states that cannot be
distilled to Bell states, and cannot be put to use in any of the
applications where entanglement is a vital resource. Also, the more
difficult task of finding out whether a given mixed state is separable
or not gives rise to classes of states which can be identified by other
criteria.

#### 3.2.1 Separable states

Recall from section 2.3 that a bipartite state is called separable if it
can be realised as a mixture of product states,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . Given a density matrix in some basis the task
of finding local density matrices to satisfy ( 3.3 ) can be enormous.
Even for the simplest system which may be entangled, a pair of qubits, a
density operator would typically look like

  -- -------- -- -------- -------
     @xmath               (3.4)
                 @xmath   
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------

or in matrix representation in the @xmath basis,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is not easy to see that this can be written as ( 3.3 ). Still, it is
constructed as a mixture of two product states. It can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It could of course be realised by a variety of other mixtures as well.

This example shows that we could well use an operational criterion for
separability, like the Schmidt number for pure states. In general, no
easily computable necessary and sufficient criterion is known. Still, we
have a necessary condition which is easy to compute. This is known as
the PPT ¹ ¹ 1 Positive Partial Transpose -criterion or Peres-Horodecki
criterion [ PPT:1996 , HHH:1996 ] . It states that if the state is
separable, then the partial transpose of the density operator with
respect to one subsystem is positive. A transpose of an operator needs
to be taken with respect to a basis, and the resulting operator depends
on the basis. Actually, if @xmath is the transpose of the operator with
respect to one basis, any operator of the form @xmath for unitary @xmath
satisfying @xmath (in the same basis) is a transpose of the operator
with respect to another basis. However, since the different bases are
connected by a unitary transformation, the eigenvalues are independent
of the basis. Therefore, any orthonormal basis will do for taking the
transposition. More formally, if we choose an orthonormal product basis
@xmath for the state @xmath , the partial transpose @xmath is defined by
its matrix elements

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the example matrix ( 3.5 ) taking the partial transpose of system
@xmath corresponds to transposing within each of the four @xmath blocks,
whereas switching the upper right block with the lower left block
corresponds to transposing system @xmath .

For systems of dimension @xmath and @xmath the PPT-criterion is also
sufficient for the state to be separable [ HHH:1996 ] . For larger
systems, though, there exist entangled PPT states [ entangled-ppt ] .
The PPT-criterion is still so useful that the class of PPT states is an
important class of states, strictly larger than the class of separable
states. Anything that can be proved for all PPT states, is automatically
true for separable states.

#### 3.2.2 Free and bound entanglement

Unlike pure states, not all entangled mixed states can be distilled into
Bell states [ bound-entanglement ] . This is an important distinction,
because for many applications entanglement must be distilled in order to
be useful. Entanglement that can be distilled is called free
entanglement and entanglement that cannot be distilled is called bound
entanglement . Bound entangled states cannot be written as a convex
combination of product states ( 3.3 ) and thus cannot be prepared
locally by two classically communicating parties, but its entanglement
is well hidden and difficult to detect. It has been shown that for a
pair of qubits all entangled states can be distilled [ 2x2-distillable ]
.

A connection between free entangled states and PPT states was found in [
bound-entanglement ] . It says that no free entangled state is PPT.
Hence, all PPT entangled states are bound entangled states. This result
was actually the first evidence of the existence of bound entangled
states.

This raises the question of whether a nonpositive partial transpose
(NPPT) state is always distillable. The answer to this question is not
known, but there are indications that NPPT bound entangled states do
exist [ bound-NPPT1 , bound-NPPT2 ] .

It has been proven that bound entanglement is useless for quantum
teleportation [ bound_useless_teleportation ] , and it can be proved for
other applications as well. One has found, though, that bound
entanglement is not completely useless after all. For certain tasks it
can be activated [ bound_activated ] to facilitate distillation of other
quantum states. It has even been shown that a small amount of PPT bound
entanglement as a resource makes it possible to distill entanglement
from any NPPT state [ bound_activating_infinitesimal ] . This means that
if NPPT bound entangled states really exist, entanglement can be
distilled by putting together two states that are not distillable by
themselves.

## Chapter 4 Measures of bipartite entanglement

Entanglement can be utilised for performing many tasks which are
impossible without it, or enhance the performance of other tasks. In
most of these tasks entanglement is consumed, so we trade entanglement
for something else. It is clear from this that we may treat entanglement
as a resource , just as energy is a resource needed for certain tasks.
This is the reason why we want to quantify the entanglement in an
entangled state. Given a state and a task that consumes entanglement,
how much can we achieve? How well can we do? It is not obvious that an
entangled state that performs a given task better than another is will
be the better resource for another task. Indeed, this is only true in a
very limited context. Because of this, we have in general many ways to
quantify the nonlocal resources (or entanglement) in a quantum state.

An entanglement measure @xmath is a functional that takes a quantum
state of a multipartite system to a nonnegative real number. In this
chapter we only consider bipartite systems, hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the set of density operators on the Hilbert space @xmath
. There are in principle two ways to quantify the entanglement in a
state. Operational measures are based on how well a certain task can be
performed, usually compared to Bell states. The other way, which gives
rise to abstract measures , is to work from a set of natural axioms we
believe an entanglement measure should satisfy, and look for functionals
that satisfy the axioms.

There are also two regimes to consider. In the finite regime we consider
the resources contained in a single quantum system, whereas in the
asymptotic regime we take into account an infinite number of systems in
the same state and consider the the resources per system .

### 4.1 Pure states

Before treating the general case of mixed states we will consider the
simpler case of entanglement measures of pure states. The treatment is
facilitated by the fact that a pure state contains no classical
correlations between the subsystems, so any correlation present must be
of quantum nature. As mentioned in section 2.3 , even if an entangled
state is pure the states of the subsystems – described locally by the
reduced density operator – are mixed. For pure states, then, the amount
of “mixedness” turn out to be a good measure of entanglement.

#### 4.1.1 von Neumann entropy

Our measure for how mixed a quantum state @xmath is, will be the von
Neumann entropy , defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we take the logarithm base-2 as is the custom in information
theory. It is most easily calculated from the nonzero eigenvalues @xmath
of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The von Neumann entropy is often seen as a generalisation of the Shannon
entropy from classical information theory. Although it is true that
Shannon entropy arises as a special case in quantum information theory
when only orthogonal states are considered, the historical influence is
the other way around. von Neumann introduced his entropy in 1932 [
von_neumann:1932 ] and Shannon published his mathematical theory of
communication in 1948 [ shannon:1948 ] . In fact, it was von Neumann who
suggested that Shannon should name his uncertainty function “entropy” as
that was already used in statistical physics [ tribus:1971 , p. 180] .

What the von Neumann entropy essentially describes, is the uncertainty
in a quantum state. It is zero for pure states, and smaller for a
mixture of two nonorthogonal states than a similar mixture of two
orthogonal states. It is not only an analogue to the entropy known from
thermodynamics, it is the same quantity (up to a constant with the
definition ( 4.2 )). Indeed, it was derived using notions such as the
ideal gas law and other laws of thermodynamics [ von_neumann:1932 , p.
191-202] ¹ ¹ 1 Pages 359-379 in the far worse typeset English
translation [ von_neumann_english:1955 ] . .

#### 4.1.2 Reduced von Neumann entropy – entropy of entanglement

For the purpose of quantifying entanglement, the important quantity is
the reduced von Neumann entropy. This is the von Neumann entropy of the
reduced density matrix. We saw an example in section ( 2.3 ) that the
reduced density operator of a pure entangled state represents a mixed
state. The von Neumann entropy of either of the subsystems (the
entropies are equal) is a good measure of entanglement. Because of this,
the reduced von Neumann entropy is also known under the name entropy of
entanglement @xmath .

It is easy to see that the reduced von Neumann entropy is equal for both
reduced density matrices. The von Neumann entropy only depends on the
eigenvalues of the density matrix ( 4.3 ) and because of the existence
of the Schmidt decomposition, the eigenvalues are equal, as was
mentioned in section 2.4 .

We haven’t yet pointed out what constitutes a good measure, but the
entropy of entanglement has some properties we find natural. (i) It is
zero for any product state, (ii) it is maximal when the reduced density
matrix is completely mixed, e.g. when the subsystems have no individual
properties (for the degrees of freedom considered) and (iii) it is
invariant under local unitary transformations. The above requirements
were introduced in [ schlienz:1995 ] , but requirements have later been
refined and placed on firmer ground for both pure and mixed states.

The entropy of entanglement was first introduced as a measure of
entanglement in [ bennett1:1996 ] . It is an abstract measure in the
sense that it satisfies some requirements, and it does not have an
immediate operational interpretation. We will now take a look at two
pure state entanglement measures which have a direct operational
meaning.

#### 4.1.3 Entanglement cost and distillable entanglement

We saw in section 2.6.3 an example of a concentration of pure state
entanglement. We turned a partly entangled two-qubit state into a Bell
state with a yield depending on how entangled the initial state was.
There are other protocols which give a higher yield if we have more than
one pair to operate on (see e.g. [ bennett2:1996 ] ). The distillable
entanglement @xmath is defined as the maximum yield of Bell states that
can be obtained, optimised over all possible LOCC protocols. The
distillable entanglement is also sometimes called entanglement of
distillation

The entanglement cost @xmath is the dual to the distillable
entanglement. Two separated parties cannot prepare an entangled state if
they can only communicate classically. But if they have some entangled
state in some standard form like Bell states, they can convert those
into the desired entangled state. Thus, the entanglement cost is defined
as the minimum number of Bell states needed to create a given state by
means of LOCC.

The above definitions were implicitly given for the finite regime. It
turns out that in this regime @xmath and @xmath are hard to calculate
even though the states are pure. What is clear intuitively is that for
any state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If not, one could create entanglement by means of LOCC by converting
Bell states to a state not satisfying ( 4.4 ) and converting them back
again.

In the asymptotic limit, the results are known. We define the
regularised (or asymptotic) versions of distillable entanglement and
entanglement cost as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In this case, it was shown in [ bennett2:1996 ] that both the
distillable entanglement and entanglement cost is equal to the entropy
of entanglement, @xmath . In fact, if two states @xmath and @xmath have
the same entropy of entanglement, they can be interconverted with
efficiency approaching unity as @xmath . If they do not have the same
entropy of entanglement, @xmath can be converted into @xmath with
asymptotic yield @xmath . It has even been shown that this conversion
can be done such that the amount of classical communication required per
Bell state produced approaches zero [ interconvertible:1999 ] (it scales
as @xmath ).

Despite the fact that the entropy of entanglement did not have an
operational interpretation ab initio , we see that it indeed plays a
fundamental role. The fact that the entropy of entanglement can be
asymptotically conserved in the conversion of states using LOCC, places
huge constraints on other candidates for pure state asymptotic
entanglement measures. A measure would not live up to our expectations
if we could increase it using only LOCC. If another measure were to give
two different values for states with the same entropy of entanglement,
it would be possible increase it by LOCC by converting the state with
lower value to the one with higher value. The conversion between states
with conversion rate @xmath imposes even stronger constraints, so we
would expect any asymptotic pure state measure to coincide with the
entropy of entanglement. The exact conditions for this to happen are
discussed in the next section.

#### 4.1.4 The uniqueness theorem for measures of entanglement

The fact that the pure state asymptotic entanglement cost and
distillable entanglement coincide with the entropy of entanglement is a
special case of a more general property of entanglement measures. The
uniqueness theorem for entanglement measures states that any pure state
measure of entanglement that satisfies certain natural criteria
coincides with the entropy of entanglement. The criteria are considered
to be too strict for the finite regime, but all natural asymptotic
measures satisfy the conditions.

The uniqueness theorem has been developed gradually in the literature,
in the beginning only as an intuitive idea of the same character as
given in the previous section [ uniqueness1 ] . Later, uniqueness was
proved from a set of conditions that measures should satisfy [
uniqueness2 , limits:2000 ] . In [ uniqueness3 ] the minimal conditions
for the theorem to hold were found. The conditions come in different
versions, some weaker than others. It turns out that some of the
stronger conditions are not necessary for the theorem, but are in fact
implied by the weaker conditions. The strongest versions are listed
first.

(P0) If @xmath is separable (i.e. a product state), then @xmath

(P1a) (Normalisation) For the maximally entangled state in @xmath
dimensions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the two sets @xmath and @xmath are orthonormal bases for the two
subsystems, @xmath , where we as usual take the logarithm base-2.

(P1b) For the Bell state @xmath , @xmath . The previous condition is
simply the generalisation of this.

(P2) For any operation @xmath that can be implemented by means of LOCC
and any @xmath such that @xmath is a pure state, @xmath .

(P3) (Continuity) Let @xmath and @xmath be sequences of pure bipartite
states living on the sequence of Hilbert spaces @xmath . For all such
sequences such that @xmath where @xmath is the trace norm @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

(P4a) (Weak additivity) For all pure states @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

(P4b) (Asymptotic weak additivity) Given @xmath and a pure state @xmath
, there exists an integer @xmath such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.9)
  -- -- -- -------

(P4c) (Existence of a regularisation) For all bipartite pure states
@xmath , the limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

exists.

With these conditions given, the uniqueness theorem for entanglement
measures states [ uniqueness3 ] that for a functional @xmath on pure
states, the following are equivalent:
(i) @xmath satisfies (P1b), (P2), (P3) and (P4b).
(ii) @xmath satisfies (P0), (P1a), (P2), (P3) and (P4a).
(iii) @xmath coincides with the entropy of entanglement @xmath .
On the other hand, if @xmath satisfies (P0), (P1a), (P2) and (P3), it
automatically satisfies (P4c), and @xmath .

(i) represents the weakest set of conditions. When they are satisfied,
the stronger conditions in (ii) are also satisfied. The connection is
that (P4a) and (P4b) turn out to be equivalent ((P4a) @xmath (P4b) is
obvious) and (P1b), (P2) and (P4a) together implies (P0) and (P1a). The
uniqueness for the asymptotic regime, previously mentioned, is
concretised by the last sentence.

### 4.2 Mixed states

The measures of pure state bipartite entanglement constitute a very
limited subset of the measures of generally mixed states. For mixed
states there is no unique way to quantify the nonlocal quantum resources
even in the asymptotic regime. In the pure state asymptotic limit, the
entropy of entanglement imposed a total order on the set of states. Any
state could be converted into another state with equal or less
entanglement. In the mixed state case there are states where neither can
be converted into the other, giving only a partial order on the set of
states. (For a longer discussion on entanglement measures as ordering of
the states, see [ ordering_states ] .) This makes the structure of mixed
state entanglement richer than that of pure states.

#### 4.2.1 Entanglement cost and distillable entanglement for mixed
states

The entanglement cost and distillable entanglement can easily be defined
for mixed states in the same way as for pure states. The entanglement
cost @xmath is the minimum number of Bell states needed to produce the
state by means of LOCC and the distillable entanglement @xmath is the
maximum number of Bell states that can be distilled by an optimal LOCC
distillation protocol. However, a perfect conversion between mixed
states in the finite regime is usually not possible, so in the following
we will only consider the asymptotic versions @xmath and @xmath . There
is a tweak, though, compared to the pure state case. As mentioned in the
discussion of entanglement distillation (section 2.6.4 ) we do not
require the conversion to be perfect. The only requirement is that the
fidelity approaches unity as @xmath .

Note that to produce mixed states from Bell states using perfect LOCC we
will need to discard some information. This can be done by doing a
random local unitary transformation and not recording which one it was,
or by doing a measurement and forgetting the outcome. A third option is
to entangle the local system with an ancilla system and discard the
ancilla. It is not surprising then that the distillable entanglement
usually is strictly smaller than the entanglement cost. Actually, for
any measure @xmath which satisfies certain natural conditions for
asymptotic measures, the entanglement cost and distillable entanglement
provide upper and lower bounds [ limits:2000 ] ² ² 2 In [ limits:2000 ]
the upper bound was @xmath , the regularised entanglement of formation .
This has been shown to be equal to the asymptotic entanglement cost [
cost_eq_formation ] . ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bound entangled states, discussed in section 3.2.2 , is an example
where the difference between @xmath and @xmath is highly visible. @xmath
is obviously zero, but @xmath is finite. This illustrates that one
single measure is not enough to quantify the entanglement resources in a
mixed quantum state, even in the asymptotic limit.

#### 4.2.2 Axioms for abstract measures

The axiomatic approach to quantifying entanglement has been quite
successful in finding measures that quantify certain aspects of
entanglement. During the course of finding the right conditions, some
conditions have been discarded as unnecessary and others have been
restricted to a specific regime. The common denominator, though, has
always been that entanglement, irrespective of how we quantify it,
should not increase on average by any LOCC operation, i.e. it is
monotonic under LOCC. The first attempt was done by Vedral et al. in [
conditions1 ] and was slightly improved by some of the same authors in [
conditions2 ] . Vidal [ uniqueness2 ] argued that the only absolute
requirement was monotonicity under LOCC. This automatically implies
other properties such as nonchange under local unitary transformations,
convexity and constancy on separable states.

The conditions on mixed states discussed here are taken from [
uniqueness3 ] . The previously discussed conditions on pure states are
specialisations of those.

(E0a) @xmath if and only if @xmath is separable. This is a useful
property for measures that satisfy it, but it is too strict in general.
Bound entangled states, for instance, have zero distillable
entanglement, but are not separable.

(E0b) @xmath if @xmath is separable.

The normalisation conditions are the same as for pure states.

(E1a) (Normalisation) For the maximally entangled state in @xmath
dimensions, @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the two sets @xmath and @xmath are orthonormal bases, @xmath .

(E1b) For a Bell state @xmath , @xmath .

(E2a) (LOCC monotonicity) For any LOCC operation @xmath , @xmath .

(E2b) When @xmath is a strictly local operation which is either unitary
or adds extra dimensions, then @xmath .

(E2c) When @xmath is a strictly local unitary operation, then @xmath .

(E3a) (Continuity) Let @xmath and @xmath be sequences of bipartite
states living on the sequence of Hilbert spaces @xmath . For all such
sequences such that @xmath where @xmath is the trace norm @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

(E3b) The previous condition (E3a) is weakened by only requiring it to
be satisfied for approximations to pure sates. That is, (E3a) only needs
to hold when the @xmath are pure.

Many measures satisfy the weak additivity condition, but it is not
considered necessary for a good measure.

(E4a) (Weak additivity) For all states @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

(E4b) (Asymptotic weak additivity) Given @xmath and a state @xmath ,
there exists an integer @xmath such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

(E5a) (Subadditivity) For all states @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

(E5b) A special case of the above is when @xmath and @xmath are
different numbers of the same state tensored together. For all states
@xmath , and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

(E5c) (Existence of a regularisation) For all bipartite states @xmath ,
the limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

exists. @xmath is called the regularisation of @xmath . This is the
weakest of the additivity conditions, and is usually satisfied.

(E6a) (Convexity) Mixing of states does not increase entanglement. For
all bipartite states @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

Although (E6a) seems very natural as forgetting which of a set of
prepared states you have should not increase entanglement, there are
indications that the (asymptotic) distillable entanglement is not convex
[ distillable_not_convex ] . This is based on the fact that PPT bound
entangled states together with NPPT bound entangled sates (if they
exist) can be distilled. Thus, even a mixture of two states with zero
distillable entanglement can be distilled. A weaker condition which is
shown in [ uniqueness3 ] to hold also for the distillable entanglement
is that the convexity need only hold on decompositions into pure states.

(E6b) For any bipartite state and any pure state realisation @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Like for pure states, asymptotic weak additivity is sufficient for weak
additivity, so (E4a) and (E4b) are actually equivalent. The same goes
for the subadditivity conditions (E5a) and (E5b).

#### 4.2.3 @xmath and @xmath as extreme measures

In [ uniqueness3 ] the exact conditions for @xmath and @xmath to be the
lower and upper bound for an entanglement measure were investigated.
Three versions of the theorem were found. With different conditions on
the measures either the nonregularised or the regularised measure would
be bounded by @xmath and @xmath .

(i) For an entanglement measure @xmath satisfying (E1a), (E2a), (E3a)
and (E4b) (and thereby (E4a)), for all states @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

These conditions are very strong, and until recently no function was
known that satisfied them. The “squashed entanglement” [ squashed ] ,
however, satisfies all conditions.

(ii) For an entanglement measure @xmath satisfying (E1a), (E2a), (E3a)
and (E5c), then for all states @xmath , the regularised version @xmath
(which exists by (E5c) and always satisfies (E4a), but not necessarily
(E3a)) is bounded by @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

These conditions are easier to satisfy, and they are satisfied by both
the entanglement of formation and the relative entropy of entanglement.

(iii) Let @xmath be an entanglement measure satisfying (E1a), (E2a),
(E3b) and (E6b). Then if weak additivity (E4a) holds,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and if subadditivity (E5a) holds,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.2.4 Relative entropy of entanglement and other distance based
measures

Along with the first attempts to give realistic conditions for
entanglement measures [ conditions1 , conditions2 ] , a class of
measures that satisfied the conditions was introduced. The conditions
considered was that the measure would be zero if and only if the state
is separable (E0a), that local unitary operations leave it constant
(E2c) and that its expectation value does not increase under LOCC (E2a).

The class of measures is based on some distance function (but not
necessarily a metric) on the set of density matrices. The measure is
then the distance from the state in question to the nearest separable
state. That is, for a distance function @xmath an entanglement measure
corresponding to the distance function could be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of separable states on @xmath . The conditions
imposed on @xmath is now converted into conditions on @xmath .

The quantum relative entropy ³ ³ 3 For reviews of the role of the
relative entropy in quantum information theory, see [ rel_ent_rev1 ,
rel_ent_rev2 ] . can be used as a distance function on the set of
density operators. It is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relative entropy is not a metric and is not even symmetric. It is
nonnegative, and zero only for identical density operators. The same
unitary operation on both states leaves it invariant. The quantum
relative entropy can be interpreted as a distinguishability of quantum
states. More precisely, suppose we are given a large (but finite) number
@xmath of quantum systems that are all in the same state, which is
either @xmath or @xmath . Our task is to perform measurements to infer
which. The probability for inferring from optimal measurements on the
composite system, that the given state is @xmath when it really is
@xmath is [ rel_ent_ent ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

(for large @xmath ). This expression is not symmetric in @xmath and
@xmath .

To illustrate this, consider the qubit states

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. one arbitrary pure state (denoted @xmath ) and the completely mixed
state. These states are optimally distinguished by measurement if we
measure each particle in the @xmath basis. In the case that we are
performing measurements on @xmath , the probability for measuring @xmath
and @xmath are both @xmath . If all measurements give @xmath , we would
wrongly conclude that the state was @xmath . The probability for that to
happen is @xmath . Conversely, if we perform the measurements on systems
in state @xmath , we will always get the result @xmath , so the
probability for confusing it with @xmath is zero.

The quantum relative entropy can be calculated from the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of the density operators as shown in Appendix A . In the
above example, it can be calculated from ( A.4 ) giving @xmath and
@xmath . This is consistent with the probabilities above and ( 4.27 ).
It is a general feature that @xmath when @xmath is a pure state. This is
because for any pure state there is a complete measurement for which the
outcome is 100% certain, and using this measurement would make it
impossible to confuse it with another state.

This property alone makes the relative entropy with the arguments
reversed, @xmath , unusable in ( 4.25 ) as a distance function. It would
give infinity for any pure entangled @xmath . @xmath on the other hand,
behaves well for separable @xmath and the entanglement measure generated
by it,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called the relative entropy of entanglement [ conditions2 ] . It
could be said that it quantifies the unlikelihood for a separable state
to give measurement outcomes consistent with the entangled state.

From its definition and the fact that @xmath only when @xmath , it is
obvious that the relative entropy of entanglement satisfies (E0a) (
@xmath iff @xmath ). It reduces to the entropy of entanglement on pure
states [ conditions2 ] , and therefore satisfies the normalisation
criterion (E1a) and continuity on pure states (E3b) by the uniqueness
theorem. It is nonincreasing under LOCC operations (E2a) [ conditions1 ]
. Continuity (E3a) was shown in [ rel_ent_ent_cont ] . There have been
found counterexamples to weak additivity (E4a) [ measures_symmetry ] and
thereby also to asymptotic weak additivity (E4b). Actually, for very
high dimension of a certain class of states, @xmath . It can also be
shown that it is both subadditive (E5a) and convex (E6a) [ uniqueness3 ]
.

The regularisation (E5c)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the relative entropy of entanglement satisfies automatically (E0a),
(E1a), (E2a), (E5a) and (E6a) as those conditions extends to any
regularisation of a measure that satisfies them [ uniqueness3 ] . In
addition, as any regularisation does, it is satisfies weak additivity
(E4a).

Any distance based measure, including the relative entropy of
entanglement, can be varied by considering other classes of states than
the separable ones. What is important is that the class is closed under
LOCC. For instance, the set can be extended to PPT states. This will
give a measure which is easier to calculate and inferior or equal to the
version for separable states. For @xmath and @xmath dimensional systems
the measures coincide as the PPT is then equivalent to separability.

Even though the quantum relative entropy is by far the most used of the
distance based measures, other distance functions provide usable
entanglement measures as well. Another measure of distinguishability of
quantum states is the Bures metric [ bures:1969 , hubner:1992 ,
fuchs:1995 ] , in this context defined as [ conditions2 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called Uhlmann’s transition probability [ uhlmann:1976 ] . The Bures
metric is a true metric and thus symmetric. It is a generalisation of
the pure state Fubini-Study metric to mixed states [ hubner:1992 ] . The
entanglement measure generated by it satisfies (E0a), (E1b) and (E2a).
Unlike the relative entropy of entanglement, however, it doesn’t reduce
to the entropy of entanglement on pure states. Actually, it is smaller
than the entropy of entanglement [ conditions2 ] .

There may be other distance functions that generate entanglement
measures with nice properties, but the two mentioned are the ones used
in practice. The Hilbert-Schmidt distance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

was suggested as a candidate [ conditions2 , witte:1999 ] . However, it
was shown by Ozawa [ ozawa:2000 ] that the distance violated one of the
criteria it was conjectured to have (nonexpansion under physical
operations), so it did not satisfy the sufficient conditions for it to
be nonincreasing under LOCC. On the other hand, the very similar trace
norm distance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

has been shown to generate an entanglement measure which is monotonic
under LOCC [ opposite_rel_ent_ent ] .

#### 4.2.5 Entanglement of formation

The entanglement of formation was historically the first entanglement
measure to appear [ bennett3:1996 ] . In the literature it is
occasionally called entanglement of creation . It was meant to be the
asymptotic entanglement cost, but this interpretation rests on the weak
additivity which is strongly conjectured, but still not proved. However,
the regularisation of it has been shown to be equal to the asymptotic
entanglement cost [ cost_eq_formation ] .

The entanglement of formation is a straightforward generalisation of the
entropy of entanglement to mixed states. Remember that in the asymptotic
limit, the entanglement cost in Bell states of preparing a pure state is
given by the entropy of entanglement. Thus, it was natural to define the
entanglement of formation for a pure state as the entropy of
entanglement. For a given ensemble of pure states @xmath the
entanglement of formation is the average of the entropy of entanglement
for the states in the ensemble

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

A mixed state can be realised by a multitude of pure state ensembles,
with different entanglement of formation. As any of those ensembles
realises the mixed state, the natural definition for the entanglement of
formation for a mixed state is the entanglement of formation for the
“most economic” ensemble. That is, the entanglement of formation for a
mixed state is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the infimum is taken over all ensembles @xmath that realises the
state @xmath .

How come entanglement of formation is not necessarily equal to the
entanglement cost? It is easy to see that the asymptotic entanglement
cost cannot be greater than the entanglement of formation. Imagine that
we are to produce a large number @xmath ( @xmath ) of some bipartite
state @xmath . We find the pure state realisation @xmath of @xmath that
has the lowest average entropy of entanglement (equal to the
entanglement of formation). Then we produce this ensemble by producing
the pure states in amounts corresponding to the probability distribution
@xmath . In the asymptotic limit this can be done reversibly. When we
mix the produced states (discard the information saying which is which),
we have a collection of systems in the state @xmath . Since the entropy
of entanglement is conserved in the first step, and @xmath for Bell
states, we have produced systems in state @xmath at a cost equal to the
entanglement of formation.

The question is if we can do better than this. Intuitively the above is
the most economical way, as any other realisation of @xmath would give a
higher or equal cost. But there is another way of producing a large
number of @xmath . We can produce @xmath copies of the state @xmath . It
is not known whether the optimal pure state realisation of this state
will have an average entropy of entanglement @xmath times that of the
state @xmath . In other words it is not known if @xmath is weakly
additive, @xmath . If it is, then @xmath which is equal to the
asymptotic entanglement cost @xmath . Additivity has been shown for some
special classes of states [ benatti:2001 , measures_symmetry ,
vidal:2002 , shimono:2002 ] , but whether it holds in general, is one of
the big open questions in quantum information theory.

From the definition of @xmath , it is easy to see that it satisfies
(E0a) and (E1a). (E0a) by the fact that the optimal pure state
decomposition of a separable states is into a mixture of product states,
(E1a) by the fact that it reduces to the entropy of entanglement on pure
states. LOCC monotonicity (E2a) was shown when it was introduced [
bennett3:1996 ] , and continuity (E3a) was shown in [ continuity_eof ] .
Subadditivity (E5a) follows from the discussion of additivity above, one
may use the same type of decomposition for a tensor product, but one
might be able to do better, which would give a lower @xmath . Convexity
(E6a) follows more or less directly from the definition.

The way the entropy of entanglement was extended to mixed states in the
case of the entanglement of formation, can also be used for other
measures on pure states. Measures constructed this way are called convex
roof measures [ uhlmann:1998 , mhorodecki:2001 ] . The method extends a
measure of some set (here pure states) to the convex hull ⁴ ⁴ 4 The
convex hull of a set is the set of all elements that can be written as a
convex combination of the original set. For instance, the convex hull of
two points is the line connecting them. (here mixed states), where it is
the largest function that is convex and compatible with the measure on
the original set. The method was used in [ roof-negativity ] construct
an entanglement measure that extends the entanglement measure called
negativity to mixed states in another way than the original measure.

A concept related to the entanglement of formation is the concurrence [
eof:1997 , eof:1998 ] . It is defined for a system of two qubits. For a
general state @xmath of two qubits, let @xmath be the spin-flipped state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath is the Pauli Y operator and @xmath is the complex
conjugate of @xmath , both taken in the standard basis @xmath . Let the
Hermitian matrix @xmath be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with eigenvalues in decreasing order @xmath . The concurrence is then
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The concurrence is monotonic under LOCC, and can thus be used as an
entanglement measure for two qubits. The great advantage is that it is
easily computable. But more important is that it is directly related to
the entanglement of formation, providing an explicit formula for the
entanglement of formation in the case of two qubits. Let the function
@xmath be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the binary entropy function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the entanglement of formation is simply given by [ eof:1997 ,
eof:1998 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

There have been various attempts to generalise the concept of
concurrence. Uhlmann [ gen_concurrence ] considered general conjugations
instead of the special ( 4.36 ). This was further generalised to
concurrence vectors by Auderaert et al. [ concurrence-vector ] . The
previously mentioned convex roof extended negativity coincides with the
concurrence in the case of two qubits [ roof-negativity ] , and thus
provides another generalisation. Some of those generalisations – along
with other aspects of concurrence and entanglement of formation – are
reviewed in [ review_formation ] .

#### 4.2.6 Negativity

The entanglement measures discussed so far have all had a serious
drawback. Their definition includes some kind of optimisation, which
make their evaluation very difficult. In fact, expressions for the
relative entropy of entanglement and entanglement of formation has only
been calculated for highly symmetric states (e.g. [ conditions2 ,
eof_isotropic , measures_symmetry , rel_ent_ent_oo-inv ] ) and low
dimensional cases (e.g. [ eof:1997 , eof:1998 ] ). For general states,
evaluating a measure includes heavy numerical calculations. With the aim
of introducing a computable measure of entanglement, two related
quantities were defined by Vidal and Werner [ negativity ] . They can
both be seen as a quantification of the PPT criterion for separability,
and because of that they have the disadvantage that they fail to
distinguish between separable states and entangled PPT states. Both
quantities are based on the trace norm of the partial transpose (in some
basis) of a state, @xmath , which can easily be calculated using
standard linear algebra packages. The first quantity is the negativity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity is equal to the absolute value of the sum of negative
eigenvalues of @xmath . It was first introduced in [ volume_separable ,
Appendix B] (without the factor @xmath and later shown to not increase
under LOCC [ negativity ] . The other quantity is the logarithmic
negativity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is not strictly monotonic under LOCC, but does not increase for a
subclass of LOCC.

For all separable states (and more generally all PPT states), both
@xmath and @xmath vanish. This is easily seen from the fact that the
partial transpose operation does not change the trace of the density
operator. If @xmath is a positive operator (i.e @xmath satisfies the PPT
criterion for separability), then @xmath , since @xmath is the sum of
the absolute values of the eigenvalues of @xmath and all eigenvalues are
positive. For states violating the PPT criterion, @xmath . In this
sense, both quantities quantify how much the state violates the PPT
criterion.

A lot of properties of @xmath and @xmath were deduced in [ negativity ]
. As already mentioned, @xmath is zero for all separable states, but is
also zero for PPT entangled states. Hence, it satisfies (E0b) but not
(E0a). It is @xmath for Bell states, so it doesn’t satisfy the
normalisation criteria either. It could be made to satisfy (E1b) by
defining it as the double value, but the normalisation wouldn’t extend
to maximally entangled states in dimension @xmath (E1a). It is monotonic
under LOCC (E2a), convex (E6a), and superadditive, satisfying @xmath .
Thus, neither additivity of any kind (E4a) nor subadditivity (E5a) is
satisfied.

Like @xmath , logarithmic negativity @xmath satisfies (E0b) and not
(E0a). However, unlike @xmath it also satisfies the normalisation
condition (E1a). But it does not coincide with the entropy of
entanglement for pure states in general. Actually @xmath on pure states,
with equality only for maximally entangled states. It is not monotonic
under LOCC (E2a), but is an upper bound for the distillable
entanglement. Nor is it convex (E6a). The most appealing property of
@xmath is probably that it satisfies (strong) additivity, @xmath . From
this, weak additivity (E4a) and subadditivity (E5a) comes for free.

The negativity can be generalised to give rise to other entanglement
measures. This is done by replacing @xmath by another norm @xmath . The
generalisation comes naturally if we define the trace norm in another,
but equivalent way. Any Hermitian matrix can be written as a difference
of two positive operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are density matrices and @xmath are nonnegative numbers.
There exists a decomposition of the form ( 4.44 ) which minimises @xmath
. For this decomposition the trace norm is @xmath , and @xmath is the
absolute sum of the negative eigenvalues of @xmath [ negativity ] . From
this we get another expression for the negativity, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Minimising @xmath is in this case the same as minimising @xmath , since
by taking the trace of the condition, we get @xmath . If @xmath is a
density matrix, A is PPT, and we can take @xmath to be zero, so the
negativity vanishes as it should for PPT states.

The condition @xmath restricts the set of density matrices @xmath over
which we can take the infimum. Another norm and another negativity can
be obtained by taking another set @xmath from which @xmath must be
picked. Norms that can be defined in this way corresponding to a compact
set @xmath are called base norms . The norm corresponding to a general
compact set @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the corresponding negativity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

We get back the usual trace norm and negativity from this by taking
@xmath as the set of all Hermitian (not necessarily positive) matrices
with unit trace such that the partial transpose is positive. In
mathematical terms, @xmath .

By choosing @xmath as the set of all separable states, another
entanglement measure arises. It was described prior to the introduction
of negativity and was introduced in [ robustness ] . It is called
robustness of entanglement and was defined as the minimum amount of
mixing with locally prepared states needed to make the state separable.
Also other measures have been related to negativities [ mhorodecki:2001
] , such as the measures introduced by Rudolph based on the greatest
cross norm [ cross_norm ] . It should be noted that only the original
negativity has the advantage of being easily computable. The other
negativities need to be evaluated by finding the infimum over a large
parameter space.

#### 4.2.7 Squashed entanglement

Of the entanglement measures considered so far, only few are additive,
and when they are some of the other greatly desired conditions are not
fulfilled. Quite recently a new entanglement measure was proposed,
having more nice properties than its predecessors. It is motivated from
the so called intrinsic information of classical cryptography and is
called squashed entanglement [ squashed ] . It is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The infimum is taken over all extensions to a third subsystem @xmath ,
so @xmath . @xmath is the quantum mutual conditional information defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Most of the properties of @xmath were shown along with its introduction
as an entanglement measure in [ squashed ] . The squashed entanglement
vanishes on all separable states (E0b), but it is not known whether it
also vanishes for some entangled states (E0a). If there exists an
extension to @xmath with @xmath for which @xmath vanishes, it implies
that @xmath is separable. But the infimum in ( 4.48 ) is taken over all
extensions, and thus @xmath may be zero even if no finite dimensional
extension makes @xmath zero. It coincides with the entropy of
entanglement on pure states, and thus satisfies the normalisation
condition (E1a). It is also bounded from below by the distillable
entanglement and from above by the entanglement cost. As a proper
entanglement measure it does not increase under LOCC (E2a) and it is
convex (E6a). When it was introduced, it was shown to be continuous on
most of the state space, and indications that it was continuous on the
whole state space were presented. Continuity was finally proved by
Alicki and Fannes [ squashed_cont ] (E3a). The measure is strongly
additive, making it satisfy both weak additivity (E4a) and subadditivity
(E5a). So except from (E0a), which is still unknown, squashed
entanglement satisfies the strictest versions of all conditions
presented.

In [ measures_symmetry ] various additivity properties were discussed.
The additivities we have presented so far are for independent pairs,
described by tensor products. But if there are entanglement or classical
correlations between the pairs as well, they may be taken advantage of.
Consider the state @xmath which lives on the Hilbert space @xmath ,
where @xmath is controlled by Alice and @xmath by Bob. Each of the
primed and unprimed subsystems are individually described by tracing out
the other,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and if they are independent @xmath . For a strongly additive
entanglement measure this implies @xmath . But if there are correlations
between the pairs that can be exploited, we would expect

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

This property is called strong superadditivity [ measures_symmetry ] and
is satisfied by the squashed entanglement [ squashed ] .

Like most other entanglement measures, the definition of squashed
entanglement involves an optimalisation which makes the measure hard to
compute. Due to its recent introduction, not much work has been
published about its calculation on special sets of states, nor about
efficient numerical algorithms. One of the important open questions is
whether it vanishes on any entangled states, especially on the bound
entangled ones.

#### 4.2.8 Other entanglement measures

In addition to the entanglement measures discussed, other measures have
been proposed without gaining the same importance. One of them is the
entanglement of assistance [ cohen:1998 , assistance:1998 ] . It is
based on the following idea. Many copies of an entangled tripartite pure
state, @xmath , is shared between Alice, Bob and Charlie. Now, Alice and
Bob want to use the state to perform some task involving the use of
bipartite entanglement. If they ignore Charlie completely, they share
the state @xmath . In other words they share a mixed state, and it might
even be separable. But Charlie wants to help, and Alice and Bob may
communicate classically with him. Therefore, Charlie can perform local
operations on his part of the system and tell Alice and Bob about the
measurement outcomes. A measurement by Charlie will then leave the
subsystem of Alice and Bob in some pure state, which depending on the
measurement outcome may or may not be entangled. Alice and Bob can then
discard the pairs that are not entangled, and turn the rest reversibly
(in the asymptotic limit) into Bell states. If each measurement by
Charlie leaves them with a state @xmath with probability @xmath , the
number of Bell states produced per copy of the tripartite state will be
equal to the average entropy of entanglement of the ensemble @xmath ,
namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, Charlie wants to do the measurements in a way that leaves Alice and
Bob with as much entanglement as possible on average. It turns out that
the optimisation can be taken over all ensembles @xmath consistent with
@xmath . Thus, what Charlie can achieve does not depend on the initial
tripartite state @xmath , only on @xmath , so all pure tripartite states
for which @xmath is the same, allow Charlie to help Alice and Bob to the
same result. The entanglement of assistance is the average entropy of
entanglement Alice and Bob are left with after Charlie has applied his
optimal strategy, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see that this is dual to the entanglement of formation ( 4.35 ),
which is the same with an infimum instead of the supremum. Even though
the entanglement of formation is believed to be additive, there are
states for which the entanglement of assistance is superadditive,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

A recently introduced measure related to the entanglement of assistance
is the localizable entanglement [ localizable:2004 ] . It is really a
multipartite measure for a large number of qubits, but the goal is, just
as for the entanglement of assistance, to optimise (localise) the
entanglement between two subsystems by performing measurements on the
others. If we had allowed global measurements on the other qubits, we
could have regarded it as a single “Charlie” system, and it would have
reduced to the entanglement of assistance. Because we can only perform
local measurements on each individual qubit, the localizable
entanglement is necessarily smaller than the entanglement of assistance.

Another entanglement measure recently introduced is the witnessed
entropy of entanglement [ witnessed_ent_ent ] . It is based on the
concept of entanglement witnesses [ HHH:1996 ] . An entanglement witness
for an entangled state @xmath is a Hermitian operator @xmath for which
@xmath and @xmath for all separable states @xmath . We conventionally
normalise entanglement witnesses to have @xmath . We say that an
entanglement witness @xmath is optimal for a state @xmath if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all entanglement witnesses @xmath . The definition of the witnessed
entropy of entanglement is based on the optimal witness,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of the total Hilbert space and @xmath the
smallest of the dimensions of the Hilbert spaces of the subsystems. Note
that the definition applies equally well to bipartite and multipartite
systems. It is not additive, but satisfies the rest of our conditions
for entanglement measures, (E0a), (E1a), (E2a), (E3a), (E5a) and (E6a).
The main advantage of this measure is that it can be approximately
calculated for all mixed states. Finding the exact optimal entanglement
witness, is a hard optimisation problem, but using approximation
techniques, there are algorithms to find the @xmath to a given
precision.

Other measures can be defined operationally in the following way. Take
your favourite application of entanglement, study how well or bad it
performs for different sets of states, define an entanglement measure
from this and check that it satisfies at least some of the conditions
for entanglement, above all LOCC monotonicity. One of the operational
measures that have had limited impact on the community is an
entanglement measure introduced by Hiroshima [ E_dc ] based on the
capacity of dense coding [ dense_coding ] . Another operational measure
by Biham et al. [ E_ga ] is derived from Grover’s search algorithm [
grover_proceedings , grover_journal ] . It is based on the fact that the
algorithm performs worse the more the input state is entangled.

## Chapter 5 Beyond bipartite entanglement and finite dimension

The systems we have considered until now have all been bipartite systems
with finite dimensional Hilbert spaces. Some of the concepts and
measures considered are valid also in the multipartite systems and for
entanglement of continuous variables. Others lose their meaning in this
more general setting. In this chapter we consider some of the steps that
need to be taken to generalise the concepts from the previous sections
to multipartite systems and systems with continuous variables.

### 5.1 Multipartite systems

While the basic structure of bipartite entanglement is well understood,
multipartite entanglement is still an active field of research. In
bipartite systems the pure state entanglement in the asymptotic regime
is well understood, since the von Neumann entropy of the reduced density
matrices can be conserved under transformations. In general the Schmidt
decomposition cannot be extended to multipartite systems [
peres_multischmidt ] , so the eigenvalues of the reduced density
matrices of each system need not be the same, nor do the von Neumann
entropies.

The questions about entanglement literally acquire new dimensions when
more that two subsystems are considered. Between two parties all
relations are between those two parties, and in terms of quantum
communication there is only one single channel. Once we increase the
number of parties to three, we have three pair relations in the system.
Still, those three pair relations do not describe all correlations in
the system (neither classical nor quantum). Consider for instance the
pure tripartite entangled state called the GHZ ¹ ¹ 1 Daniel M.
Greenberger, Michael A. Horne and Anton Zeilinger state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we trace out any one of the systems, we get the density matrix shared
by the two remaining parties

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is separable. Thus, the state contains no bipartite entanglement
between the systems, but the tripartite entanglement is maximal.

#### 5.1.1 Separability

Some notions can be taken directly over from bipartite systems, though.
The generalisation of separability from ( 3.3 ) is straightforward. A
state is separable if and only if it can be written as a convex
combination of product states;

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath .

The classification of states does not end with this. An entangled
multipartite state may or may not still be entangled after one of the
subsystems are ignored (i.e. traced out). A multipartite state that
loses its entanglement when any of the subsystems is traced out, is
called multiseparable [ thapliyal_multisep ] .

The PPT criterion for separability trivially extends to the multipartite
case. If a multipartite state is separable, then transposing any number
of the subsystems must also give a valid (i.e. positive) density
operator.

#### 5.1.2 Measures of entanglement

The definition of entanglement cost and the distillable entanglement is
based on a standard bipartite state, namely the Bell state. This is a
bipartite state, so it is not obvious how to extend these measures to
the multipartite case. Nielsen [ ounces_and_pound ] argued that this
could by overcome by generalising the definition from Bell states to a
definition in terms of qubits transferred (in the case of creation) or
the number of CNOT gates that could be implemented (in the case of
distillation). For instance, to create a Bell state it is necessary to
transfer one qubit. Likewise the transfer of one qubit can be simulated
by teleporting a state, spending one Bell state. If the entanglement
cost is defined in terms of how many qubits that need to be transferred,
it will coincide with the usual definition for bipartite states.

Most of the conditions we imposed on measures in section 4.2.2
generalise to the multipartite case. The only possible exceptions are of
course the normalisation conditions (E1a) and (E1b) which are based on
Bell states. Those would be unnatural to impose on multipartite
entanglement, but it should be possible for a measure to satisfy them
for states where only two of the subsystems are entangled.

The relative entropy of entanglement and other distance based measures
do not have any reference to the bipartite case in their definition.
Therefore, they are just as valid in the multipartite case as in the
bipartite case.

The entanglement of formation suffers the same problem as the
entanglement cost, and can be generalised in the same way. For a pure
state we define the entanglement of formation as the number of qubits we
need to transfer in order to prepare it (LOCC comes for free). Then we
extend the definition to the mixed states by the convex roof method as
usual. Another more formal generalisation was suggested by Wang [
eof_multi ] .

The meaning of entanglement measures in the multipartite setting is more
vague than in the bipartite. In the bipartite setting it quantifies in
some way how much that can be achieved by the two parties together. In
the multipartite case there are more possibilities. For instance there
may be some entanglement between all of the parties, as in the state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which on tracing out one of the subsystems gives the density matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is an entangled state with negativity @xmath and entanglement of
formation @xmath (calculated from the expressions in sections 4.2.6 and
4.2.5 ). Or there may be no entanglement between the pairs, as in the
GHZ state mentioned earlier. Both states can be prepared by sending two
qubits (after one of the parties has created the state locally). While
the different bipartite measures place different orderings on the states
[ different_ordering ] , ordering is even more ambiguous for
multipartite states. The types of entanglement are qualitatively more
different, and a state being very much entangled in one sense (as
defined by one measure), can have very little or no entanglement in
another sense. All this says is that, since a multipartite system is a
more complicated structure, we cannot expect one single parameter to be
as good a description of the entanglement in it as it is in the
bipartite case.

### 5.2 Continuous variables

Most of quantum information theory has been formulated in the context of
finite dimensional Hilbert spaces. However, from an experimental point
of view, entanglement is just as interesting in the continuous variable
regime. This has led to efforts to quantify entanglement also in the
case where the Hilbert spaces have infinite dimension. Two papers by
Eisert et al. [ contvar:2002 , contvar-intro:2003 ] summarise many of
the new problems that arise and their possible solutions.

First of all, when the dimension of the Hilbert space is infinite, we
have states with an infinite amount of entanglement. This should come as
no surprise, as the entropy of entanglement for a maximally entangled
state in @xmath dimensions is @xmath (c.f. criteria (P1a) and (E1a)).
What is more worrying is that the set of pure states with infinite
entropy of entanglement is actually dense in the trace norm on the set
of pure states [ contvar:2002 ] . This means that arbitrarily close to
any product state is a state which has infinite entanglement. The
solution to this problem is to consider only states where the mean
energy is bounded from above. This is a reasonable physical assumption,
and on this subset of states the entropy of entanglement is continuous.
Other measures can also be defined on this subset without exhibiting
strange behaviour.

The definition of separability in a continuous variable bipartite system
must be slightly altered from the one in section 3.2.1 . The expression
is still the same as ( 3.3 ), namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath is a probability distribution. But in infinite dimension we
can only require that the state can be approximated arbitrarily well by
an expression of the form ( 5.6 ).

The PPT criterion for separability is also valid in infinite dimension
and for the special class of so-called Gaussian states, it is also
sufficient for separability [ ppt_contvar ] .

It is a well known fact in the finite dimensional case that there is a
neighbourhood around the completely mixed state @xmath where all states
are separable [ volume_separable , sep_fourier , myrh_sep ] . However,
the volume of the separable ball diminishes as the dimension of the
system grows. In the infinite dimensional setting, even when the energy
is bounded from above, it has been shown [ contvar:2002 ] that
arbitrarily close to any state (in the trace norm), there is an
entangled state.

The class of so-called Gaussian states has a special role in
entanglement theory of continuous variables. These are states with a
Gaussian Wigner function (a quasi-probability distribution in phase
space which completely describes a quantum state). These states are
often encountered in the laboratory, and they can be completely
described by two parameters. For Gaussian states, and operators that
takes Gaussian states to Gaussian states, many of the notions from
finite dimensional entanglement theory have similar counterparts. See
e.g. [ contvar-intro:2003 , ent_prop_gauss , eof_sym_gauss ,
gaussian_eof , lower_eof_gauss ] .

## Appendix A Expressions for the quantum relative entropy

The quantum relative entropy is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We want to calculate it in terms of the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of
@xmath and @xmath . We denote the eigenvalues of @xmath ( @xmath ) by
@xmath ( @xmath ) and its eigenvectors by @xmath ( @xmath ). In the case
of degenerate eigenvalues we assume that the eigenvectors have been
properly orthogonalised.

The linearity of the trace gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first term can be identified as @xmath , where @xmath is the
von Neumann entropy. This depends only on the eigenvalues of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second term is more complicated as the eigenvectors of the density
operators in general are not the same. We decompose the density
operators using the spectral decomposition.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                                                                         @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                  @xmath      
                                                                                              
  Then we decompose @xmath in the eigendirections of @xmath , @xmath .                        
                                                                         @xmath               
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

Now we can take the trace of this to get the second term

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We can now put the two terms together to get the expression we wanted;

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.2)
  -- -- -- -------

This may also be written as the single sum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the case when the eigenvectors for the two density matrices are the
same (i.e. @xmath and @xmath commute), we can arrange the eigenvectors
so that @xmath . ( A.2 ) then reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------