Entanglement is perhaps the single-most important resource of quantum
information theory. The first part of this thesis deals with the
creation of optical event-ready entanglement with a specific class of
optical circuits. These circuits include passive components such as
beam-splitters and phase-shifters, and active components such as optical
parametric down-converters and optical squeezers. Furthermore, the
entangled-state preparation may be conditioned on one or more detector
outcomes. In this context, I discuss the statistics of down-converters
and give a quantitative comparison between realistic detectors and
detector cascades, using the confidence of the detection. The outgoing
states of the optical circuits can be expressed in terms of
multi-dimensional Hermite polynomials. Event-ready entanglement cannot
be created when the outgoing state is conditioned on two detected
photons. For six detected photons using ideal photo-detectors a scheme
is known to exist.

Part two of this thesis includes two applications of optical
entanglement. First, I discuss quantum teleportation and entanglement
swapping using down-conversion. It is shown that higher-order
photon-pair production degrades the fidelity of the teleported (or
swapped) states. The interpretation of these states proved
controversial, and I have attempted to settle this controversy. As a
second application, quantum lithography uses optical (‘which-way’)
entanglement of multiple photons to beat the classical diffraction
limit. Given a suitable photo-resist, this technique results in
sub-wavelength optical resolution and can be used to write features much
smaller than is possible with classical lithography. I present classes
of states which can be used to create patterns in one and two dimensions
with sub-wavelength resolution.
