Most of these results have been published before in the papers [ 7 , 8 ,
9 , 10 , 11 , 15 ] . Our aim here is to present them together in a
coherent way and to provide enough background material to make (at least
some of) them and the underlying ideas accessible to non-experts. In
particular, we have in mind people familiar with quantum field theory
but without a very detailed knowledge of this branch of string theory.

On the one hand, in Chapter 2 we introduce some of the key concepts
underlying our research in different contexts than string theory, in
particular in quantum field theory. These concepts are duality,
supersymmetry and anomaly inflow. On the other hand, in Chapter 3 and
Section 4.1 we try to provide enough technical information on strings,
D-branes and boundary states to enable the motivated reader to
understand the computations in Chapter 4 , in particular the ones given
in quite some detail in Section 4.3 . Chapter 3 is also a necessary
preparation for Chapter 5 , Chapter 6 and Chapter 7 . Let us now give a
chapter-by-chapter outline of the thesis, at the same time summarizing
the main results.

In Chapter 2 , we introduce three key concepts in a mostly field
theoretic setting. In Section 2.1 , we give various examples of
dualities, with an emphasis on electromagnetic duality. In particular,
we briefly review the duality conjecture by Montonen and Olive, and some
of the puzzles it raised. In Section 2.2 , we show how these puzzles
naturally get a solution in supersymmetric field theory. We introduce
the supersymmetry algebra and the notion of BPS states. In Section 2.3 ,
we try to give a self-contained presentation of some results from the
anomaly and anomaly inflow literature. We focus on one example, where
one explicitly sees the inflow mechanism at work. The concept of anomaly
inflow is crucial to this thesis, so we strongly encourage the reader to
go through this section if he is not familiar with it.

Chapter 3 deals with superstrings and D-branes. Of course, it is
impossible to give a complete and self-contained review of string theory
in fifty or sixty pages. This being said, we do make an effort to
introduce in a coherent way the concepts relevant to this thesis, in
particular to the computations in Chapter 4 . Chapter 3 does not contain
original results.

Section 3.1.1 introduces strings from a world-sheet point of view. We
encourage the reader to study the difference between closed and open
strings, the different sectors (e.g. NS versus R for open strings) and
the string spectra, including the GSO projection. Readers who are not
interested in technical details may want to skip almost anything
referring to ghosts and BRST operators. Section 3.1.2 deals with the
low-energy effective description of string theory as a supergravity
theory in a ten-dimensional spacetime. The interplay between the
world-sheet and spacetime descriptions of string theory will be one the
main themes in this thesis. Section 3.2 introduces superstrings in
background fields.

In Section 3.3 , some tools to compute string scattering amplitudes are
collected. The important concept of vertex operator is introduced. Quite
some effort goes into some subtleties related to ghosts, superghosts,
pictures and BRST invariance. From a technical point of view, it is
important to properly deal with these subtleties. However, readers who
are not interested in technicalities can safely skip them: these details
will be well-hidden in the explicit computations after Section 4.2 .
Roughly speaking, the details are only necessary to justify our choice
of vertex operators. These vertex operators are given in Section 3.3.6 .

In Section 3.4 , D-branes and their effective actions are introduced. In
particular, some of the terms in the D-brane Wess-Zumino action are
displayed in detail. This section is essential to understand anything of
what follows in the thesis. Section 3.5 deals with the anomaly inflow
argument in the context of D-branes and NS fivebranes. We do not give
all the technical details, but the ideas play a central role in the
thesis. For one thing, these anomaly inflow arguments will be applied to
type 0 string theory in Chapter 6 . In Section 3.6 , we discuss three
dualities in string theory. The most important one for our purposes may
be type IIB S-duality, of which we shall critically examine a
generalization in Chapter 6 .

In Chapter 4 , we check the presence of some of the anomalous D-brane
couplings Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) by explicit string computations. These
computions are done in the boundary state formalism. In Section 4.1 , we
introduce the boundary state and give a precise set of rules to use it
in sphere scattering amplitudes. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We do not try to derive these
rules from first principles, though. This section does not contain much
original material, though to our knowledge our particular set of rules
has not appeared before in the literature.

In Section 4.2 , we give an overview of the checks of the Wess-Zumino
action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ). It turns out that there is indirect evidence for
the presence of all the terms in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ), but that for the terms
involving NS-NS fields direct evidence was lacking before our paper [ 7
] appeared. The indirect arguments explicitly use the consistency of
string theory, in particular the absence of gauge and gravitional
anomalies.

The direct checks of some of the anomalous D-brane couplings are
performed in Section 4.3 , Section 4.4 and Section 4.5 . In Section 4.3
, we check the presence of the term ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 See Section 3.4 for our
notation.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the D-brane Wess-Zumino action. Thanks to our preparatory work in
Chapter 3 and especially Section 4.1 , we can give the computation in
quite some detail. Section 4.3 is an expanded version of a section of
our paper [ 7 ] .

In Section 4.4 , we check the presence of the terms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which involve a four-form constructed from curvature two-forms. These
computations were first done in our papers [ 7 , 8 ] .

In Section 4.5 , which is based on our paper [ 8 ] , we consider the
terms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

involving an eight-form built from curvature two-forms. Using results
from [ 12 ] , we check the presence of all these terms and, as a nice
by-product, we find new, non-anomalous D-brane couplings.

In Chapter 5 , we discuss an application of the D-brane world-volume
action: we show how it can be used to study strings ending on D-branes
in a D-brane background. We study one particular configuration, which is
largely motivated by studies of the baryon vertex in the AdS/CFT
correspondence, a recently proposed duality between conformal field
theories and string theories in certain backgrounds.

Section 5.1 contains a lightning review of the AdS/CFT correspondence
and the baryon vertex, and a brief introduction to the method we use to
study the baryon vertex: the BPS method. The rest of Chapter 5 closely
follows our paper [ 9 ] . In Section 5.2 , the BPS method is explained
in a somewhat simpler setting than the one we shall consider. In Section
5.3 , we study the baryon vertex configuration and a related
configuration in our formalism. We reproduce the BPS equations obtained
and conjectured in [ 13 , 14 ] . A nice aspect of our approach is that
we can derive results closely related to supersymmetry without
explicitly considering fermions. ¹² ¹² 12 This is also the case for the
BPS bound for magnetic monopoles, see Section 2.1 and Section 2.2 .
Another advantage of our approach is that it makes it possible to
reinterpret the BPS equations in terms of superalgebras [ 9 ] . However,
the latter reinterpretation will not be discussed in this thesis.

Chapter 6 is devoted to type 0 string theory. Compared to type II
strings, type 0 strings have a tachyon, twice as many R-R fields and no
spacetime fermions in their perturbative spectra. Because of the
problems related to the presence of a tachyon, type 0 string theory
became popular only one and a half year ago. Then, it was noticed that
the tachyon may not be a big problem when one is interested in D-brane
world-volume field theories, as in the AdS/CFT correspondence.

In Section 6.1 , we give a brief review of this motivation to study type
0 string theory. Type 0 strings are introduced in Section 6.2 . In
Section 6.3 , we introduce type 0 D-branes. As could be anticipated from
the doubling of the R-R spectrum compared to type II string theory, the
number of different D-branes is also doubled. Following our paper [ 10 ]
, we derive a Wess-Zumino action for type 0 D-branes. We use an anomaly
inflow argument very similar to the one used for type II D-branes.
Again, the different terms in the Wess-Zumino action can be checked via
boundary state computations.

In Section 6.4 , which is based on our paper [ 15 ] , we study NS
fivebranes in type 0 string theory. We derive their massless spectra and
find that they are non-chiral and purely bosonic for both type 0A and
type 0B. Type IIA NS fivebranes have a chiral, anomalous spectrum. The
anomaly is cancelled by anomaly inflow from the bulk of spacetime. We
compute that for both type 0A and type 0B there is no such inflow from
the bulk. This is consistent with the non-chiral and thus non-anomalous
spectra of type 0 NS fivebranes. We propose a speculative interpretation
of the type 0 NS fivebrane spectra in terms of “type 0 little strings”.
In Section 6.5 , we combine our studies of type 0 D-branes and NS
fivebranes to comment on the recently proposed type 0B S-duality.

Chapter 7 deals with non-BPS D-branes. These are objects on which open
strings can end, but that preserve no supersymmetry. In some string
theories, such objects can be stable, but in ten-dimensional type II
string theory they are not. In Section 7.1 , we review how Sen’s work
motivated the study of non-BPS branes. In Section 7.2 , we propose a
Wess-Zumino action for the unstable non-BPS D-branes of type II string
theory [ 11 ] . On the one hand, we argue that the action we propose is
consistent with the interpretation of BPS D-branes as topologically
non-trivial tachyon configurations on a non-BPS D-brane. On the other
hand, we check the presence of the terms we propose by explicit string
computations.
