# Chapter 2 Some key concepts

This thesis deals with string theory. However, an important role will be
played by three key concepts, whose importance is not limited to string
theory. These concepts are: duality, supersymmetry and anomaly inflow.
The aim of this chapter is to introduce them in a simpler context. The
first section is based on [ 16 , 17 ] and the second on [ 17 ] .
Although the third section does not contain original material, we have
made an effort to give a consistent ¹ ¹ 1 We shall use the following
conventions. The four-dimensional spacetime metric is @xmath . The gamma
matrices satisfy the Clifford algebra

@xmath (2.0.1)

Further, we define @xmath , so that @xmath . The conjugate @xmath of a
Dirac spinor @xmath is defined by

@xmath (2.0.2)

presentation of some results from the anomaly and anomaly inflow
literature. The main references we have used are [ 18 , 19 , 20 ] for
anomalies and [ 21 , 22 ] for anomaly inflow.

### 2.1 Duality

A physical system is said to exhibit “duality” if there are two
complementary formulations of the theory. Often, each description is
useful in a particular region of parameter space. Computations that are
hard in one formulation of the theory may be easy in a dual description.

One example of a system exhibiting duality is the Ising model of
statistical mechanics. Take a square two-dimensional lattice with spins
@xmath taking the values @xmath and interacting ferromagnetically with
their nearest neighbours with strength @xmath . The partition function
at temperature @xmath is ² ² 2 We omit all subtleties related to
boundary conditions for a finite lattice, or to the infinite volume
limit; our only aim is to give a heuristic idea.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the sum on @xmath runs over all nearest neighbors, the sum on
@xmath over all spin configurations, and @xmath . Expanding the
exponential in Eq. ( 2.1.1 ) gives rise to an expansion in powers of
@xmath , which is appropriate for weak coupling (or high temperature).
This expansion can be represented by certain “bond graphs” on the
lattice, where a bond is a line connecting two lattice sites. It turns
out that there is an alternative way to expand the partition function
Eq. ( 2.1.1 ), namely around a maximally ordered configuration. This
expansion, which is a strong coupling (low temperature) expansion, can
be represented in terms of bond graphs on the dual lattice (the square
lattice whose vertices are the centers of the faces of the original
lattice). Using the graphical representation of both expansions, one can
relate the original partition function (with coupling @xmath ) to the
partition function on the dual lattice with coupling @xmath , where
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the partition function on the dual lattice, @xmath
and @xmath are the number of lattice points of the original and dual
lattice, respectively, and @xmath is the number of nearest neighbours of
any point of the original lattice. Note that strong coupling on the
original lattice is mapped to weak coupling on the dual lattice, and
vice versa.

So far, the discussion would not change much if we allowed more general
lattices than square ones. However, if the lattice is square, then so is
the dual lattice, which implies that the strong and weak coupling
regimes of the same theory are related. A remarkable consequence is
that, if the system is to have a single phase transition, it must occur
at the self-dual point with @xmath , or @xmath [ 23 ] .

Another non-trivial duality occurs in two-dimensional relativistic field
theory. The sine-Gordon model is defined by the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The theory contains the quantum excitations of the field @xmath as
“obvious” (or “fundamental”) particles, with mass @xmath . In addition
to these fundamental particles, there are the (less obvious) solitons
interpolating between different minima of the potential, with mass
@xmath . These solitons owe there stability to the topologically
non-trivial vacuum structure. By expanding the potential to quartic
order, we see that @xmath acts as the coupling constant for this theory.
Thus, the soliton mass is large (compared to the one of the fundamental
excitations) at weak coupling.

This theory is completely equivalent [ 24 , 25 ] to an apparently
unrelated theory of interacting fermions, the massive Thirring model.
The action of the Thirring model is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The map between the two theories relates the couplings through

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and maps the soliton of the SG theory to the fundamental fermion of the
Thirring model and the fundamental particles of the sine-Gordon theory
to fermion anti-fermion bound states. We see from Eq. ( 2.1.5 ) that
strong coupling in one theory (i.e., large @xmath ) is mapped to weak
coupling (small @xmath ) in the other theory. (Actually, the
correspondence is only valid for @xmath since for larger values the
Hamiltonian of the sine-Gordon model turns out to be unbounded from
below.) Thus, duality provides a means of performing strong coupling
calculations in one theory by mapping them to weak coupling calculations
in a dual theory.

Another feature of this particular model is the interchange of
fundamental quanta and solitons: sine-Gordon solitons can be viewed as
being created by massive Thirring fields in the dual formulation. This
feature is shared with many other dualities.

###### Electromagnetic duality

Maxwell’s classical equations for the free electromagnetic field,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

are invariant under electromagnetic duality rotations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This symmetry is broken if electric charges @xmath are introduced, but
can be restored by also introducing magnetic charges @xmath . The
duality rotation Eq. ( 2.1.8 ) is then supplemented by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Quantum mechanically, when residing on different particles, these
charges should satisfy Dirac’s quantisation condition [ 26 ]

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.1.10)
  -- -- -- ----------

Zwanziger and Schwinger [ 27 ] extended this condition to dyons, which
are particles with both electric and magnetic charges:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.1.11)
  -- -- -- ----------

This condition is invariant under duality rotations applied to dyons 1
and 2 simultaneously.

In unified gauge theories, magnetic charges show up in a natural way.
Consider, for instance, SU(2) Yang-Mills theory with scalars @xmath
transforming in the adjoint representation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and we take the @xmath invariant potential

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . We have taken the coupling constant ³ ³ 3 We put @xmath .
inside the covariant derivative to be @xmath . In the vacuum, the Higgs
[ 28 ] field @xmath has an expectation value with magnitude @xmath .
Expanding around this vacuum, one of the gauge fields remains massless:
it is identified with the U(1) gauge field of electromagnetism. The
other two gauge fields (the “W-bosons”) carry electric charges @xmath
and have masses @xmath . Further, there is one scalar field, the
physical Higgs field.

In addition to these excitations of the elementary fields, the theory
contains solitonic particles [ 29 ] . These correspond to topologically
non-trivial finite-energy solutions of the classical equations of
motion. It turns out that these solitons carry magnetic charges @xmath
with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

hence they are called magnetic monopoles. In general, there is an
inequality [ 30 ] between their masses and charges, @xmath . This
Bogomol’nyi bound can be saturated, @xmath , in the limit @xmath (where
the physical Higgs particle becomes massless), which is called the
Prasad-Sommerfield [ 31 ] limit. In that limit, the conditions for the
bound @xmath to be saturated constitute a set of first order
differential equations, the Bogomol’nyi equations [ 30 ] .

In fact, a universal lower bound exists for the mass of a particle with
electric charge @xmath and magnetic charge @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Again, this Bogomol’nyi bound can only be saturated in the
Prasad-Sommerfield limit. The field configuration should satisfy a set
of first order differential equations. These are often easier to solve
than the (second order) equations of motion, which is one of the virtues
of Bogomol’nyi’s approach. In the supersymmetric models to be discussed
in Section 2.2 , the Bogomol’nyi bound and the conditions under which it
is saturated will get a nice interpretation.

In the limit of vanishing potential, all the particles mentioned above
(photon, Higgs, W-bosons @xmath and magnetic monopoles @xmath ) saturate
the Bogomol’nyi bound, which is invariant under duality rotations Eq. (
2.1.9 ). All particles satisfy the universal mass formula

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is remarkable, given the very different way in which the various
particles are described (fundamental excitations versus solitons).

We have mentioned that sine-Gordon solitons can be viewed as being
created by massive Thirring fields in a reformulation of the theory. In
view of this, one may wonder whether a similar reformulation exists for
the gauge theory Eq. ( 2.1.12 ). In such a dual formulation, the quantum
fields should correspond to the monopoles rather than the original gauge
particles. This question was addressed in a more general context, e.g.,
for a more general unbroken gauge group than U(1), in [ 32 ] . It was
conjectured that the dual theory is a gauge theory whose potential
couples to the magnetic charge. Conjectures for the structure of the
magnetic, or dual, gauge group were made. A special case, Eq. ( 2.1.12 )
with gauge group SU(2) and in the limit of vanishing potential, was
considered by Montonen and Olive. This is the case to which we now
return.

The duality invariance of the universal mass formula Eq. ( 2.1.18 ) led
Montonen and Olive [ 33 ] to the conjecture that the whole theory is
invariant under interchanging the W-bosons with the monopoles and at the
same time @xmath and @xmath . This means that there would be a dual,
“magnetic” description of this particular theory, which is identical to
the original, “electric” description (up to the value of the coupling
constant). It is an SU(2) gauge theory with the gauge group
spontaneously broken to U(1). The monopoles appear as quantum
excitations of the massive gauge fields, whereas the original W-bosons
are solitons in the dual description.

Note that this self-duality is special to the case Montonen and Olive
were considering. It is by no means a general feature that the dual
theory is the same as the original one.

This conjecture by Montonen and Olive is quite nontrivial and
immediately raises a number of puzzles:

1.  Will the duality symmetry of the mass spectrum survive quantum
    corrections?

2.  The W-bosons have spin one, whereas the monopoles are rotationally
    invariant. How do the monopoles acquire spin, so that they can be
    interpreted as W-bosons in the dual description of the theory?

3.  Since @xmath and @xmath are inversely proportional, the conjectured
    duality relates two theories, one of which is necessarily at strong
    coupling. Is it possible to test this conjecture at all?

The solution of these puzzles involves supersymmetry, as we shall now
discuss.

### 2.2 Supersymmetry and BPS states

A supersymmetry is a symmetry with a fermionic generator, which means
that bosons and fermions are transformed into each other. Supersymmetry
turns out to impose severe restrictions on physical theories. ⁴ ⁴ 4 We
refer the reader to our work [ 6 ] (and references therein), where some
of the constraints imposed by supersymmetry are studied for a particular
class of theories. An obvious constraint is that the particles of a
theory should fall into supersymmetry multiplets. The supersymmetry
algebra is such that the supersymmetry generators commute with the
momenta, which implies that each particle is degenerate in energy with
its superpartner(s). In what follows, the supersymmetry algebra will be
of great use in solving the puzzles raised at the end of Section 2.1 .

Indeed, the theory discussed in the previous section can be extended in
several ways before quantizing it. It is possible to add fermionic and
other fields to the original theory. These play no role in the solutions
discussed so far if putting them to zero is consistent with the new
equations of motion. It turns out that the theory can be extended in
such a way that it becomes supersymmetric [ 34 ] .

We introduce the supercharges @xmath carrying a Dirac spinor index
@xmath running from 1 to 4 and an internal symmetry index @xmath running
from 1 ot @xmath . We impose a Majorana condition on these supercharges.
Choosing a Majorana basis for the gamma matrices (which means that the
gamma matrices are real), this Majorana condition means that the
supercharges are hermitian. The simplest anticommutation relation these
supercharges can satisfy is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking the trace in the spinor indices @xmath and @xmath and choosing
@xmath equal to @xmath without summing, this implies that the
Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the supercharges are hermitian, the Hamiltonian is non-negative,
and only the vacuum (zero energy) state is annihilated by all
supercharges.

For a massive particle state, in a rest frame in which @xmath , Eq. (
2.2.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is a Clifford algebra in @xmath Euclidean dimensions and has a
unique irreducible (complex) representation, which is of complex
dimension @xmath . For even @xmath , there exists a real irreducible
representation of real dimension @xmath .

For a massless particle state, in a frame in which @xmath , Eq. ( 2.2.1
) reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The matrix @xmath has two eigenvalues equal to 0 and the other two equal
to 2; in a certain Majorana basis it equals diag(0,2,0,2). Thus, half of
the supercharges annihilate the massless state: it is supersymmetric.
The other half generate a Clifford algebra in @xmath dimensions. The
unique irreducible (complex) representation of this algebra has complex
dimension @xmath , the square root of the dimension of a massive
representation. A real representation of real dimension @xmath exists
unless @xmath . The representation of dimension @xmath is called
“short”, the one of dimension @xmath “long”.

Furthermore, it can be shown that the range of helicities in a massless
representation is at least @xmath ; in a massive representation this
range is at least @xmath .

Now, we return to the spontaneously broken gauge theory discussed in
Section 2.1 . For @xmath , the massless vector (with helicities @xmath )
and the massless Higgs field (helicity 0) belong to a single gauge
supermultiplet (for @xmath , this multiplet is really irreducible, for
@xmath it is the sum of two multiplets with helicity ranges from @xmath
to 0 and from 0 to 1, respectively). There are two other such multiplets
(containing the vectors that are going to become massive through the
Higgs mechanism and the scalar fields that are going to be “eaten up” by
the vectors in that process). The states in the latter multiplets
acquire a mass by the Higgs mechanism. This leads to a paradox: the
Higgs mechanism should not change the number of helicity states, whereas
we have just discussed that the dimensionalities of the massless and
massive representations differ drastically. The resolution of this
paradox is that the supercharges satisfy anticommutation relations that
are not quite Eq. ( 2.2.1 ): extra terms occur on the right hand side.
For instance, if @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the anti-symmetric symbol with @xmath . The charges
@xmath and @xmath are called “central” because they commute with all the
generators of the algebra. Their inclusion radically changes the
representations, as we shall now show. Consider the algebra acting on a
massive particle at rest carrying charges @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As @xmath , the right hand side of Eq. ( 2.2.6 ) has eigenvalues @xmath
, each with fourfold multiplicity. As the left hand side of Eq. ( 2.2.6
) is a non-negative matrix (because of the hermiticity of the
supercharges), the mass satisfies the bound

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When this bound is saturated, half of the eigenvalues of the right hand
side of Eq. ( 2.2.6 ) vanish, so that the irreducible representation is
short, like the massless irreducible representation of Eq. ( 2.2.1 ).
Thus, for the centrally extended algebra Eq. ( 2.2.5 ), the Higgs
mechanism is possible without changing the number of states, provided
the bound Eq. ( 2.2.7 ) remains saturated. Since the central charges are
conserved (because the supercharges are) and Eq. ( 2.2.7 ) is
reminiscent of Eq. ( 2.1.17 ), it is plausible that the central charges
are related to the electric and magnetic charges. Indeed, it has been
explicitly checked [ 35 ] that @xmath and @xmath (where @xmath and
@xmath are the electric and magnetic charges, respectively, and @xmath
is the magnitude of the expectation value of the Higgs field). Thus,
from this perspective, the Bogomol’nyi bound Eq. ( 2.1.17 ) is just a
consequence of the supersymmetry algebra! The fact that the massive
particles appearing in the previous section saturate this bound means
that they preserve part of the supersymmetry. Such objects are called
BPS, after Bogomol’nyi, Prasad and Sommerfield.

For @xmath rather than @xmath , there are more central charges, but the
conclusions are essentially unchanged.

We shall now see how the observations in this section shed light on the
puzzles raised at the end of Section 2.1 .

1.  In @xmath , quantum corrections are under control. This ensures that
    BPS states constructed at weak coupling evolve smoothly to states at
    strong coupling.

    For both @xmath and @xmath , the universal mass formula @xmath
    survives as the coupling constant is increased, because otherwise a
    short representation should suddenly turn into a long one.

2.  The argument that the states of a given momentum must represent the
    supersymmetry algebra applies in particular to magnetic monopoles.
    For @xmath the smallest massive representation is the gauge
    multiplet with helicities ranging from @xmath to 1. Thus, we have
    found monopoles with spin 1 [ 36 ] . The gauge multiplet is a short
    representation, which, as used in the previous point, implies the
    saturation of Bogomol’nyi’s bound Eq. ( 2.1.17 ). For @xmath , the
    monopole states form a hypermultiplet, which has helicities ranging
    from @xmath to @xmath .

3.  Even though the duality we would like to test relates a strongly
    coupled theory to a weakly coupled one, supersymmetry does make some
    tests possible. As mentioned above, for @xmath BPS states cannot
    disappear as the coupling constant is increased. Thus, if duality
    predicts the presence of a certain BPS state in a certain strongly
    coupled theory, a corresponding state should exist for weak
    coupling. Such BPS states can be predicted by extending the duality
    symmetry to SL(2, @xmath ). A concrete test of such a prediction has
    been performed in [ 37 ] .

### 2.3 Anomalies and anomaly inflow

It often happens in quantum field theories that a classical symmetry is
broken at the quantum level. The symmetry in question is then called
“anomalous”. The presence of an anomaly in a certain symmetry means that
the corresponding current is not conserved, and thus that conservation
of the associated charge is violated. This charge could be, for
instance, the electric charge in a U(1) gauge theory, or energy and
momentum in the case of gravitational anomalies. Anomalies in global
symmetries are nothing to worry about, but if a gauge symmetry is
anomalous the theory becomes inconsistent. Usually, anomalies in gauge
symmetries are cancelled directly by adding extra fermion species with
appropriate quantum numbers. A famous example is the standard model of
elementary particle physics: for each generation, the anomalies due to
the different chiral particles cancel. In this section, we will describe
an alternative way in which an anomalous gauge theory may be made
consistent. This mechanism, called “anomaly inflow”, was developed in [
21 ] and [ 22 ] . It applies to certain defects, like strings or domain
walls. If charge is not conserved on such a defect, this can be
compensated by charge inflow from the outside world.

Since anomaly inflow, in a different context, is going to play an
important role in this thesis, we shall now supplement this scenario
with formulas. In this section, we will only discuss gauge anomalies
caused by the presence of chiral fermions; the formalism can be extended
to gravitational anomalies, and to theories with a more general chiral
matter content.

The gauge field @xmath is a Lie-algebra valued one-form,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath the Hermitean generators of the gauge group in the
representation @xmath . They satisfy the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the (real) structure constants of the gauge group,
e.g., @xmath for SU(2). The generators satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the index ⁵ ⁵ 5 For instance, the spin @xmath
representation of SU(2) has index @xmath . of the representation @xmath
. The field strength

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which reads in components

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For SU(2), this agrees with Eq. ( 2.1.13 ) for @xmath ; this means that
we have absorbed the charge @xmath in the gauge field. The infinitesimal
gauge transformation of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the gauge covariant derivative.

Consider a (complex) Weyl fermion in @xmath dimensions coupled to the
gauge field @xmath of @xmath , and let @xmath be the effective action
for the gauge field, obtained by integrating out the fermion (there is
only a classical and a one-loop contribution):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, it is known from topological arguments [ 19 ] that the gauge
variation of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Chern character in the representation @xmath of the
gauge group in which the fermion transforms,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the subscript @xmath denotes that the @xmath -form part of the
expression in square brackets should be taken. The superscript (1) in
Eq. ( 2.3.10 ) refers to the descent procedure, which we now introduce.

Consider any closed, gauge invariant polynomial @xmath of the gauge
field strength @xmath , which is a two-form on space-time. Being closed,
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the zero-form term, is exact (at least
locally, but global issues will be neglected throughout this
discussion):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, the gauge variation of @xmath is exact:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As a simple example of the descent procedure, it is not difficult to
check that for a Weyl fermion in @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

(the wedge product between forms is suppressed) so that for a Weyl
fermion in @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Gauge invariance of @xmath is related to covariant conservation of the
current

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as can be seen as follows:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, using Eq. ( 2.3.15 ), the gauge current in @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is the familiar expression for the anomaly.

Now that we have developed enough machinary, we go on to describe the
anomaly inflow in the model of [ 21 , 22 ] . The model describes a Dirac
fermion in @xmath , coupled to a gauge field @xmath and to a complex
scalar field @xmath with vacuum expectation value @xmath , where @xmath
is called the axion field. A string configuration is described by @xmath
, where @xmath , @xmath are polar coordinates in the @xmath -plane (or
23-plane). The function @xmath is such that @xmath as @xmath and @xmath
as @xmath . Such a string is called an “axion string”. The Lagrangian
describing the fermions is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . Consider the Dirac equation for zero background gauge
field, in the axion string background:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is easy to check that this equation is solved by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

if

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath runs over the values 0,1. To interpret this solution, first
note that Eq. ( 2.3.21 ) implies that the wave function is localized
near the string (at @xmath ): since @xmath for @xmath the wave function
is exponentially suppressed far away from the string. It follows from
Eq. ( 2.3.22 ) that the solution satisfies the massless Dirac equation
in two dimensions, while Eq. ( 2.3.23 ) states that it is chiral in two
dimensions. The other equation, Eq. ( 2.3.24 ), implies that we have
precisely one (complex) Weyl spinor in two dimensions. Since the net
number of chiral fermions (by which we mean the number of chiral minus
the number of antichiral fermions) is invariant under continuous
deformations of the background (it is given by an index theorem), this
chiral fermion will not disappear when a (topologically trivial)
background gauge field is turned on.

This raises a puzzle. The original four-dimensional theory Eq. ( 2.3.19
) does not have a gauge anomaly, because the gauge fields have no chiral
couplings. However, the fermion zero modes on the string, described by a
Weyl fermion in two dimensions, give rise to a gauge anomaly, meaning
that the gauge charge they carry is not conserved. For the current

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

derived from the two-dimensional action for the fermion zero modes, this
means

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As charge is conserved in the full, four-dimensional theory, the
resolution must be that charge flows from the bulk of spacetime onto the
string, thus compensating for the non-conservation of charge on the
string, as we shall now describe.

The anomaly in Eq. ( 2.3.26 ) tells us that the part of the fermion
determinant @xmath coming from the fermion zero modes (denoted @xmath
above) is not invariant under gauge transformations. The rest of the
fermion determinant (coming from the massive degrees of freedom which
live off the string) must cancel this variation and restore gauge
invariance of the full theory. Indeed, in the thin string approximation
( @xmath for @xmath ) these massive modes can be shown to mediate the
following effective interaction between the axion field and the
background gauge field:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

In this approximation, the string is singular, but this can be accounted
for by considering @xmath as @xmath times a delta-function, or rather a
two-form with delta-function support, in the two dimensions transverse
to the string, e.g.,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here, @xmath denotes a disc around the origin in the two dimensions
transverse to the string and @xmath is its boundary. Using this and
Eq. ( 2.3.14 ), one sees that the variation of @xmath precisely cancels
the anomalous variation Eq. ( 2.3.26 ) of @xmath .

This resolves the puzzle mentioned above. It is instructive to go one
step further and actually compute the current @xmath induced by @xmath .
The result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath for @xmath and vanishes otherwise. We would like to make a
few comments about this result. First, as a cross-check, it can be
checked explicitly that @xmath is indeed covariantly conserved. Second,
the current @xmath consists of two pieces. The first piece, @xmath , is
localized in the whole spacetime, is covariant, and describes the inflow
of charge from infinity onto the string. The second piece, @xmath , is
localized on the string; it is the contribution of the massive fermion
modes to the current flowing on the string, and should be added to
@xmath , the contribution of the zero modes. The individual pieces
@xmath and @xmath are non-covariant, but it is easy to see that their
sum has a covariant divergence (the current itself is also known to be
covariant).

This has a beautiful interpretation in terms of “consistent” and
“covariant” anomalies. A consistent anomaly is the gauge variation of an
effective action and as such satisfies certain consistency conditions.
These conditions imply that the gauge anomaly cannot have a covariant
form (except in the case of an abelian gauge symmetry, where it is
accidentally covariant) and thus that the corresponding current as
defined in Eq. ( 2.3.16 ) cannot be covariant. On the other hand, it is
possible to define a different current that is covariant and whose
covariant divergence gives a covariant expression for the “anomaly”. The
latter “anomaly”, which cannot be the gauge variation of an effective
action, is called the “covariant anomaly”. Its physical meaning was less
clear, until the work we have just described appeared [ 22 ] . The term
@xmath , which appeared above in a natural way, turns out to be
precisely the term one has to add to the consistent current to transform
it into the covariant one. The total current flowing on the string is
the current that gives rise to the covariant anomaly, thus providing a
physical realization of the latter. Note that the covariant anomaly is
not the variation of a two-dimensional action: part of it is provided by
the variation of a higher-dimensional action.

## Chapter 3 Strings and branes

This chapter is not meant to give an extensive review of string theory:
much more space and time would be needed for that. Rather, we want to
highlight those features of string theory that will play a prominent
role in the second half of this thesis, where our own results are
presented. Readers who are interested in more thorough introductions to
string theory are referred to the many good text books on the subject,
e.g., [ 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 ] .

One concrete aim is to enable the reader who has some knowledge of
quantum field theory and is willing to work his way through the present
chapter, to understand the computations in Chapter 4 . Readers who are
not interested in all the technical details can safely skip anything
referring to ghosts, superghosts and pictures: although these concepts
are essential to justify the concrete form of the amplitudes we compute,
they do not play a significant role in the actual computations in
Chapter 4 .

### 3.1 Strings

#### 3.1.1 World-sheet point of view

##### The bosonic string

A bosonic string in a @xmath -dimensional trivial Minkowski background
is described by the Polyakov action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the previous formulae, @xmath is a constant, the meaning of which
will become clear soon, @xmath is the Euler number of the world-sheet
@xmath and @xmath is the spacetime Minkowski metric of signature @xmath
. Further, @xmath denotes the world-sheet coordinates. The fields @xmath
describe the embedding of the world-sheet in spacetime, and @xmath is a
Euclidean world-sheet metric of signature @xmath . Note that this metric
is non-dynamical; eliminating it from the action by using its classical
equation of motion gives rise to the Nambu-Goto action, which is
proportional to the area of the world-sheet. The constant @xmath has the
dimension of spacetime-length-squared and is related to the string
tension @xmath by @xmath .

The action Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) is invariant under the following symmetries:

1.  @xmath -dimensional Poincaré transformations, acting on @xmath .

2.  Diffeomorphisms of the worldsheet (under which @xmath transforms as
    a scalar and @xmath as a covariant tensor), in short “diff
    invariance”.

3.  Weyl transformations, i.e., @xmath -dependent rescalings of @xmath .
    This symmetry is typical of a two-dimensional world-sheet.

The variation of the action with respect to the metric @xmath defines
the energy-momentum tensor:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Diff invariance implies that @xmath is conserved, while it is traceless
as a consequence of Weyl invariance.

##### Path integral quantization

A path integral prescription can be given to quantize the string. Define
an amplitude in string theory by summing over all world-sheets
interpolating between given initial and final curves (see Fig. 3.1 ).

Each world-sheet @xmath is weighted by @xmath , leading to the naive
path integral

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Before refining this expression, we pause a moment to interpret the
@xmath term in Eq. ( 3.1.1 ). As the Euler number @xmath is a
topological invariant, the @xmath factor in the path integral governs
the relative weighting of different topologies in the sum over
world-sheets. For instance, adding a handle to a given world-sheet
reduces the Euler number by 2 and thus adds a factor @xmath . Such a
handle is the closed string analogue of a loop in a Feynman diagram in
field theory. Thus, it follows that the closed string coupling constant
is proportional to @xmath .

The reason why we called the path integral Eq. ( 3.1.4 ) naive is that
it includes an (infinite) overcounting: if @xmath and @xmath are related
by a diff @xmath Weyl transformation they represent the same physical
configuration. This overcounting can formally be accounted for by
dividing out the (infinite) volume of the group of diff @xmath Weyl
transformations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Roughly speaking, the idea is now to use the diff @xmath Weyl symmetry
to fix the metric to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and then to drop the integration over metrics. The gauge Eq. ( 3.1.6 )
is called unit gauge . This gauge choice is possible at least locally on
the world-sheet (global issues will show up later).

For now, we will study the action we get from Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) by simply
replacing @xmath by @xmath as in Eq. ( 3.1.6 ). Some of the things that
will have to be supplemented later are the following.

1.  Varying the action Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) with respect to @xmath gives rise
    to the equation of motion @xmath . If we use the gauge-fixed action,
    this should be imposed as a constraint.

2.  The diff @xmath Weyl leaves the Polyakov action invariant, but this
    does not imply that it is really a symmetry of the quantum theory.
    Indeed, whereas it is possible to define the quantum theory in a way
    that preserves diff invariance, this will generically not be the
    case for the Weyl invariance. The requirement that the quantum
    theory be gauge invariant imposes strong restrictions on the theory
    (for instance, the Polyakov action Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) suffers from a Weyl
    anomaly unless the spacetime dimension is 26).

3.  Once we have fixed the metric to its reference value @xmath , for
    which we have used the diff @xmath Weyl symmetry of the action Eq. (
    3.1.2 ), we might hope to have eliminated the overcounting in the
    naive path integral. This is not quite correct, as we shall see in
    the next paragraph.

4.  In fact, all of these issues can be dealt with by introducing ghost
    fields . This will be done later in this section.

##### Conformal invariance

Using a complex world-sheet coordinate @xmath , which equals @xmath or a
holomorphic function of it, and its complex conjugate @xmath , the
action Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) in unit gauge reads ¹ ¹ 1 We are using the
convention that

@xmath (3.1.7)

for a complex variable @xmath . This differs from the conventions in [
38 ] by a factor of 2.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Before discussing the precise way in which to implement the constraints,
we study the gauge-fixed action Eq. ( 3.1.8 ) by itself. As long as we
do not worry about global issues, there is more gauge freedom than we
needed to bring the metric in unit gauge: there exist diffeomorphisms
that leave the metric invariant up to a Weyl transformation. These
diffeomorphisms are called conformal transformations. The corresponding
diff @xmath Weyl transformations preserve the unit gauge. In terms of
the complex coordinate @xmath introduced above, the conformal
transformations are the holomorphic coordinate transformations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Actually, if we regard @xmath and @xmath as independent coordinates,
which corresponds to letting @xmath and @xmath take complex values, the
symmetry is enlarged to independent transformations of @xmath and @xmath
(i.e., @xmath and @xmath need not be related by complex conjugation).

An alternative way of arriving at the conformal symmetry is by starting
from the energy-momentum tensor Eq. ( 3.1.3 ). In complex coordinates,
its tracelessness is expressed by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while its conservation is then equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

implying that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

are respectively holomorphic and antiholomorphic. Now, it is obvious
that, because of the tracelessness of @xmath , the currents

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

are conserved for arbitrary holomorphic @xmath . Again, the symmetry is
enlarged to independent holomorphic and antiholomorphic transformations
if we extend the range of @xmath and @xmath beyond the “real surface”
where they are each other’s conjugates. It follows from Eq. ( 3.1.13 )
that the generators of the conformal symmetry are the moments @xmath and
@xmath of the energy-momentum tensors:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It can be shown that, for any conformal field theory, the conserved
charges @xmath and @xmath satisfy the Virasoro algebra

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and analogously for the @xmath (with central charge or Virasoro anomaly
@xmath ). One can prove that world-sheet energy-momentum conservation
necessarily breaks down (and thus the theory is inconsistent) unless
@xmath . Moreover, if @xmath and energy-momentum is conserved, the
classical Weyl invariance is broken at the quantum level unless @xmath .
The theory as we have described it so far (by the action Eq. ( 3.1.8 ))
is not Weyl invariant ( @xmath ), but Weyl invariance will be restored
when the full theory (including ghosts) is considered.

A special case of a conformal transformation is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for constant complex @xmath . These transformations are generated by
@xmath . Usually, one chooses a basis of local operators that transform
as follows under Eq. ( 3.1.16 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath are known as the conformal weights of @xmath . An important
special class of operators are the tensor operators or primary fields
@xmath , on which a general conformal transformation acts as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### Superstrings

So far, we have only discussed the bosonic string, which will not play a
significant role in this thesis. It is possible to generalize the above
discussion to the superstring. The corresponding action before gauge
fixing would have local worldsheet supersymmetry ² ² 2 Note that this is
not the same as spacetime supersymmetry, which is not manifest in this
formalism, which is called Ramond-Neveu-Schwarz formalism. There exists
a formulation with manifest spacetime supersymmetry, called the
Green-Schwarz formulation. We shall refer to the latter in Section 6.5 .
invariance in addition to the diff @xmath Weyl invariance of the bosonic
string. The action in gauge-fixed form is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The fields @xmath and @xmath are world-sheet Majorana-Weyl spinors of
opposite chirality, and spacetime vectors. As before, spacetime indices
are raised and lowered with the Minkowski metric @xmath . Again, the
gauge-fixed action should be accompanied by constraints. In addition to
the constraint that the world-sheet energy-momentum tensor should
vanish, we now have to impose the vanishing of the world-sheet
supercurrents

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Weyl invariance now requires the spacetime dimension to be 10, to be
compared with the 26-dimensional spacetime of the bosonic string.

##### Closed and open strings

Until now, we have not specified the topology of the world-sheet. For a
closed string , identify the world-sheet space coordinate @xmath
periodically: @xmath . With a Euclidean time coordinate @xmath , the
world-sheet becomes an infinite cylinder. This cylinder can be described
with the complex coordinate @xmath satisfying @xmath , or by the complex
coordinate @xmath , which is related to @xmath by a conformal
transformation. This conformal transformation maps the cylinder to the
complex plane, such that @xmath corresponds to the origin of the @xmath
-plane and @xmath to the point at infinity of the compactified @xmath
-plane (see Fig. 3.2 ).

We shall later apply canonical quantization to the action Eq. ( 3.1.19
), defined on the world-sheet of the string. To do that we shall use the
coordinate @xmath as the time coordinate. Thus time translations
correspond on the complex plane to the transformations Eq. ( 3.1.16 )
with real @xmath . As a consequence, time translations are generated by
@xmath . In this way, @xmath gets an interpretation as a Hamiltonian on
the world-sheet.

The action Eq. ( 3.1.19 ) leads to the equations of motion

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The equation of motion for @xmath implies that @xmath is holomorphic and
@xmath antiholomorphic, so we have the following Laurent expansions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The 1 in the exponent of @xmath is the holomorphic conformal weight of
@xmath ( @xmath is a primary field with @xmath ). Its appearance in this
expansion is due to the transformation properties of @xmath under the
conformal transformation between the cylinder and the plane (see Eq. (
3.1.18 )). We always choose the modes such that they are the usual
Fourier modes on the cylinder. For instance, on the cylinder the mode
corresponding to @xmath is @xmath -independent. Note that this also
explains the 2’s in Eq. ( 3.1.14 ): up to the Virasoro anomaly @xmath is
a @xmath tensor operator.

The equations Eq. ( 3.1.24 ) can be integrated to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath , and @xmath is equally distributed between @xmath and
@xmath . The overall motion of the string is described by @xmath and
@xmath , while the “oscillator modes” @xmath and @xmath describe the
oscillations of the string.

For the world-sheet fermions, we allow more general periodicity
conditions. We start with the coordinate @xmath on the cylinder. The
fermion action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

must be invariant under the periodic identification of the cylinder,
@xmath . This condition plus ten-dimensional Lorentz invariance leaves
two possible periodicity conditions for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the same sign for all @xmath . Similarly, there are two possible
periodicities for @xmath . (For @xmath only the periodic periodicity
condition is possible in a theory with maximal Poincaré invariance.) All
in all, there are four different sectors, denoted NS-NS, NS-R, R-NS and
R-R.

Taking into account the fact that @xmath and @xmath are primary fields
of weights @xmath and @xmath , respectively, the conformal
transformation from @xmath to @xmath acts as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

These fields have “Laurent” expansions

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.1.29)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath in the Ramond sector and @xmath in the Neveu-Schwarz
sector.

Canonical quantization gives rise to the (anti-)commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The supercurrents have the Laurent expansions

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.1.32)
  -- -- -- ----------

For open strings , let @xmath , which corresponds to @xmath if we now
define @xmath . This conformal transformation maps the strip to the
upper half-plane (see Fig. 3.3 ). The upper half-plane can also be
conformally mapped to the unit disc.

For open strings, the requirement that the action Eq. ( 3.1.19 ) be
stationary still implies the equations of motion Eq. ( 3.1.21 ), Eq. (
3.1.22 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.23 ), but in addition the fields should satisfy
appropriate boundary conditions, so that the boundary terms in the
variation of Eq. ( 3.1.19 ) vanish. We will now discuss these boundary
terms, first for the bosonic fields @xmath , and then (page 3.1.1 ) for
the fermionic fields @xmath .

If we take the world-sheet to be the upper half-plane, the boundary
terms involving @xmath are proportional to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One way to make this vanish is by choosing the Neumann boundary
condition @xmath , which preserves the Poincaré symmetry. Another
possible choice is the Dirichlet boundary condition @xmath , which means
that the endpoints of the open string are fixed in the @xmath
-direction. The boundary conditions can be chosen independently for each
value of @xmath and for both boundary components (the negative and the
positive real axes, corresponding to @xmath and @xmath in the original
coordinates on the strip). For instance, we can consider an open string
whose first endpoint is constrained to a ( @xmath )-dimensional
hyperplane @xmath , and whose second endpoint must lie on a ( @xmath
)-dimensional hyperplane @xmath .

When strings with Dirichlet boundary conditions are introduced, the
Poincaré symmetry is broken by these boundary conditions. The
hyperplanes to which the endpoints of certain open strings are confined
are called D-branes . These objects, which are going to play a prominent
role in this thesis, will be introduced in more detail in Section 3.4 .

Open string fields have only one set of oscillators. We explain this in
detail for a field @xmath with Neumann boundary conditions at both
endpoints (NN). The boundary conditions require @xmath in the expansion
Eq. ( 3.1.25 ). The momentum is now ³ ³ 3 The difference with the closed
string is that the world-sheet space coordinate @xmath of the open
string takes values in @xmath rather than @xmath . The momentum one
computes using Noether’s theorem gives @xmath in both cases. @xmath .
The expansion is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The modes are normalized so as to satisfy the usual commutation
relation, given in Eq. ( 3.1.30 ).

These boundary conditions can equivalently be imposed by using a
doubling trick . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Such a trick will be used in Section 7.2 . First,
use the equation of motion Eq. ( 3.1.21 ) to write @xmath as the sum of
a holomorphic and an antiholomorphic part. To avoid confusion, we write
this as follows in terms of real coordinates @xmath on the upper
half-plane @xmath ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Because of the Neumann boundary conditions, @xmath and @xmath can be
combined into a single holomorphic field @xmath defined on the whole
plane by extending it as follows:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Going back to the complex coordinate @xmath , this extended holomorphic
field has mode expansion

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is very reminiscent of the holomorphic closed string field @xmath
in Eq. ( 3.1.25 ). For many purposes open strings are almost equivalent
to one sector (say the holomorphic one) of closed strings.

If the field @xmath satisfies different boundary conditions, it is still
described by a single set of oscillators, but their moding varies. For
DD boundary conditions, @xmath remains integer moded but the zero mode
fluctuations @xmath and @xmath are absent. For ND or DN boundary
conditions, the mode numbers are half-integer (and thus there are no
zero modes).

We now turn to the boundary conditions on the fermionic fields. In
@xmath coordinates, the condition that the boundary terms of the
variation of the fermion action vanish takes the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is solved in a Lorentz invariant way by imposing

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

at the boundary. Here, @xmath and @xmath can take the values 0 and
@xmath . This choice can be made independently for both boundary
components, but by redefining @xmath we can set @xmath . Therefore,
there are two possibilities, named R sector ( @xmath ) and NS sector (
@xmath ). It is convenient to combine @xmath and @xmath in a single
holomorphic field with extended range @xmath by defining

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath . This field is periodic in the R sector and antiperiodic in
the NS sector. Therefore, we have a single set of R or NS oscillators
and the corresponding algebra Eq. ( 3.1.31 ), as opposed to the two sets
we had for closed strings (see Eq. ( 3.1.29 )). This is analogous to the
situation for the bosonic fields.

For open strings, the energy-momentum tensor satisfies the boundary
condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are normal and tangent vectors to the boundary
of the world-sheet. This expresses that (world-sheet) translation
invariance is unbroken in the tangential direction. In terms of the
@xmath coordinates, this means

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The fields @xmath and @xmath can be combined into a single holomorphic
field @xmath on the whole @xmath -plane:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here, the prime denotes complex conjugation ( @xmath ). ⁵ ⁵ 5 Readers
who find the notation confusing, may want to write everything in terms
of real coordinates, as in Eq. ( 3.1.35 ). There is a single set of
Virasoro generators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

In the first line, the contour @xmath is a semi-circle centered on the
origin; in the second line this has been rewritten in terms of a closed
contour and the extended holomorphic field Eq. ( 3.1.43 ).

Summarizing the oscillator mode analysis, we may say that the open
string modes are analogous to the holomorphic sector modes of the closed
string. The latter contains in addition an independent set of
antiholomorphic sector modes.

##### Ghosts

Now, we are ready to discuss the gauge fixing procedure, in particular
how the constraint that the energy-momentum tensor should vanish is
imposed. The procedure we follow is BRST quantization, which is a
standard tool in quantizing gauge theories. The reader is referred to [
42 , 38 , 39 ] for the details of the construction and for a systematic
introduction to it; we just mention some of the key points.

First, one adds Faddeev-Popov ghost fields to the theory:
reparametrization ghosts ( @xmath and @xmath ) and antighosts ( @xmath
and @xmath ), and superconformal ghosts ( @xmath and @xmath ) and
antighosts ( @xmath and @xmath ). The first four are often called “the
ghosts”, the last four “the superghosts”. Sometimes, all eight are
collectively called “ghosts”. The gauge-fixed action Eq. ( 3.1.19 ) is
supplemented with the ghost action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are primary fields of
conformal dimensions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
The ghosts @xmath and @xmath are anticommuting scalar fields; the
superghosts @xmath and @xmath are commuting spinors. Analogous remarks
apply to the tilded fields.

Although in this gauge the ghost and matter actions are decoupled, the
ghosts and superghosts do couple to the world-sheet metric of a non-flat
world-sheet. Thus, they contribute to the energy-momentum tensor, even
if the world-sheet metric is trivial! It turns out that if the spacetime
dimension is 10 (for the bosonic string this would be 26) the modes of
the total energy-momentum tensor satisfy the Virasoro algebra without
central charge . As a consequence, in this dimension the Weyl symmetry
of the action before gauge-fixing is not anomalous (see the discussion
after Eq. ( 3.1.15 )), as anticipated in remark 2 on page 3.1.1 . The
ghosts and superghosts also contribute to the world-sheet supercurrents.

The equations of motion derived from Eq. ( 3.1.45 ) state that the
untilded ghosts and superghosts are holomorphic and the tilded ones
antiholomorphic. For closed strings, the holomorphic and antiholomorphic
fields are independent; for open strings, they can be combined into a
single holomorphic field on the complex plane. Hence, we restrict our
attention to holomorphic ghost and superghost fields on the complex
plane.

In @xmath coordinates, the superghosts are periodic in the NS sector and
antiperiodic in the R sector (the ultimate justification will be that
the BRST current is then periodic, so that it can be integrated to give
the BRST charge). The mode expansions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.47)
     @xmath   @xmath               (3.1.48)
     @xmath   @xmath               (3.1.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and similarly for the antiholomorphic fields. The (anti)commutation
relations are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The total (matter + ghost) holomorphic superconformal generators are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (3.1.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Here, @xmath denotes creation-annihilation normal ordering , placing all
lowering operators to the right of all raising operators, with a minus
sign whenever anticommuting operators are switched. The lowering
operators are the ones with positive subscript (which lower the @xmath
eigenvalue) and, for this purpose, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and half of
the @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath only occur in the Ramond sector). The
normal ordering constant @xmath is @xmath in the NS sector and 0 in the
R sector (if spacetime is ten-dimensional).

##### Fock space

As a first step in determining the physical Hilbert space of the (free)
string, we represent the matter and ghost algebras Eq. ( 3.1.30 ), Eq. (
3.1.31 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.50 ). We start with eigenstates @xmath of @xmath
(with momentum @xmath ) that are annihilated by all the oscillator modes
with a positive mode number. We first discuss the representation of the
algebra of the holomorphic modes; for the closed string, we shall have
to reintroduce the antiholomorphic sector later.

In the NS sector, the ground state with given momentum is uniquely
specified if we further impose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The state @xmath is degenerate ⁶ ⁶ 6 The term “degenerate” will get its
usual meaning once we implement the constraint @xmath . with @xmath .
(The latter state will never be present in physical Hilbert spaces.) The
full Fock space is built by applying raising operators (modes with
negative subscript) to these states.

In the R sector, there are more zero modes. The ambiguity in the
definition of the ground state due to the superghost zero modes can be
removed by demanding that the ground state be annihilated by @xmath .
The degeneracy due to the @xmath modes has more profound consequences.
It is clear from Eq. ( 3.1.31 ) that the @xmath satisfy the SO(1,9)
Clifford algebra. States span a representation space for this algebra.
The irreducible real representation is 32-dimensional. The operators
@xmath transform ground states in ground states, so there must be (at
least) 32 ground states transforming as a non-chiral Majorana spinor of
SO(1,9). Half of this degeneracy will persist in the physical Hilbert
space. This is how spacetime fermionic states appear in this formalism.
As in the NS sector, the full Fock space is obtained by acting with
raising modes on the ground states (and the states with which they are
degenerate).

Thus, for the open string, we have the NS sector with a ground state
that transforms as a scalar under SO(1,9), and the R sector with an
SO(1,9) spinor ground state. For the closed string, we have to
reintroduce the antiholomorphic fields, thus finding four sectors. The
ground state is a scalar in the NS-NS sector, a spinor in the NS-R and
R-NS sectors and a bispinor in the R-R sector.

##### Physical Hilbert space

We are now ready to build the physical Hilbert space out of these Fock
spaces. The crucial observation is that the gauge-fixed matter plus
ghost action is invariant under the BRST-transformation , which is
generated by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for the open string, and by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for the closed string. Here, @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the superscripts denote the matter and ghost contributions to the
respective quantities, and @xmath is defined analogously. The symbol
@xmath denotes a contour integral along a circle around the origin of
the complex plane.

In the critical spacetime dimension ( @xmath for the superstring), the
BRST charge @xmath is nilpotent:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now impose that physical states should be annihilated by @xmath , in
other words they should be BRST-closed :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We anticipate that the inner product on the Fock space will be defined
in such a way that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, it follows that BRST-exact states (obtained by acting with @xmath
on another state) are orthogonal to all physical states. Hence, two
physical states that differ by an exact state are physically equivalent.
The physical Hilbert space is defined as a set of equivalence classes of
BRST-closed modulo BRST-exact states. This is called the cohomology of
@xmath . It turns out that this procedure is not sufficient as it
stands: we have to impose the additional conditions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and, in the R sector,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

plus the analogous conditions for the tilded modes in the case of closed
strings. These conditions can be imposed on the Fock space states before
applying the BRST procedure. Since one can check that @xmath and @xmath
, the conditions Eq. ( 3.1.58 ), Eq. ( 3.1.60 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.61 ) imply
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can define a positive inner product on the space of physical states
(as was anticipated in our calling this space a Hilbert space). There
are some subtleties related to ghost and superghost zero modes, which we
do not treat here. These subtleties will be dealt with in Section 3.3.4
.

##### String spectra

Before we discuss the spectra of the free open and closed strings, we
introduce the operator

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

(or @xmath ), where @xmath is the world-sheet fermion number . The
operator Eq. ( 3.1.64 ) is defined to anticommute with @xmath and the
(holomorphic) superghosts, so that it would be more appropriate to call
@xmath world-sheet spinor number . It gives @xmath on the NS ground
state and acts as @xmath on the R ground states (so it anticommutes with
the @xmath modes, which act as gamma-matrices). The operator Eq. (
3.1.64 ) will allow us to perform projections on the spectrum. Such
projections are necessary for consistency of the theory, and also to
obtain spacetime supersymmetric theories. Finally, for the closed string
there is also an operator @xmath , the analogue of @xmath in the
antiholomorphic sector.

###### Open strings

The quantization prescription given above can be shown to lead to the
following spectra (we discuss only the lightest modes). For the open
string , Eq. ( 3.1.1 ) for @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath in the NS sector and @xmath in the R sector. @xmath is the
excitation number of the non-zero modes. The constraint Eq. ( 3.1.62 )
determines the mass of a physical state in terms of its excitation
number.

In the NS sector, the lowest state is @xmath . Its mass is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so the ground state is tachyonic. As stated before, it has @xmath . On
the first excited level, we find the physical states of a massless
vector. This vector is obtained by letting @xmath act on a momentum
state @xmath . Here, @xmath is the polarization vector. The unphysical
polarizations are removed from the physical Hilbert space by BRST
invariance. The mass shell condition Eq. ( 3.1.62 ) now implies @xmath .
These massless states have @xmath and transform in the @xmath vector
representation of the SO(8) little group.

In the R sector, the lowest states are @xmath , where @xmath is a spinor
index, and @xmath is the polarization (there is an implicit sum over
@xmath ). The constraint Eq. ( 3.1.63 ) implies that this state
satisfies the massless Dirac equation, and thus is massless (as can also
be seen from Eq. ( 3.1.62 )). The positive chirality states have @xmath
and transform in the @xmath spinor representation of the SO(8) little
group, those with negative chirality have @xmath and transform in the
@xmath conjugate spinor representation.

###### Closed strings

For the closed string , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.67)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Again, @xmath and @xmath take values 0 or @xmath depending on the
sector. The mass-shell condition can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second equality is often called the level-matching condition.

In the NS-NS sector, we find a closed string tachyon with @xmath . The
tachyon has @xmath . We include this information in the notation by
stating that the tachyon sits in the (NS @xmath ,NS @xmath ) sector. The
(NS+,NS @xmath ) and (NS @xmath ,NS+) sectors are empty because of the
level-matching condition. In the (NS+,NS+) sector, we find 64 states in
the @xmath representation of the SO(8) little group: the graviton (
@xmath ), antisymmetric tensor ( @xmath ) and dilaton ( @xmath ).

The R-R sectors contain massless antisymmetric tensor potentials,
transforming in the @xmath for (R+,R+), in the @xmath for (R+,R @xmath )
or (R @xmath ,R+), or in the @xmath for (R @xmath ,R @xmath ). For
instance, the @xmath denotes a 4-form potential @xmath with selfdual
field strength and the @xmath a 3-form potential @xmath .

In the NS-R sectors, we find spinors and gravitini (vector-spinors),
e.g., @xmath for (NS+,R+) and @xmath for (NS+,R @xmath ).

##### Consistent string theories

First, we focus on closed oriented strings. Not all of the states we
have just found can be present together in a (perturbatively) consistent
string theory. We have not introduced the necessary concepts to
formulate the consistency conditions precisely (we refer to section 10.6
of [ 38 ] for details), but we shall try to indicate what kind of
conditions are involved. First, scattering amplitudes, to be introduced
in Section 3.3 , have to be well-defined (“all pairs of vertex operators
have to be mutually local”). Second, poles in scattering amplitudes of
physical particles must correspond to physical particles (“the OPE must
close”). Third, the theory must be “modular invariant”, which implies
that UV-divergences can be removed without spoiling space-time gauge
invariances.

One could impose as an extra consistency condition the requirement that
there should not be any excitations with negative mass squared
(“tachyons”). However, as in [ 38 ] , we shall not include this
requirement in the consistency conditions. The presence of a tachyon
means that the starting point of the perturbation series is not the real
vacuum of the theory, so that the perturbation theory does not make
sense. Nevertheless, one may hope that the theory does have a vacuum, so
that it is really a consistent theory (although the perturbation series
around the original would-be vacuum did not make sense). We refer to
Section 6.1 for a situation in which such a scenario has been proposed.

To obtain a consistent theory, one has to perform projections on the
spectrum obtained in the previous paragraph (“String spectra”). These
projections involve the world-sheet fermion number operators and are
called GSO-projections . Two inequivalent projections give rise to
consistent theories without tachyons: ⁷ ⁷ 7 We shall encounter different
GSO-projections in Chapter 6 .

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where for instance R+ and R- are the Ramond sectors projected with
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, as we have explained above. The
presence of gravitini indicates that these theories have local spacetime
supersymmetry . In type IIB, the gravitini have the same chirality, so
the supersymmetry is chiral: there are two supercharges transforming in
say the @xmath of SO(1,9). On the other hand, the IIA theory has
non-chiral supersymmetry, with one supercharge in the @xmath and the
other in the @xmath .

Before we proceed to study the type II theories from a spacetime point
of view, we introduce another supersymmetric string theory, which will
show up in Chapter 7 . The type IIB superstring, with the same
chiralities on the holomorphic and the antiholomorphic sides, has a
world-sheet parity symmetry @xmath . This symmetry can be gauged to
obtain an unoriented closed string theory. This results in the following
changes for the spectrum. In the NS-NS sector, the antisymmetric tensor
is eliminated, leaving the graviton and the dilaton. Only the linear
combination (NS-R)+(R-NS) of the two fermionic sectors of type IIB
survive the gauging, giving rise to massless states in the @xmath . In
particular, only one gravitino, and as a result only one supercharge, is
left. In the R-R sector, only the antisymmetric two-form potential
remains. It turns out that this closed string theory, called type I
closed unoriented string theory is inconsistent (for instance, there are
spacetime gravitational anomalies) unless one adds open strings to the
theory in a very precise way.

In order to add those open strings, we have to generalize the open
strings we have discussed so far. The two endpoints of an oriented open
string are special points, and distinct from each other. Therefore, it
is possible to assume that the open string carries “charges” at its end
points. If we take the charge at the first endpoint to transform in the
@xmath of a U( @xmath ) symmetry group and the one at the second
endpoint in the @xmath , then the open string as a whole transforms in
the @xmath , which is the adjoint of U( @xmath ). As a consequence, its
U( @xmath ) quantum numbers can be specified by giving a U( @xmath )
generator @xmath . In string scattering amplitudes, to be introduced in
Section 3.3 , the effect of the U( @xmath ) charges will be to produce a
Chan-Paton group-theory factor @xmath whenever @xmath external strings
are attached to a disc in the cyclic order @xmath ). Although the
charges have trivial world-sheet dynamics, they have a crucial influence
on spacetime physics. For instance, one finds a U( @xmath ) gauge
symmetry rather than the U(1) gauge symmetry associated to the massless
vector in the spectrum of the “ordinary” open string. In fact, this one
gauge field is replaced by a hermitean matrix of gauge fields. Without
Chan-Paton charges, the gauge field can be shown to be odd under
world-sheet parity, so it is not present on unoriented open strings ,
which are obtained from oriented ones by gauging world-sheet parity.
However, if an unoriented open string carries Chan-Paton charges, these
also transform under world-sheet parity. One possible action is @xmath
(the transposition reflects the fact that world-sheet parity
interchanges the endpoints). All in all, the gauge fields with
antisymmetric @xmath survive. As a result, the U( @xmath ) gauge
symmetry is reduced to O( @xmath ).

Going back to the problem that type I closed unoriented string theory by
itself is inconsistent, it is known that this inconsistency can be
removed by including unoriented open strings with SO(32) gauge symmetry.
The open string GSO projection keeps the states with even world-sheet
fermion number, thus eliminating the tachyon. The resulting unoriented
type I open plus closed string theory contains the massless closed
string states mentioned above, plus a gauge field and a spinor in the
adjoint of SO(32):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have discussed three tachyon-free and nonanomalous string theories:
type IIA, type IIB and type I SO(32). In addition to those, there exist
two heterotic string theories, which consist, roughly speaking, of the
holomorphic side of a bosonic string and the antiholomorphic side of a
superstring. Heterotic strings will only play a marginal role in this
thesis (see Section 7.1.2 ), so we do not introduce them in any detail.

#### 3.1.2 Spacetime point of view

##### Low energy supergravity

The particle spectra of the superstring theories consist of a finite
number of massless particles and an infinite tower of massive ones.
These massive string states have masses of the order of @xmath .
Usually, the string scale @xmath is assumed to be of the order of @xmath
GeV, though recently it has been pointed out that string scales as low
as 1 TeV cannot be excluded experimentally (this bound being set by the
non-observation of string physics at present-day particle accelerators).
In any case, one is mainly interested in describing the light (massless)
degrees of freedom. If we had a second quantized description of strings,
based on an action which is a functional of the fields corresponding to
the excitations of a string (like the graviton, dilaton, etc.), we could
imagine integrating out the massive fields from this action (or, at the
quantum level, the quantum effective action). The resulting effective
action for the massless fields would be horrendously complicated and
nonlocal, but useful formulas could be obtained by restricting to the
first few terms in a systematic expansion in the number of derivatives
(and fermions). This truncation would be called the low-energy effective
action . As we do not have such a second quantized description of string
theory, we cannot implement the programme we have just outlined. What we
can do is compute scattering amplitudes in perturbative string theory
(this will be explained in Section 3.3 ). Starting from this on-shell
information, we can then construct a classical action for the massless
fields that reproduces these amplitudes.

For the superstring theories discussed above, the high degree of
supersymmetry completely determines the form of the low-energy effective
action up to two derivatives. We shall focus on the type II string
theories, for which the low-energy effective actions are those of type
IIA and type IIB supergravity. However, the first action we shall write
down is that of eleven-dimensional supergravity, both for its relation
to type IIA supergravity and for its relation to M-theory, to be
discussed in Section 3.6.3 . We shall always restrict to the bosonic
parts of the actions.

##### Eleven-dimensional supergravity

The eleven-dimensional supergravity theory contains two bosonic fields:
the metric @xmath and a 3-form ⁸ ⁸ 8 We shall use differential forms to
simplify the notation [ 38 ] . A @xmath -form @xmath is a completely
antisymmetric @xmath -index tensor @xmath with the indices omitted (the
@xmath subscript on @xmath denotes the rank; we hope there will be no
confusion with the @xmath ’th component of a one-form). The wedge
product of a @xmath -form @xmath and a @xmath -form @xmath is defined by

@xmath (3.1.71)

(The wedge @xmath is sometimes suppressed.) Here, @xmath denotes
antisymmetrization with weight one. The exterior derivative takes a
@xmath -form into a ( @xmath )-form:

@xmath (3.1.72)

The integral of a @xmath -form over a @xmath -dimensional manifold,

@xmath (3.1.73)

is coordinate invariant. An important result is Stokes’ theorem,

@xmath (3.1.74)

where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional manifold and @xmath its boundary.
Using a metric @xmath on a @xmath -dimensional manifold, one defines the
Hodge star (or dual ) of a @xmath -form @xmath by

@xmath (3.1.75)

where @xmath is the determinant of the metric, @xmath is the totally
antisymmetric symbol with @xmath , and indices are raised with the
inverse of the metric @xmath . It is convenient to represent
differential forms by introducing an algebra of anticommuting
differentials @xmath , writing

@xmath (3.1.76)

so that the wedge product corresponds to multiplying these differentials
and the exterior derivative is @xmath . potential @xmath with field
strength @xmath . In terms of the SO(9) little group of the massless
states, the metric gives a traceless symmetric tensor (44 states) and
the 3-form a rank 3 antisymmetric tensor (84 states). Together with the
128 states of the SO(9) vector-spinor gravitino, these states form a
short multiplet of the supersymmetry algebra with 32 supercharges.

The bosonic part of the action is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where in general

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### Type IIA superstring

To obtain the non-chiral, type IIA, supergravity action in ten
dimensions, compactify the 10-direction on a circle of radius @xmath and
restrict to configurations independent of this direction. The reduction
of the metric is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath run from 0 to 10 and @xmath from 0 to 9. The superscript on
the metrics distinguishes between the 11-dimensional metric appearing in
the previous paragraph and the ten-dimensional metric, which will appear
henceforth. The superscript 10 will be omitted. The eleven-dimensional
metric has reduced to a ten-dimensional metric, a gauge field @xmath
(note that in Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) @xmath denotes the @xmath component of this
one-form) and a scalar @xmath . The potential @xmath reduces to a
three-form potential @xmath and a two-form potential @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The action Eq. ( 3.1.77 ) gives rise to the type IIA supergravity action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.82)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.84)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the notation is as follows. We have grouped the terms according to
whether the fields are in the NS-NS or R-R sector of type IIA string
theory; the Chern-Simons action @xmath contains both. The constant
@xmath is related to @xmath and the radius of compactification by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The field @xmath is the dilaton. The field @xmath is the NS-NS two-form
potential and @xmath its field strength:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have denoted the R-R potentials and field strengths by @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have defined

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

There are several terms in the action Eq. ( 3.1.82 ) that contain
potentials rather than their exterior derivatives. The term Eq. ( 3.1.85
) is gauge invariant because of the Bianchi identities for the field
strengths. The reason why the term involving @xmath is gauge invariant
is that the gauge variation of the second term in Eq. ( 3.1.89 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is cancelled by the transformation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which supplements the usual @xmath . The @xmath gauge transformation has
its origin in reparametrizations of @xmath : Eq. ( 3.1.91 ) is simply
part of the eleven-dimensional tensor transformation. The gauge
invariant combination @xmath is to be regarded as the physical field
strength.

All the terms in Eq. ( 3.1.82 ) can be interpreted as tree level effects
in type IIA string theory, which means that they arise from sphere
amplitudes. As we shall argue later, one expects sphere amplitudes to
contain a factor @xmath as in Eq. ( 3.1.83 ). To obtain this dilaton
dependence for Eq. ( 3.1.84 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.85 ), and thus to make the
relation to string theory more explicit, one could redefine

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

at the cost of complicating the Bianchi identity and gauge
transformations. Because of these drawbacks, the action is usually
written as in Eq. ( 3.1.82 ).

##### Type IIB superstring

Type IIB supergravity contains a self-dual field strength @xmath . There
is no simple covariant action for such a field. However, we can use the
following action if we impose the self-duality of @xmath as an added
constraint on the solutions :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.93)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.95)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.97)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.98)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

As in type IIA (see the discussion around Eq. ( 3.1.91 )), the action
Eq. ( 3.1.93 ) is invariant under the modified R-R gauge transformations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where now we have combined the R-R potentials and the gauge parameters
in formal sums of forms of different degree:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.100)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.101)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Here, only @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are relevant; we have
included the other forms for later use.

The higher forms do not contain independent degrees of freedom. The
relation to the lower forms appears as follows, as clearly explained in
[ 43 ] . The R-R sector ground state before the GSO projection is a
@xmath component bispinor of SO(1,9): one spinor index comes from the
holomorphic sector, the other from the antiholomorphic sector. This
bispinor can be expanded in products of gamma matrices:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.1.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix (to be introduced around
Eq. ( 3.3.53 )) and @xmath . The coefficients @xmath in this expansion
are the R-R field strengths. The holomorphic and antiholomorphic GSO
projections imply on the one hand that only even/odd form field
strengths occur in type IIA/B, and on the other hand that those field
strengths satisfy a Hodge duality relation @xmath (the sign depending on
@xmath ). This is why the five-form field strength of type IIB is
self-dual, for instance.

As an example of Eq. ( 3.1.99 ), its four-form part reads

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.1.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

To see that Eq. ( 3.1.96 ) is invariant under Eq. ( 3.1.99 ), one has to
make use of the fact that @xmath . Note that Eq. ( 3.1.99 ) is also
valid for type IIA, with the obvious changes to Eq. ( 3.1.100 ) and
Eq. ( 3.1.101 ). The form in which we have written the action Eq. (
3.1.93 ) differs slightly from the one in [ 38 ] . The reason why we
have chosen this form of the action is that it is written in terms of
the R-R potentials @xmath which will appear in the D-brane Wess-Zumino
action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ). (See the discussion on gauge invariance in point 4
in Section 3.4 .)

An important property of the action Eq. ( 3.1.93 ) is that it has an
SL(2, ) symmetry. To see this, define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Then,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.1.105)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.106)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----------

where the Einstein metric @xmath is used everywhere. This action is
invariant under the following SL(2, ) symmetry:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.107)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.108)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.109)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath real numbers satisfying @xmath
. The SL(2, ) invariance of the @xmath kinetic term is familiar, and
that of the @xmath kinetic term follows from

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.1.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In type IIB string theory, the SL(2, ) invariance is broken to a
discrete SL(2, @xmath ) subgroup; see Section 3.6.2 .

### 3.2 Strings in background fields

In Section 3.1.1 , we have studied strings moving in a flat, Minkowski
spacetime. Now, we would like to generalize the discussion to curved
spacetimes. For simplicity, we restrict our attention to the bosonic
sector of the superstring. It is natural to replace the action Eq. (
3.1.2 ) by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Unlike Eq. ( 3.1.2 ), this does not reduce to a free field theory in the
unit gauge Eq. ( 3.1.6 ). From the two-dimensional point of view, @xmath
is a “coupling functional” (which can be viewed as an infinite number of
coupling constants by expanding @xmath around a fixed spacetime point
@xmath ).

To see the relation between this gravitational background and the
graviton excitation of the closed string, consider a spacetime that is
close to flat

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath small ( @xmath will be defined in Eq. ( 3.4.7 )). Then, the
factor @xmath in the world-sheet path integral can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As we shall see in Section 3.3.6 ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the bosonic part of the vertex operator for the graviton state of the
string. Thus, Eq. ( 3.2.3 ) means that turning on a background metric as
in Eq. ( 3.2.1 ) corresponds to inserting a coherent state of gravitons.

From this perspective, it is quite plausible that backgrounds of the
other massless string states can be included as well. Restricting to the
closed string, this means that the action Eq. ( 3.2.1 ) should be
extended to include ⁹ ⁹ 9 We only consider backgrounds of NS-NS fields;
it is much harder to turn on a R-R background. the antisymmetric tensor
@xmath and the dilaton @xmath . The result is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the world-sheet Ricci scalar. We have called this action
@xmath rather than @xmath because, as will become clear soon, it extends
Eq. ( 3.1.1 ) rather than Eq. ( 3.1.2 ): it already contains the string
coupling constant.

The action Eq. ( 3.2.5 ) is invariant under field redefinitions @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath transforming as tensors. The Lagrangian density
changes by a total derivative under the spacetime gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that Eq. ( 3.2.6 ) leaves the action invariant if the world-sheet
does not have a boundary. For world-sheets with boundary, gauge
invariance is restored by adding a boundary term to Eq. ( 3.2.5 ), as we
shall discuss in Section 3.4 . The @xmath term in Eq. ( 3.2.5 )
describes the minimal coupling of the string world-sheet to the gauge
potential @xmath , much like the world-line of an electron couples to a
photon. The analogue of the electric charge is the string winding
number. Invariance under Eq. ( 3.2.6 ) corresponds to conservation of
string winding number. In this respect, it is clear that once open
strings (world-sheets with boundary) are added to the theory and closed
strings are allowed to be cut into open strings, the gauge invariance
Eq. ( 3.2.6 ) will have to be reconsidered.

The dilaton term in Eq. ( 3.2.5 ) has an important consequence. For
constant dilaton field, @xmath , it equals @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the Euler number of the world-sheet @xmath . This means that the
constant @xmath in Eq. ( 3.1.1 ) can be shifted by choosing a different
vacuum expectation value for the dilaton. As we have seen in Section
3.1.1 , @xmath determines the string coupling constant. Here, it is the
constant mode of one of the fields. What we have learned is that the
string coupling constant is not a free parameter of string theory.
Rather, different values of the coupling constant correspond to
different vacua of the same theory.

Some of the results of this section have an interpretation in terms of
the spacetime effective actions of Section 3.1.2 . The type II string
theories are theories of closed strings only; ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 This statement
and the following conclusion will be altered in Section 3.4 . the tree
level actions Eq. ( 3.1.82 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.93 ) are designed to
reproduce scattering amplitudes due to world-sheets with sphere
topology. These actions are manifestly invariant under the @xmath -gauge
transformations Eq. ( 3.2.6 ), consistent with the fact that the sphere
has no boundary. Further, we have argued that the actions Eq. ( 3.1.82 )
and Eq. ( 3.1.93 ) can be brought to a form where the dilaton appears as
a global factor @xmath (in fact, this is the only way in which the
dilaton appears without derivatives). This means that the coupling
constant @xmath in front of the action has no invariant meaning: it can
be shifted by redefining the dilaton field (so that it gets a different
vacuum expectation value). We shall only consider backgrounds with a
constant expectation value for the dilaton. In that case, we can
redefine the dilaton field by a constant and make its expectation value
vanish. Then, @xmath (which we will henceforth denote @xmath ) is
related to the ten-dimensional Newton’s constant (see Eq. ( 3.4.7 ) in
Section 3.4 ).

To conclude this section, we just mention the important fact that the
condition that the action Eq. ( 3.2.5 ) be Weyl invariant reproduces the
classical equations of motion of the background fields, including @xmath
corrected Einstein equations. The reader is referred to [ 39 , 38 ] for
details about this essential consistency condition.

### 3.3 String scattering amplitudes

#### 3.3.1 Vertex operators

In Section 3.1.1 , we defined amplitudes in perturbative string theory
by summing over world-sheets interpolating between given initial and
final curves. In practice, this idea is very difficult to implement for
generic initial and final curves. It turns out that the situation
simplifies when on-shell amplitudes (i.e. scattering amplitudes, or
S-matrix elements) are considered.

A heuristic argument for this simplification goes as follows [ 38 ] .
First, one argues [ 38 ] that scattering amplitudes of on-shell states
are due to world-sheets with incoming and outgoing legs that are
semi-infinite cylinders. Each of those legs can be described with a
complex coordinate @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the limit @xmath . The end @xmath fits onto the rest of the
world-sheet. The external state is specified by a weight factor in the
path integral depending on the configuration at @xmath .

Then, one notes that the cylinder Eq. ( 3.3.1 ) can be conformally
mapped into the annular region described with a coordinate @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the @xmath limit, this region becomes the unit disc (see Fig. 3.4 ).
The external state is now specified by the insertion in the path
integral of a local operator at @xmath .

Finally, one can always find a conformal transformation that maps each
of the initial and final curves to finite points. In that way, the
original world-sheet is conformally mapped into a compact one. The
on-shell external states are represented by the insertion of local
operators in the path integral. These local operators are called vertex
operators .

Readers who do not feel comfortable with this heuristic argument can
just skip it and define string scattering amplitudes as expectation
values of local vertex operators. They will find out that, for on-shell
external states, such a prescription is compatible with the local
world-sheet symmetries, such as conformal symmetry. Vertex operators for
off-shell external states would break some local world-sheet symmetries.
Since these symmetries are necessary to eliminate negative norm states
from the physical string spectrum, at this point the readers will
conclude that they can only treat on-shell amplitudes.

Thus, in practice, we can only compute the S-matrix in perturbative
string theory. Off-shell questions, like the potential of massive or
tachyonic particles, are extremely difficult to answer in this
framework. There have been attempts to understand off-shell string
theory, but these have only been partially successful. We shall not deal
with them in this thesis.

#### 3.3.2 Hilbert space interpretation

In Section 3.3.1 , we found a path integral prescription to compute
string scattering amplitudes. The prescription instructs us to sum over
all compact world-sheets, with vertex operators inserted in the path
integral. To be more precise, the vertex “operators” are really local
functionals of the fields appearing in the world-sheet action.

If the world-sheet is a sphere (as it will be in most of this thesis),
¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The other world-sheets we shall consider are the disc and the
torus. In both cases, a similar Hilbert space interpretation is
possible. the amplitudes can be given a Hilbert space interpretation.
First, we map the sphere to the (compactified) complex plane, described
with a complex coordinate

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We choose @xmath as our world-sheet time coordinate. ¹² ¹² 12 In fact,
this is the time coordinate that appeared naturally in Section 3.1.1 ,
where we obtained the complex plane via a conformal transformation on
the cylinder. Then, we can apply canonical quantization, which, in fact,
is what we did in Section 3.1.1 . The resulting algebra of the modes of
the various fields in the world-sheet action can then be represented on
a Hilbert space, after dealing with the subtleties we shall consider in
Section 3.3.4 . ¹³ ¹³ 13 In fact, in this thesis we shall not need to
explicitly construct this Hilbert space with its positive scalar
product; see Section 3.3.3 .

The local insertions in the path integral now get an interpretation as
operators on a Hilbert space.

The conclusion is that the states of the free string Hilbert space
correspond to local operators. This reflects an important feature of
conformal field theory (CFT) on a cylinder: there is a complete
correspondence between operators and states. This correspondence is
called the state–operator mapping . We refer to [ 38 ] for more details
on this construction.

To illustrate the state–operator mapping, consider the conformal field
theory describing the NS sector of the superstring. Let us ask which
state @xmath corresponds to inserting the unit operator at the origin,
i.e., to doing the path integral without an insertion at the origin. To
answer this question, we find out by which modes the state is
annihilated. The modes @xmath are defined by (see Eq. ( 3.1.24 )):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When they act on the state created by an operator inserted at the
origin, the contour integral is along a small circle around the origin.
With no operator inserted at the origin (except for the unit operator),
the integrand of Eq. ( 3.3.4 ) is perfectly holomorphic inside the
contour for @xmath . Thus, as far as the CFT describing the fields
@xmath is concerned, the state @xmath is just the vacuum @xmath with
zero momentum. Analogously, the state @xmath is annihilated by all
@xmath with @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.1.29 )). Further, it is clear from Eq. (
3.1.14 ) that @xmath is annihilated by the Virasoro generators @xmath
and @xmath with @xmath , in particular by the SL(2, @xmath ) subgroup
generated by @xmath . Therefore, it is called the SL(2, @xmath ) vacuum
. However, the SL(2, @xmath ) vacuum is not the vacuum (or ground state,
the state with zero occupation number in the Fock spaces) we defined
around Eq. ( 3.1.53 ): it follows from Eq. ( 3.1.47 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.49 )
that @xmath is not annihilated by the lowering operators @xmath and
@xmath . As far as the ghosts (as opposed to the superghosts) are
concerned, there is an easy relation between the SL(2, @xmath ) vacuum
and the ground state defined before: the ground state is obtained from
the SL(2, @xmath ) vacuum by acting with @xmath . For the superghosts,
the relation between both vacua is far less obvious. To discuss it, one
would need the material introduced in Section 3.3.4 .

As another example of the state–operator mapping, what is the operator
corresponding to the state @xmath ? Acting with @xmath on @xmath amounts
to inserting

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the path integral, where the contour integral is along a small circle
around the origin. The integrand is holomorphic except at the origin. By
Cauchy’s theorem, inserting Eq. ( 3.3.5 ) is equivalent with inserting
@xmath at the origin. Thus, the state @xmath is created by the operator
@xmath .

Applying the mode @xmath corresponds to inserting the operator @xmath .
One can check that the state with several creation modes excited
corresponds to the normal-ordered product of the operators associated to
the modes. Here, by normal-ordered we mean conformally normal-ordered ,
which is generically different from the creation-annihilation normal
ordering we encountered before. The normal-ordered product of two
operators differs from the ordinary product in that it satisfies the
naive equations of motion. It is obtained from the ordinary product by
subtracting terms that become singular as the operators come close to
one another. As an example, in the CFT of the @xmath fields the state
@xmath corresponds to operator @xmath , where we denote conformal normal
ordering by @xmath . Henceforth, we shall usually drop the normal
ordering symbols.

As a useful tool, we define the commutator of a charge

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

associated to a holomorphic current @xmath , and an operator @xmath
inserted at a point @xmath . We define the commutator @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.7)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath is a circle centered at the origin with radius slightly
greater than @xmath and @xmath is one with slightly smaller radius than
@xmath . The small circle @xmath is centered at @xmath . In Eq. ( 3.3.8
) we have deformed the contour using holomorphicity (see Fig. 3.5 ). We
have assumed that no other operators are inserted in the annulus between
@xmath and @xmath .

All the holomorphicity arguments we are using are only valid inside a
path integral, which is where we shall make use of them. From that point
of view, the definition Eq. ( 3.3.7 ) is very natural. In a Hilbert
space interpretation of the path integral, the operators come out time
ordered. In the way we quantized the sigma model on the sphere, time
ordering is the same as radial ordering, so the ordering of the
operators on the right hand side of Eq. ( 3.3.7 ) is as suggested by the
left hand side.

We pauze to mention an important consequence of the state–operator
mapping, the operator product expansion (OPE) . This states that
inserting in a path integral two local operators close to one another
(compared to the other insertions) is equivalent to inserting a sum of
local operators at one of both points. For operators @xmath satisfying
transforming as Eq. ( 3.1.17 ), the OPE reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath labels a complete set of operators transforming as Eq. (
3.1.17 ), and the equality holds inside correlation functions. OPEs are
very handy to compute commutators with charges associated to holomorphic
currents: as we have just seen, these involve circle integrals, which
can often be computed using Cauchy’s theorem. As another application,
consistency with OPEs puts strong restrictions on the form of
correlation functions. For instance, OPEs are of great help in
evaluating correlation functions like the ones appearing in Section 7.2
.

We end this digression by giving two examples of useful OPEs. The
transformation property Eq. ( 3.1.18 ) of primary fields is encoded in
the OPE

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes non-singular terms, which for many applications are
not important. From this, one can compute the commutator of @xmath
(defined in Eq. ( 3.1.14 )) with @xmath . The OPE of the energy-momentum
tensor with itself reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which states that the energy-momentum tensor is not a primary field in a
theory with non-vanishing central charge. The “ @xmath ” instead of “
@xmath ” denotes the omission of non-singular terms. This OPE encodes
the Virasoro algebra Eq. ( 3.1.15 ).

#### 3.3.3 Inner product

If we want to give the correlation functions computed from the path
integral an interpretation as expectation value in a Hilbert space, we
have to define an inner product on the space of states. To be more
precise, we should take the space of physical states defined in Section
3.1.1 and endow it with a positive sesquilinear form. We shall not go
all that way, though. What we shall do is define a sesquilinear form
(“inner product”) on the Fock space of the string oscillators, and
introduce a bracket notation for it. This will be sufficient for our
purpose of rewriting scattering amplitudes in a “Hilbert space”
formalism. The step of explicitly extracting a positive inner product on
the physical Hilbert space will be omitted.

It is consistent with the commutation relations to ask that the inner
product be such that the modes satisfy the Hermiticity properties

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and analogously for the antiholomorphic modes. The first line in Eq. (
3.3.12 ) expresses, for instance, the fact that the operators @xmath
correspond to the modes of the real classical field @xmath .

If, for the time being, we denote the inner product of two states @xmath
and @xmath by @xmath , the Hermitian conjugate of an operator @xmath is
defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To define the sesquilinear form @xmath , one could proceed as follows.
First, define @xmath to be the path integral on the sphere with the
vertex operator corresponding to the state @xmath inserted at the origin
and no other insertions. Then, arbitrary brackets @xmath can be defined
using sesquilinearity and the hermiticity properties Eq. ( 3.3.12 ).

Now, we introduce the bracket notation ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The “bra” @xmath is
often called the conjugate state of the “ket” @xmath . Also, @xmath is
called an in-state and @xmath an out-state . The latter terminology can
be motivated as follows. We are studying a Euclidean field theory on the
sphere, which we map to the cylinder with coordinates @xmath , where
@xmath is the Euclidean time coordinate. Consider an operator that would
be Hermitean in a Minkowski field theory obtained from our Euclidean
theory via Wick rotation. The Hermitean conjugate of such a operator
inserted at a point with coordinates @xmath , corresponds to the same
operator inserted at a point with coordinates @xmath . We have seen in
Section 3.3.1 that an in-state @xmath is created by an operator inserted
at @xmath :

@xmath (3.3.14)

where @xmath is composed of Hermitean operators at @xmath . According to
Eq. ( 3.3.13 ), we may write

@xmath (3.3.15)

where @xmath is composed of Hermitean operators at @xmath . by defining

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 3.3.4 Ghosts

The ghost and superghost systems have some peculiarities with important
consequences. We first discuss the ghost system. One can define [ 42 ] a
ghost number operator @xmath that counts @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
for @xmath . (It is the charge associated to the current @xmath .) It
turns out [ 42 ] that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the 3 is related to the anomaly in the ghost number current.
Suppose we want to compute the expectation value in the SL(2, @xmath )
vacuum of an operator @xmath with ghost number @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the SL(2, @xmath ) vacuum @xmath does not carry ghost charge, we
can use Eq. ( 3.3.17 ) and Eq. ( 3.3.18 ) to derive

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that only operators with ghost number

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

can have a non-vanishing expectation value!

For the superghost system, one can analogously define a superghost
number operator @xmath that counts @xmath charge. (It is the charge
associated to the current @xmath .) Now, [ 42 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

(where @xmath is related to the anomaly in the superghost number
current), so that only operators with superghost number

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

can have a non-vanishing expectation value.

Of course, the same reasoning goes through for the antiholomorphic
ghosts and superghosts, so that in addition to Eq. ( 3.3.20 ) and Eq. (
3.3.22 ) non-vanishing amplitudes have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is convenient to write the superghosts @xmath and @xmath in terms of
new variables as [ 42 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

( @xmath has been defined above Eq. ( 3.3.21 )), and @xmath and @xmath
are holomorphic fermions with dimensions 1 and 0, respectively. The OPEs
are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can associate the following charge to the @xmath system:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which satisfies [ 42 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A non-vanishing amplitude can be obtained if one @xmath is inserted in
the path integral over @xmath and @xmath . This can also be seen as
follows. The @xmath field @xmath has a single zero mode @xmath on the
sphere, while the @xmath field @xmath has none. The Grassmann integral
over @xmath vanishes unless a factor of @xmath is inserted. Note, in
passing, that this also makes it clear that the insertion point does not
matter.

However, it is a peculiar feature of Eq. ( 3.3.24 ) that only @xmath
occurs, not @xmath itself. For computations involving @xmath and @xmath
, we can therefore restrict to the reduced algebra with @xmath omitted
(not integrated over in the path integral). If this is done, no @xmath
insertion is needed. Working in the “large” algebra is useful when
discussing pictures . The picture operator @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For instance, inserting @xmath or @xmath inside the contour contributes
@xmath or @xmath to @xmath , respectively. It is clear from Eq. ( 3.3.22
) and Eq. ( 3.3.28 ) that, in the large algebra, only operators with
total superghost number @xmath and @xmath charge @xmath can have a
nonzero expectation value. In the reduced algebra, this means that the
total superghost number should be @xmath and the total picture should be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Of course, the same can be done for the antiholomorphic superghosts. In
the @xmath variables, the superghost number corresponds to the power of
@xmath . The SL(2, @xmath ) vacuum @xmath has superghost number zero.
Vacua with other superghost numbers can be defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 3.3.5 BRST invariance

On vertex operators, the equivalent of the physical state condition
Eq. ( 3.1.58 ) reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

BRST exact states are created by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath any operator. From all this, it is clear that BRST exact
states decouple from physical sphere amplitudes: write the BRST exact
vertex operator as in Eq. ( 3.3.33 ) and use Eq. ( 3.3.32 ) to commute
@xmath to the left or the right until it annihilates @xmath or @xmath .

Using Eq. ( 3.1.1 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.52 ), the BRST charge Eq. ( 3.1.55 )
can be decomposed as follows into pieces with definite ghost number:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.3.35)
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

Note that due to a contribution of the supercurrent piece of @xmath
there is no @xmath in front of @xmath in Eq. ( 3.3.35 ).

All vertex operators we shall use have definite ghost number. Such
vertex operators must commute with the three pieces of @xmath
independently. In the following, we shall focus on the condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Take an @xmath primary field @xmath that does not contain ghost fields
(superghost fields are allowed). Then, it follows from Eq. ( 3.3.10 )
(and the fact that the OPE between @xmath and non-ghost fields is
non-singular) that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and analogously

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that, in real coordinates @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This vanishes if we integrate @xmath over the sphere. ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 On
world-sheets with boundary, like the disc, the boundary terms vanish due
to the boundary condition on the ghost field, which we have not
discussed explicitly. Analogously, one can use Eq. ( 3.3.35 ) and the
fact that the @xmath OPE is non-singular to show that @xmath is
invariant under @xmath and @xmath .

Open string vertex operators, which we shall use in Section 7.2 , are
inserted on a boundary of the world-sheet. To construct a BRST invariant
vertex operator, one takes a dimension 1 primary field and either
integrates it over the boundary or adds a ghost field. In most of this
thesis, we shall focus on closed string vertex operators, to which we
now return.

We have found two kinds of candidate vertex operators: fixed vertex
operators with ghost number one, and integrated vertex operators with
ghost number zero,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In both cases, @xmath is an @xmath primary field of the Virasoro
algebra. Note that the structure of Eq. ( 3.3.42 ) is consistent with
the observations around Eq. ( 3.3.5 ) and the fact that physical states
are built by applying matter and superghost oscillators on the vacuum
@xmath .

Now, we combine our new knowledge with the observations summarized in
Eq. ( 3.3.20 ), to conclude that, in a scattering amplitude on the
sphere, three vertex operators should be in the fixed form Eq. ( 3.3.42
) and the others should come in the integrated form Eq. ( 3.3.43 ). We
could also have obtained this result by carefully gauge fixing a path
integral like Eq. ( 3.1.5 ). The three fixed insertion points serve to
gauge-fix the six real parameter family of diff @xmath Weyl
transformations that were not fixed by the gauge choice Eq. ( 3.1.6 ).
Indeed, the sphere has six conformal Killing vectors!

Of course, in order for these candidate vertex operators to really be
physical vertex operators, they should also commute with @xmath , @xmath
and their antiholomorphic counterparts. The ideas involved are similar
to the ones developed above, but technically more complicated. We shall
not go through the details.

Starting from an @xmath tensor operator @xmath (satisfying certain
conditions), we have found two different BRST invariant vertex
operators, one with ghost numbers one, the other with ghost number zero.
In computing scattering amplitudes, it does not matter which vertex
operators we fix and where we fix them: all possibilities correspond to
equivalent ways of fixing the gauge. Independently of the gauge fixing,
we determined the number of ghost number one vertex operators in a
non-vanishing amplitude from the ghost number properties of the vacuum,
Eq. ( 3.3.20 ). Analogously, one can show that each string state
corresponds to more than one operator @xmath . In fact, there is an
infinite number of them for each state. They are said to be in different
pictures , i.e., they carry different values of @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.3.29
)) or @xmath . Independently, each of these operators @xmath can be
fixed or integrated, subject to the constraint that precisely three of
them should be fixed. There is another constraint coming from Eq. (
3.3.30 ) and its antiholomorphic counterpart: the holomorphic and
antiholomorphic pictures of the vertex operators in an amplitude should
add up to @xmath . By introducing picture changing operators and using
contour deformation arguments, one can show that this is the only
constraint. As long as the pictures add up to @xmath , it does not
matter which vertex operator is in which picture.

Of these products of vertex operators, only terms consistent with Eq. (
3.3.22 ) and its antiholomorphic counterpart contribute to the
amplitude.

#### 3.3.6 Closed string vertex operators

This is a good point to write down the explicit form of the closed
string vertex operators we shall use in this thesis. We shall always
compute scattering amplitudes in a trivial Minkowski background

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the formal sum @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 3.1.100 ). The closed
string vertex operators describe fluctuations of the fields around their
background values:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The graviton vertex operator in the @xmath picture is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that Eq. ( 3.2.4 ) is reproduced when the fermions are put to zero.
For the NS two-form, the @xmath vertex operator reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The vertex operator for a R-R potential in the @xmath picture can be
found in [ 44 ] . Its expression is slightly complicated. However, in
this thesis we shall always be able to insert the R-R vertex operator at
infinity on the complex plane. It turns out [ 44 ] that the ‘‘out’’
state ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 See footnote 14 . obtained by inserting a R-R vertex
operator at infinity has a relatively simple expression:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we define ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 Note that the matrix @xmath in the following
equation is the charge conjugation matrix, as we shall explain shorthly.
It has nothing to do with a formal sum of R-R potentials, for which
unfortunately we have used the same symbol.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that @xmath just denotes @xmath or @xmath and should not be
confused with the field in Eq. ( 3.3.24 ). Further, @xmath denotes the
holomorphic R vacuum with spinor index @xmath (introduced after Eq. (
3.1.66 )), momentum @xmath and superghost charge @xmath (see Eq. (
3.3.31 )). The matrix @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix.
Conventions on the RR zero modes and gamma matrices can be found in the
Appendix of [ 45 ] . Here, we only note that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In Chapter 7 , we shall also use open string vertex operators (to be
introduced there) and @xmath R-R vertex operators. The latter involve
spin fields, a concept we shall not introduce in any detail. The reader
is referred to the references for more information.

### 3.4 D-branes

In Section 3.1.1 , we noted that Neumann boundary conditions are not the
only possible boundary conditions for open strings. Consider, first in a
trivial Minkowski background, open strings satisfying Neumann boundary
¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 As in Section 3.1.1 we have chosen the real axis to coincide
with the boundary of the open string world-sheet. conditions in the
directions 0 to @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and Dirichlet boundary conditions in the other directions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath are constants. These boundary conditions describe open
strings whose end-points are confined to the ( @xmath )-dimensional
plane @xmath (see Fig. 3.6 ). Such a plane, on which open strings can
end, is called a D-brane, or D @xmath -brane.

The boundary conditions Eq. ( 3.4.1 ) and Eq. ( 3.4.2 ) have to be
supplemented with appropriate boundary conditions on the fermions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath equals @xmath or @xmath . In fact, @xmath can be chosen
independently for each string endpoint, giving rise to NS and R sectors
as in Section 3.1.1 . The absence of factors of @xmath (present in Eq. (
3.1.39 )) is due to our working in @xmath rather than @xmath
coordinates. The different sign in Eq. ( 3.4.4 ) compared to Eq. ( 3.4.3
) can be argued for using T-duality and its interpretation as a
one-sided parity transformation (see Section 3.6.1 ).

The quantization of the open strings goes as described above, the only
difference being that the momenta only have components along the brane
(there are no @xmath and @xmath modes for @xmath a direction in which
Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed). As a result, the states of
the open string will correspond to fields depending only on the
coordinates along the brane, unlike for instance the metric and gauge
fields discussed in the previous section, which depend on all spacetime
coordinates. Before the GSO projection, the open strings have a
tachyonic ground state, and at the massless level a vector @xmath ,
@xmath scalars @xmath and some fermions (the vector and scalars are the
reduction of a ten-dimensional vector to @xmath dimensions). As before,
the GSO projection eliminates the tachyon and keeps the massless bosonic
modes. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 The other GSO projection, keeping the tachyon and
eliminating the massless bosonic modes, also plays a role in string
theory, as we shall see in Chapter 7 . In that chapter, we shall also
encounter D-branes described by open strings without GSO projection.

The scalars @xmath can be interpreted as describing local fluctuations
in the position of the D-brane in transverse space. This is a crucial
axiom in the study of D-branes: it implies that D-branes are dynamical
objects. Even if we start from a brane world-volume (which is the
generalization of the world-line of a particle and the world-sheet of a
string) which is just a plane, we find excitations (described by open
strings ending on the brane) that describe fluctuations in the shape of
the brane.

#### 3.4.1 Action for a single D-brane

At leading order, the low-energy effective action describing the
massless degrees of freedom of a D @xmath -brane is the dimensional
reduction of the ten-dimensional U(1) super-Yang-Mills action to @xmath
dimensions. As usual, there are higher order corrections in @xmath
(since @xmath has dimensions of length squared, these are suppressed at
low energies). To leading order in derivatives of the gauge field
strength @xmath , but to all orders in the field strength itself, the
effective action is given by the Dirac-Born-Infeld action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath is the tension of a D @xmath -brane:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath is the string coupling constant and @xmath Newton’s
constant.

In the presence of NS-NS background fields, the action Eq. ( 3.4.5 ) is
modified to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are arbitrary coordinates on the D-brane world-volume, and
@xmath and @xmath denote the pullbacks to the D-brane worldvolume of the
bulk fields @xmath and @xmath . This action receives perturbative and
non-perturbative curvature corrections, (some of) which were computed in
[ 46 ] . The action Eq. ( 3.4.5 ) is written in static gauge: @xmath .

If the R-R background is nontrivial, the Dirac-Born-Infeld action Eq. (
3.4.8 ) should be supplemented with the Wess-Zumino action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Before we comment on the structure of this action, we explain the
notation. First, @xmath and @xmath are the curvatures of the tangent and
normal bundles of the D-brane world-volume. Then, @xmath denotes the
A-roof genus:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.4.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where the second term is a four-form, the third and the fourth terms are
eight-forms and higher terms are irrelevant because they have at least
twelve antisymmetrized indices, whereas the dimension of any D-brane
world-volume is at most 10, the dimension of spacetime.

By @xmath , we mean a formal sum of pullbacks of all R-R potentials
(i.e., all @xmath with @xmath odd/even in type IIA/IIB), see Eq. (
3.1.100 ). The two-form @xmath is the pullback of the the NS-NS two-form
@xmath (we shall often omit the subscript 2 on the latter). The
integrand in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) is a formal sum of forms of different degree.
The @xmath sign instructs us to pick only the ( @xmath )-form part and
to integrate it over the ( @xmath )-dimensional world-volume.

The Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) plays a central role in this
thesis. Therefore, we shall now display some of its terms more
explicitly.

Taking the 1 from both the exponential in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) and the
expansion Eq. ( 3.4.10 ), we find the well-known coupling [ 47 ] between
a D @xmath -brane and a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This coupling just means that D @xmath -branes are charged under the (
@xmath )-form R-R potential.

Taking the linear part of the exponential in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) and the 1
from the expansion Eq. ( 3.4.10 ), we find the following coupling
between a D @xmath -brane and a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The term involving @xmath implies, for instance, that a D @xmath -brane
with a magnetic flux carries D( @xmath )-brane charge. The other term
says that the same is true for a D @xmath -brane with @xmath -flux.
Section 4.3 will be devoted to the part of Eq. ( 3.4.12 ) that involves
the @xmath -field.

Taking the 1 from the exponential and the four-form part of Eq. ( 3.4.10
), we find the coupling

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first term implies, for instance, that a D @xmath -brane wrapped
around certain topologically nontrivial manifolds carries D( @xmath
)-brane charge. The terms Eq. ( 3.4.13 ) will be derived in Section 4.4
.

Taking the 1 from the exponential and the eight-form part of Eq. (
3.4.10 ), we find the terms

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which will be the subject of Section 4.5 .

There are perturbative [ 8 ] and non-perturbative [ 46 ] curvature
corrections to the Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ). The perturbative
corrections will be discussed in Section 4.5 .

Let us pause to comment on the structure of the actions Eq. ( 3.4.8 )
and Eq. ( 3.4.9 ).

1.  If we just consider the spacetime metric and the map embedding the
    brane in the spacetime, the action Eq. ( 3.4.8 ) is proportional to
    the induced volume of the ( @xmath )-dimensional brane world-volume.
    This is similar to the Nambu-Goto action for the string (see Section
    3.1.1 ).

2.  The dilaton dependence of Eq. ( 3.4.8 ) is as expected for an open
    string tree level action (see Section 3.2 ; the Euler number of a
    disc is one). From Eq. ( 3.4.9 ), we would also get this dilaton
    dependence if we redefined the R-R potentials @xmath as in Eq. (
    3.1.92 ).

3.  The Born-Infeld field strength @xmath and the pullback @xmath of the
    bulk field @xmath always appear in the combination

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (3.4.15)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    This is related to the comments on @xmath -gauge invariance after
    Eq. ( 3.2.6 ), and can be understood as follows. The closed string
    field @xmath and the open string field @xmath appear in the
    world-sheet action of an open string with end-points on the D-brane
    as

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (3.4.16)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    where by @xmath and @xmath we mean the pullbacks of the respective
    fields to the string world-sheet @xmath or its boundary @xmath (we
    are using differential form notation, see footnote 8 in Section
    3.1.2 ). The first term was introduced in Eq. ( 3.2.5 ). The second
    term means that the end-points of the string are charged under the
    gauge field on the brane (in fact, both end-points carry opposite
    charges). This term is necessary for gauge invariance, as we now
    show. Under a gauge transformation Eq. ( 3.2.6 ), the first term
    changes by

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (3.4.17)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    This non-invariance can be compensated if the transformation Eq. (
    3.2.6 ) is accompanied by

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (3.4.18)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    where @xmath is the pullback of @xmath to the D-brane world-volume.
    We conclude that in Eq. ( 3.4.16 ) only the combination is invariant
    under the gauge transformation Eq. ( 3.2.6 ), Eq. ( 3.4.18 ).

4.  To see that the Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) is invariant under
    the R-R gauge transformations Eq. ( 3.1.99 ), note that, as @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (3.4.19)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Since all other forms appearing in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) are closed, the
    variation of the integrand is a total derivative.

#### 3.4.2 Multiple D-branes

When we consider more than one D-brane, we find more degrees of freedom
than the ones of the individual D-branes. The additional degrees of
freedom are provided by open strings stretching between different
D-branes (see Fig. 3.7 ).

For simplicity, consider @xmath coincident D @xmath -branes. Then, the
massless degrees of freedom constitute an @xmath , @xmath U( @xmath )
vector multiplet dimensionally reduced to @xmath dimensions. Now, @xmath
is a nonabelian gauge field and the scalars @xmath transform in the
adjoint representation of U( @xmath ). If the D-branes are moved away
from each other, the gauge symmetry is broken to the U(1) @xmath of the
individual branes. The “off-diagonal” degrees of freedom get masses
proportional to the distance between the branes to which their end
points are confined.

At the end of Section 3.1.1 , we introduced Chan-Paton factors, leading
to nonabelian gauge groups. Here, we see that considering multiple
D-branes provides an alternative way to get nonabelian gauge symmetry
from string theory. However, it can be argued via T-duality ²⁰ ²⁰ 20
T-duality will be introduced in Section 3.6.1 . that these two
mechanisms are closely related. In fact, we shall refer to indices for
the gauge group on multiple D-branes as Chan-Paton indices.

The leading terms in the low energy action of this system of D @xmath
-branes should correspond to the reduction to @xmath dimensions of the
@xmath U( @xmath ) super-Yang-Mills theory. However, it is a nontrivial
(and, in fact, not completely solved) problem ²¹ ²¹ 21 See, for
instance, [ 48 ] for a recent discussion of the nonabelian Born-Infeld
action and for more references. to find the nonabelian generalization of
Eq. ( 3.4.8 ) and Eq. ( 3.4.9 ). For Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) one can, as a “first
approximation”, include a trace over the gauge (Chan-Paton) indices of
the nonabelian field strength which now appears in the exponential
factor. However, it was shown in [ 49 ] that the full story is more
involved and interesting. For instance, there are additional commutator
terms that couple a D @xmath -brane to R-R potentials of degree higher
than @xmath (remember that the action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) couples this brane
to the potentials up to degree @xmath ). Nevertheless, in this thesis we
shall stick to the “first approximation”, keeping in mind that there
will be corrections to our results. We shall not discuss the nonabelian
generalization of Eq. ( 3.4.8 ) in this thesis.

### 3.5 Branes and anomaly inflow

#### 3.5.1 D-branes

The D-brane Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) is essential for the
consistency of D-branes, in particular for the consistency of
intersections of D-branes (also called I-branes ). In fact, when
intersecting branes (or branes in certain nontrivial backgrounds) are
involved, the WZ action may not be invariant under gauge or coordinate
transformations. It turns out [ 50 , 51 ] that the anomalous variation
of this action precisely cancels anomalies of chiral degrees of freedom
living on the intersection (or on the brane itself). This is an example
of the anomaly inflow mechanism, which we introduced in Section 2.3 in a
field theory context. In this subsection, we shall give a hint of how
the inflow mechanism on I-branes works. We refer the reader to [ 50 , 51
] for more rigorous treatments.

A D @xmath -brane couples electrically to @xmath and magnetically to the
Hodge dual @xmath , which equals @xmath , possibly up to a sign. In
configurations where both electric and magnetic charges are present, it
is more appropriate to work with the field strengths rather than the
potentials. Therefore, we shall first rewrite the WZ action in terms of
the gauge invariant field strengths @xmath , by which we mean a formal
sum of R-R field strengths (cf. Eq. ( 3.1.100 )):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(see Eq. ( 3.1.89 ), Eq. ( 3.1.97 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.98 )).

The structure of Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) and its naive nonabelian generalization
discussed briefly in Section 3.4.2 is the following:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a closed, gauge invariant polynomial constructed out of
the gauge field strength and curvature two-forms (to be precise, @xmath
is invariant under gauge transformations of the vector field on the
brane and under local Lorentz rotations but not under @xmath gauge
transformations). ²² ²² 22 Note that we have dropped the hats on @xmath
and @xmath . It should be clear from the context when a pullback is
meant. Writing, as in Section 2.3 ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the leading zero-form term of @xmath , we can integrate
Eq. ( 3.5.2 ) by parts to obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the @xmath in Eq. ( 3.5.3 ) can now be a gauge transformation
of the vector field living on the brane, or a local Lorentz rotation in
the tangent or normal bundle to the brane. The first is really a gauge
symmetry on the brane. The local Lorentz rotations are gauged in
spacetime, so that there must not be any anomalies in them either.
Incidentally, it is a matter of choice whether one discusses anomalies
in local Lorentz rotations or in general coordinate transformations (one
can shift them from one to the other). Therefore, we refer to the
anomalies in local Lorentz transformations as gravitational anomalies.

It follows from Eq. ( 3.5.1 ) that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(this can be considered as the Bianchi identity for @xmath ). Combining
this with Eq. ( 3.5.3 ), it is clear that Eq. ( 3.5.4 ) is invariant
under gauge and local Lorentz transformations (as it should be, being
equal to Eq. ( 3.5.2 ), which is manifestly invariant). Analogously,
Eq. ( 3.5.4 ) is still invariant under @xmath gauge transformations
@xmath if this is combined with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first term in the variation of the second term in Eq. ( 3.5.4 ) will
cancel the variation of the first term in Eq. ( 3.5.4 ); the second term
in the variation of the second term in Eq. ( 3.5.4 ) is zero upon using
Eq. ( 3.5.5 ).

Just as in electrodynamics, the Bianchi identity is modified in the
presence of magnetic charges, Eq. ( 3.5.5 ) will undergo changes in the
presence of D-branes. This will give rise to noninvariance of Eq. (
3.5.4 ) under gauge and local Lorentz transformations in certain
backgrounds. As in Section 2.3 , its gauge variation will be cancelled
by an anomaly due to localized chiral fermions [ 50 , 51 ] .

As is usual at present, we shall put @xmath , though it would be
interesting to see how a nonzero @xmath field should be incorporated.
Also, in [ 49 ] the question was raised what happens to @xmath gauge
invariance in the presence of intersecting branes. We shall not deal
with these issues here.

The argument that anomalies due to chiral zero modes on intersections of
D-branes (and on D-branes in certain nontrivial gravitational
backgrounds) are precisely cancelled by anomaly inflow can be found in [
50 , 51 ] . We shall give the reader a rough idea on two points: which
chiral zero modes live on D-brane intersections and how is the variation
of Eq. ( 3.5.4 ) localized on brane intersections? We shall do this for
the special case of two D5-branes intersecting on a string.

Consider a D5-brane (denoted D5) stretched along the directions 012345
and another D5-brane (D5’) along the directions 016789. They intersect
on a string (I-brane) in the 01 directions (see Fig. 3.8 ).

The usual degrees of freedom of both D5-branes are obtained as in
Section 3.4 by quantizing open strings with their end-points confined to
the D-brane in question. For D5-branes in flat space (as we are
considering), these degrees of freedom are nonchiral. However, two
intersecting branes have more degrees of freedom than those associated
to the individual branes: there are open strings with one end-point on
D5 and the other on D5’. Upon quantization, these strings give rise to
extra degrees of freedom localized on the intersection. It turns out
that, in the situation we are considering here, these degrees of freedom
are chiral fermions, charged under the gauge symmetry on both branes.
These chiral fermions give rise to gauge and gravitational anomalies.

The reader is invited to compare this situation with the one in Section
2.3 . In both cases, we have chiral fermions localized on a submanifold
of spacetime, although the full bulk theory is (assumed to be)
consistent, i.e., free of anomalies in gauge symmetries. In both cases,
the anomalies due to the localized chiral fermions will have to be
cancelled by inflow. From a “practical” point of view, there is one
great difference between both cases. In Section 2.3 , we knew the
degrees of freedom of the theory we started from, and the cancellation
of anomalies was the result of a somewhat artificial splitting of the
effective action in two pieces. The chiral modes living on the axion
string were just modes of a field in the action. In the present case, we
start from a theory of which we do not know the fundamental degrees of
freedom. We do not know what “fundamental field” the chiral fermions are
modes of, we just found them using the fact that open strings can end on
D-branes. The anomaly inflow argument can be used to extract information
about the theory away from the intersection.

We still have to indicate how the WZ action Eq. ( 3.5.4 ) can cancel
anomalies localized on D-brane intersections. Going back to our example,
consider the

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

term of Eq. ( 3.5.4 ), which would be equal to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the absence of other branes. Note that we are considering the
situation with @xmath , so that @xmath is just @xmath . In the presence
of D5’, Eq. ( 3.5.5 ) changes into

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(up to a constant), where in general @xmath is the current associated to
the world-volume of the D-brane in question. ²³ ²³ 23 For instance, for
a D @xmath -brane stretched along the first @xmath coordinate directions
the associated current reads

@xmath (3.5.10)

In general, the current is defined such that for any @xmath -form @xmath

@xmath (3.5.11)

Using @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.5.3 )) we thus find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which shows that the variation of Eq. ( 3.5.7 ) is indeed localized on
the intersection with D5’. Analogously, a similar term on D5’ will also
have a variation localized on the intersection.

In Eq. ( 3.5.4 ), the first term is expressed in terms of the R-R
potentials rather than the field strengths. In the case we are
considering (only D5-branes and @xmath ), this term describes the
coupling of the D5-branes to @xmath . ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 This term cannot be
expressed in terms of a field strength. It turns out [ 50 , 51 ] that,
in the presence of branes, the R-R potentials have an anomalous gauge
variation. The variation of the terms

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is also localized on the intersection of both branes.

All in all [ 50 , 51 ] , the total variation of the Wess-Zumino actions
for D5 and D5’ precisely cancels the anomaly due to the chiral fermions
on the intersection. In fact, most of the curvature terms in Eq. ( 3.4.9
) were discovered using anomaly inflow arguments.

The terms displayed in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) have been called anomalous D-brane
couplings [ 50 ] .

This anomaly inflow argument and, in particular, the curvature terms in
Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) fixed by it, occupy a central position in this thesis. In
Chapter 4 , we shall find more direct evidence for the presence of these
curvature terms. In Chapter 6 , we repeat the anomaly inflow argument
for D-branes in non-supersymmetric type 0 string theories. In this way,
we fix the whole Wess-Zumino action for those D-branes. The Wess-Zumino
action can then be checked directly repeating the computations of
Chapter 4 .

#### 3.5.2 NS fivebranes

We have seen that type II string theories contain fundamental strings,
which are electrically charged under the @xmath field (see Eq. ( 3.2.5
)), and D-branes, which are electrically and magnetically charged under
certain R-R potentials. String perturbation theory gives an explicit
descriptions of the dynamics of these objects (at weak string coupling).
However, these are not the only extended objects in the type II
theories. This subsection deals with the NS fivebrane, which is a
solitonic object (a localized classical solution to the field
equations). It is magnetically charged under the @xmath field.

To describe the dynamics of this object, one can look at fluctuations of
the fields around the classical solution [ 52 ] . ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 This is how
we found the chiral fermion living on the axion string in Section 2.3 .
In both type IIA and type IIB, there are normalizable massless modes
corresponding to translations in the four transverse directions. In
addition, there is a vector on the the IIB NS5-brane and a selfdual
antisymmetric tensor and an additional scalar on the IIA NS5-brane.
These massless degrees of freedom are accompanied by fermionic
superpartners, which are chiral for IIA and nonchiral for IIB.

Incidentally, we shall derive these results in Section 6.4.1 by first
T-dualizing to Kaluza-Klein (KK) monopoles, which are other extended
objects in type II string theories. Of course, in that derivation we use
T-duality properties of NS5-branes. Although T-duality will be
introduced in Section 3.6.1 , we shall not derive the fact that
NS5-branes and KK monopoles are T-dual. Note that dualities are often
helpful in determining the excitations of extended objects. ²⁶ ²⁶ 26
This often works the other way around: knowing the field content living
on certain extended objects adds evidence to duality conjectures. For
instance, the modes living on the IIB NS5-brane are predicted by (or add
evidence to) type IIB S-duality, to be introduced in Section 3.6.2 .

As the reader may have guessed, in this subsection we shall be
interested in the chiral degrees of freedom living on the IIA NS5-brane:
a selfdual antisymmetric tensor and a number of chiral fermions. It is
well-known that this spectrum gives rise to a gravitational anomaly in
six dimensions: the energy-momentum tensor of the chiral modes living on
the NS5-brane is not conserved at the quantum level. ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 We are
implicitly making the choice that the anomaly is in the general
coordinate transformations rather than the local Lorentz
transformations. The anomaly, i.e., the divergence of the
energy-momentum tensor, is localized on the NS5-brane world-volume.
Nevertheless, the full theory we started with (type IIA string theory)
is non-chiral and thus free of gravitational anomalies. The reader who
has read Section 2.3 and the previous subsection will not be surprised
by the resolution of this puzzle [ 53 ] . The anomaly should be
cancelled by a bulk term of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

for a specific closed, invariant polynomial @xmath of the curvature
twoform. Here, @xmath is a general coordinate transformation. Needless
to say, Eq. ( 3.5.15 ) is just an example of the descent relations Eq. (
2.3.12 ) and Eq. ( 2.3.13 ). Eq. ( 3.5.14 ) is often written as @xmath ,
although @xmath is not well-defined in the presence of an NS5-brane.
Using the fact that NS5-branes are magnetically charged under @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

(up to a factor), it is clear from Eq. ( 3.5.15 ) that the variation of
Eq. ( 3.5.14 ) is localized on the NS5-brane:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It turns out [ 53 ] that this variation of Eq. ( 3.5.14 ) indeed cancels
the anomalous variation due to the chiral zero modes on the type IIA
NS5-brane.

This picture is quite satisfactory, but it would be nice to have more
direct evidence for the presence of the term Eq. ( 3.5.14 ) in the type
IIA supergravity action (note that this term is higher order in momenta
than the terms shown in Section 3.1.2 ). In fact, it was explicitly
computed to be present in [ 54 ] , before this anomaly inflow argument
was made. Some details of the computation of [ 54 ] will be given in
Section 6.4.2 .

In Section 6.4.2 , we shall also repeat the computation of [ 54 ] for
type 0 string theories. We shall find that in those theories there is no
bulk term like Eq. ( 3.5.14 ). From that observation, we are then able
to conclude that the NS5-branes in those theories must have a non-chiral
spectrum. This will be confirmed by a more direct argument.

### 3.6 Dualities

#### 3.6.1 T-duality

We start from type IIA or type IIB string theory in a trivial Minkowski
background and compactify one of the directions (say the 9-direction) on
a circle of radius @xmath . Just as in field theory, the first effect is
that the momentum is quantized:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.6.1)
  -- -- -- ---------

The second effect has no counterpart in field theory: strings can wind
around the compact direction:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.6.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

The integer @xmath is the winding number . The mode expansion Eq. (
3.1.25 ) for @xmath is replaced by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.6.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Instead of Eq. ( 3.1.69 ), we now have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.6.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

or

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This mass formula is invariant under

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.6.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Interchanging @xmath and @xmath can be achieved by replacing @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By superconformal invariance, this “one-sided parity transformation”
includes a reflection of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This has an interesting consequence: as the zero mode @xmath , which
acts as a gamma matrix in the antiholomorphic R sector, changes sign,
the chirality of the antiholomorphic R sector ground state is reversed.
Therefore, interchanging winding and momentum takes IIA to IIB and vice
versa. What we have learned is that, for instance, the type IIA theory
compactified on a circle of small radius has the same spectrum as the
type IIB theory on a circle of large radius. In fact, this equivalence
extends to the interactions as well. It is called T-duality .

Thus, we see that the uncompactified type IIA and IIB theories are just
different limits of a single space of compactified theories. A
remarkable consequence of T-duality is that strings cannot tell the
difference between large and small compactification radii: it looks like
the string length @xmath constitutes a minimal length scale ²⁸ ²⁸ 28
This discussion requires some modification when D-brane probes are
considered: they can probe smaller distances than strings. . This
dramatically shows how our intuitive notions of spacetime break down at
the string scale.

As T-duality interchanges IIA and IIB, it should turn a R-R potential
with an odd number of indices into one with an even number of them, and
vice versa. Up to signs, the result of T-duality in the 9-direction is
to remove the index 9 if it is present and to add it if it is not. For
instance,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

So far, we have only considered closed strings. Let us now introduce
D-branes and open strings and see how T-duality acts on them. It is easy
to see that if the open string coordinate @xmath satisfies Neumann
boundary conditions, then the “one-sided parity transformed” coordinate
@xmath satisfies Dirichlet boundary conditions, and vice versa. Thus, a
D-brane extended in the 9-direction is transformed into one which is
localized in that direction, and vice versa. Note that this is
consistent with the D-branes being charged under the R-R potentials and
the transformation Eq. ( 3.6.12 ) of the latter.

#### 3.6.2 Type IIB S-duality

String theory is not as well-understood as field theory: we are lacking
a fundamental description of the theory. One tool we have is string
perturbation theory, which only makes sense when the string coupling
constant is small. Even in principle, it is not known how to do
computations at generic values of the string coupling constant. However,
in the past few years some powerful tools have been developed that allow
us to understand the physics at least at some regions of parameter
space. These tools are called dualities . In Section 2.1 , we have
introduced this concept mainly in the context of field theory. We have
seen examples where a strongly coupled theory could equivalently (but
with much more computational power!) be described by a weakly coupled
dual theory. The picture of string theory that has emerged in the last
five or six years is that there is one “big” theory (called M-theory,
see also the next subsection) of which all five known consistent string
theories are perturbative descriptions, which are each useful in a
certain corner of parameter space. One example was given in the previous
subsection: weakly coupled type IIA and type IIB theory in ten
noncompact dimensions are continuously related to one another. The
parameter interpolating between the two theories is the size of a
compactified direction.

We now give a different, more involved example. We start from weakly
coupled type IIB string theory and ask what happens when the coupling
constant grows strong.

The conjecture is that type IIB string theory is selfdual , i.e., that
the theory at strong coupling looks precisely the same as at weak
coupling! In Chapter 2 , we have seen an example of a selfdual field
theory, and in fact the situation for type IIB is quite similar to that
one.

There are two strings in the theory: the fundamental string and the
D-string (D1-brane). The ratio of their tensions is @xmath , so that at
weak coupling the fundamental string is much lighter than the D-string.
At strong coupling, this is the other way around. The duality conjecture
is that at strong coupling the theory is equivalent to the weakly
coupled type IIB theory, with the D-string now playing the role of the
fundamental string. Type IIB S-duality, as it is called, reverses the
string coupling and exchanges the two strings.

The evidence for S-duality is largely based on supersymmetry. For
instance, supersymmetry allows to follow the ground states of, say, the
D-string to strong (fundamental string) coupling and compare them to
those of a weakly coupled fundamental string. Another piece of evidence
is that the low energy effective action is fixed by its large amount of
supersymmetry.

S-duality leaves the potential @xmath invariant, so it should take the
D3-brane to itself. As it exchanges the fundamental string and the
D-string, it should also exchange the potentials @xmath and @xmath they
couple to, and the corresponding magnetically charged objects, the
NS5-brane and the D5-brane.

In fact, the S-duality group is bigger than just the @xmath
transformation we have considered so far. It is enlarged to a discrete
SL(2, @xmath ) subgroup of the SL(2, ) symmetry group of type IIB
supergravity (see Section 3.1.2 ).

In Section 6.5 , we shall critically examine a similar duality
conjecture for the nonsupersymmetric type 0B string theory.

#### 3.6.3 M-theory

M-theory in the strict sense is the strong coupling limit of type IIA
string theory. It is to a large extent unknown what this theory looks
like, though it is known that it is eleven-dimensional and that its low
energy limit is eleven-dimensional supergravity. Thus, the
eleven-dimensional supergravity theory we described in Section 3.1.2
appears in string theory in a remarkable way.

There are many more dualities between the different consistent string
theories. For instance, in Section 7.1.2 we briefly introduce
heterotic/type I S-duality. The “big picture” that emerged in the last
half of the nineties is that all consistent supersymmetric string
theories correspond to different corners of moduli space (parameter
space) of a single underlying theory, which is also called M-theory.
Uncovering the fundamental degrees of freedom of M-theory (and thus of
string theory) is one of the most important goals in this branch of
physics. Nevertheless, M-theory will not appear explicitly in the rest
of this thesis.

## Chapter 4 Anomalous couplings from string computations

In this chapter, we check the presence of some of the anomalous D-brane
couplings Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) by explicit string computations. These
computations are done in the boundary state formalism. In Section 4.1 ,
we introduce the boundary state and give an explicit set of rules to use
it in sphere scattering amplitudes. In Section 4.2 , we give an overview
of the checks of the Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ). The actual checks
are performed in Section 4.3 , Section 4.4 and Section 4.5 . As a nice
by-product, we find new, non-anomalous D-brane couplings.

### 4.1 Boundary states

#### 4.1.1 Introduction

In Section 3.4 , we have introduced D-branes as spacetime defects on
which open strings can end. Adding ¹ ¹ 1 Actually, it is likely [ 38 ]
that D-branes would be present from the start in a full, nonperturbative
definition of type II string theory. In that sense we are not really
adding anything. a D-brane to a theory of closed strings means adding
open strings with their end-points confined to the D-brane. These open
string degrees of freedom interact with the closed strings in the bulk.
For instance, one can imagine two open strings joining and forming a
closed string, which can escape from the D-brane. Another example is the
end-points of a single open string coming together, thus transforming
the open string in a closed string, which is no longer confined to the
brane. One is often interested in the resulting interaction of the
D-brane with the gravitons, gauge potentials and other closed string
states in the bulk. These interactions determine, amongst other things,
the spacetime quantum numbers of the D-brane, such as its mass, charges
etc. From the closed string point of view, D-branes are sources for
closed string states: they are objects emitting (off-shell) gravitons,
gauge potentials etc. The boundary state formalism, which goes back to [
55 ] ² ² 2 The careful reader may note that D-branes were not known at
the time [ 55 ] was written. The boundaries in that reference describe
the interaction with open strings of the type I theory of open and
closed strings. The open strings, which live in the bulk of spacetime,
can be reinterpreted in the D-brane language as living on a number of
spacetime-filling D9-branes. and even further to [ 56 ] , implements
this point of view.

A boundary state is, roughly speaking, a coherent closed string state.
Inserting it in an amplitude has the same effect as cutting a disc out
of the world-sheet and imposing appropriate boundary conditions on the
world-sheet fields. For instance, a sphere diagram with a boundary state
inserted is the same as a disk diagram with the appropriate boundary
conditions on the world-sheet fields.

We shall choose world-sheet coordinates such that the boundary is at
world-sheet time @xmath and that the part of the world-sheet that has
not been cut out is described by @xmath (see Fig. 4.1 ). ³ ³ 3 The part
of the world-sheet that has been cut out is thus described by @xmath .
In the coordinate @xmath , this corresponds to the unit disc. The
boundary state then describes the (off-shell) closed string states
emitted by the D-brane. One can think of a coherent state, created at
@xmath , which has the property that it is annihilated by the quantized
boundary conditions at @xmath .

The boundary conditions that are imposed on the bosonic world-sheet
fields are the following: the boundary is tied to the brane (Dirichlet
boundary conditions in the transversal directions) but free to move
along the brane (Neumann boundary conditions in the longitudinal
directions). We shall now give the explicit form of the boundary state.

#### 4.1.2 Explicit form

We construct the boundary state as in [ 44 ] . The boundary state @xmath
is a BRST invariant state that enforces the boundary conditions imposed
by a D-brane. It exists in both the NS-NS sector and the R-R sector of
the closed superstring. In either sector, it can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the matter and ghost parts of the boundary
state, which in turn factorize into @xmath and @xmath field (resp. ghost
and superghost) dependent factors:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We shall first construct a boundary state that describes a boundary at
@xmath . The condition that the string world-sheet start on the brane
(positioned at @xmath , @xmath ) is implemented by specifying that the
boundary state is an eigenstate of the string position operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, the condition that this initial position be freely movable
along the brane is translated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We also impose that the boundary state be annihilated by the boundary
conditions Eq. ( 3.4.3 ) and Eq. ( 3.4.4 ) on the fermionic fields: ⁴ ⁴
4 Note that the @xmath ’s are expressed in @xmath coordinates, such that
the boundary is located at @xmath . Therefore, the form of the boundary
conditions are the same as in Eq. ( 3.4.3 ) and Eq. ( 3.4.4 ), which,
however, were expressed in terms of @xmath coordinates.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In Eq. ( 4.1.6 ), @xmath can take the values @xmath , but it turns out
that the GSO projection on the boundary state selects a specific
combination of @xmath and @xmath .

Expanded in modes, Eq. ( 4.1.4 ), Eq. ( 4.1.5 ) and Eq. ( 4.1.6 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is integer in the R-R sector and half-odd-integer in the
NS-NS sector, and we define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, we include the ghosts and the superghosts. The relations Eq. (
4.1.7 ) imply that @xmath is annihilated by the following combinations
of the matter super-Virasoro generators:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because of BRST invariance, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the boundary state must be annihilated by the following combinations of
ghost fields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The solution of Eq. ( 4.1.7 ) and Eq. ( 4.1.11 ) can be written as
follows [ 44 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the NS sector in the @xmath picture,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the R sector in the @xmath picture,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the zero mode parts of the boundary state are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The matrix @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 4.1.8 ) and the normalization
factor @xmath in Eq. ( 3.4.6 ).

One can show that the type IIA or IIB (depending on whether @xmath is
even or odd) GSO projection selects the following combinations:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 4.1.3 Comments

We pause to comment on some features of the boundary states we have just
constructed.

1.  In this section, we have made explicit the tensor product structure
    of the Fock space of the string. For instance, the SL(2, @xmath )
    vacuum @xmath is now decomposed as

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.24)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    where for instance @xmath could be further decomposed into a
    holomorphic and an antiholomorphic part. The subscripts are often
    omitted, since it is usually clear from the context which @xmath is
    meant.

2.  The delta function in the @xmath transverse directions (see Eq. (
    4.1.13 )) localizes the initial string position to be on the
    D-brane. (In that equation, @xmath are operators, the constant modes
    of @xmath , whereas @xmath are the coordinates of the brane in its
    transverse directions.) The algebra @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.1.30 )) is
    represented on the space of functions of @xmath and the
    “wavefunction” is @xmath . The state @xmath is the ground state with
    zero momentum.

    Because we can write

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.25)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

    the boundary state is a superposition of states with zero
    longitudinal momentum and arbitrary transverse momentum. What this
    really means is that insertions need only obey momentum conservation
    in the longitudinal directions, as we shall now show in more detail.

3.  We have normalized the vacua with momenta @xmath and “complementary”
    pictures @xmath and @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.3.22 )) such that

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.26)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Consider the contribution of all zero modes except those from the
    @xmath fields to an amplitude with vertex operators with momenta
    @xmath inserted ( @xmath labels the vertex operators):

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (4.1.27)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    This is the usual momentum conservation delta function, which is
    well known from field theory. Using Eq. ( 4.1.25 ), we find the
    following momentum factor for amplitudes involving one boundary
    state:

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.28)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    This shows that, in the presence of a D-brane, only longitudinal
    momentum is conserved. Of course, this is precisely what one would
    expect, since the D-brane explicitly breaks translation invariance
    in the transverse directions.

#### 4.1.4 Scattering amplitudes

In the previous section, we have, somewhat arbitrarily, defined a
boundary state that enforces boundary conditions at @xmath . We could as
well have chosen any other value of @xmath . The effect would be to
change Eq. ( 4.1.13 ) into

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and analogously for the other components of the boundary state. This can
be written as follows:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

(Note that, as we observed before Eq. ( 3.1.21 ), @xmath is the
world-sheet Hamiltonian.) All these boundary states play a role when we
use the boundary state formalism to compute string scattering
amplitudes, as we shall explain shortly. Before going into that, we have
to say a couple of words about the string propagator.

We introduce the closed string propagator as in [ 39 ] . The propagator
of an ordinary bosonic field obeying the Klein-Gordon equation @xmath
has propagator @xmath . The closed string analogue of the Klein-Gordon
equation is the mass-shell condition @xmath . Taking into account Eq. (
3.1.67 ) and Eq. ( 3.1.68 ), the propagator is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Physical closed string states satisfy the level matching condition
@xmath . We can modify the propagator to one that only propagates states
satisfying this constraint:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we define @xmath , this becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the OPE Eq. ( 3.3.10 ), one derives that @xmath for an @xmath
tensor @xmath . From this equality and a similar one for @xmath , one
can derive

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It has been argued (see, e.g., [ 55 , 57 ] ) that the boundary state is
connected to the rest of a string diagram by a closed string propagator.
Though we shall not try to give an analysis from first principles (like
factorizing disc diagrams in the closed string channel [ 57 ] ), we
shall now find out what precisely this statement means, i.e., we shall
give a precise set of rules for how to use the boundary state in a
scattering amplitude. The result will indeed be to insert an expression
like Eq. ( 4.1.33 ), but some care is needed in determining the
integration domain.

Our set of rules for computing a scattering amplitude of closed string
states on a world-sheet with sphere topology in the presence of a
boundary is as follows.

1.  Fix one vertex operator at @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.35)
      -- -------- -- ----------

2.  Fix another vertex operator at an arbitrary point of the sphere:

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.36)
      -- -------- -- ----------

3.  Insert the boundary state Eq. ( 4.1.1 ). We can consider it as an
    insertion at the origin. Intuitively, this is because it cuts out a
    disc centered at the origin. In formulas, the @xmath zero mode
    insertion in Eq. ( 4.1.14 ) is the same one would have for a vertex
    operator fixed at the origin. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Of course, there is an extra
    zero mode insertion @xmath in Eq. ( 4.1.14 ). We shall deal with
    this in rule 5 . Thus, by now we have fixed enough vertex operators,
    so that all other insertions should be integrated over the whole
    plane.

4.  Integrate Eq. ( 4.1.30 ) over all “allowed” values of @xmath . What
    are the allowed values of @xmath ? It is a very plausible guess that
    those values of @xmath are allowed for which no insertions lie on
    the disc that is cut out, i.e., we integrate over @xmath as far as
    we can without “hitting” the first insertion point. Thus, we insert

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.37)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    where @xmath is the insertion point closest to the origin, and we
    have chosen the normalization by hand. ⁶ ⁶ 6 In principle, it should
    be fixed by factorization arguments along the lines of [ 57 ] .
    Performing a change of integration variable @xmath , this becomes

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.38)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    which, as @xmath satisfies the level matching condition, can also be
    written as

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.39)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    As promised, this is the same as inserting the propagator Eq. (
    4.1.33 ), except for the different integration region.

5.  Insert a @xmath factor together with the propagator connecting the
    boundary state with the rest of the diagram. This is to get rid of
    the extra ghost zero mode insertion alluded to in footnote 5 .
    Though @xmath insertions are certainly not unfamiliar for people who
    know about higher genus amplitudes in string theory, we shall not
    try to justify it any further here. However, we do want to make one
    comment about it.

    The reason why we put the @xmath factor in Eq. ( 4.1.14 ) is that
    otherwise the boundary state would not be BRST invariant. The reason
    why we want the boundary state to be BRST invariant is that we want
    unphysical states to decouple from disc amplitudes. Now, if we
    effectively remove the @xmath by inserting @xmath , do we lose BRST
    invariance and thus the decoupling of unphysical states? Happily,
    the answer is no. Using @xmath (as before Eq. ( 3.1.62 )) and the
    form of Eq. ( 4.1.37 ), it is clear that the BRST variation of Eq. (
    4.1.37 ) with the @xmath insertion is the @xmath integral of a
    derivative with respect to @xmath . This is a well-known phenomenon
    in string theory. The resulting boundary terms usually vanish due to
    analytic continuation arguments, or can equivalently be cancelled by
    adding contact terms [ 58 , 59 ] . It should be possible to make
    this argument more precise for this case too.

6.  Multiply by an overall normalization factor. The rules to compute
    this factor are the following. ⁷ ⁷ 7 We do not motivate these rules
    here. The way to derive them is via factorization arguments.

    1.  There is a factor @xmath , which is common to all sphere
        amplitudes (not only those with boundary states).

    2.  There is a factor @xmath associated to the insertion of the
        boundary state.

    3.  Analogous factors have already been absorbed in the vertex
        operators Eq. ( 3.3.48 ) and Eq. ( 3.3.49 ) .

    4.  An additional factor of @xmath has to be included if we use the
        R-R state Eq. ( 3.3.50 ).

Now that we have provided all the components of the construction, let us
write down the result. Up to the normalization factor of rule 6 , the
tree level scattering amplitude of @xmath closed string vertex operators
@xmath in the presence of a D-brane described by a boundary state @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.1.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now simplify this formula for practical use. First, we deal with the
ghost part. As mentioned in rule 6 , the effect of the @xmath insertion
is to cancel the @xmath hidden in @xmath . Then, as the @xmath and
@xmath ghost zero modes are provided by the vertex operator fixed at
@xmath (denoted as an out-state in Eq. ( 4.1.40 )) and by the boundary
state, the vertex operator fixed at @xmath will have to provide the
@xmath and @xmath modes. Therefore, we can replace @xmath by @xmath .
All in all, we end up with the combination of ghost zero modes present
in Eq. ( 4.1.26 ), so we need not care about the ghost sector any more.

Making repeated use of Eq. ( 4.1.34 ), we can commute the propagator to
the left until @xmath annihilates the out-state (see Eq. ( 3.1.62 )).
The final result is that Eq. ( 4.1.40 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where by @xmath we mean, in fact, the boundary state with the ghost part
omitted. Note that now all vertex operators except the one at infinity
are integrated, and that the integration region is the complement of the
unit disc.

Before going into specific examples, we shall learn how to compute
correlators of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in the presence of a boundary state. Here, the dots denote conformal
normal ordering (see Section 3.3.2 ). For the @xmath conformal field
theory on the @xmath -plane, this is the same as the
creation-annihilation normal ordering introduced after Eq. ( 3.1.52 ) in
Section 3.1.1 (see [ 38 ] Vol. 1, p. 60 for a proof of this fact). We
remind the reader that for the creation-annihilation normal ordering
@xmath are considered to be lowering operators.

Consider the case

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

first without a boundary state. The correlator Eq. ( 4.1.43 ) factorizes
into contributions from the zero modes @xmath and the holomorphic and
antiholomorphic nonzero modes @xmath .

-   To compute the contribution of the nonzero modes (NZM), we use the
    fact that for operators @xmath linear in harmonic oscillator
    creation and annihilation operators

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.44)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    (See, for instance, [ 39 ] Vol. 1, Appendix 7.A). We compute

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    Note that this derivation is only valid for @xmath . However, when a
    path integral expression is transformed into an operator language
    (as in the first line of the previous equation) the insertions
    automatically come out time (i.e., radial) ordered.

    Using Eq. ( 4.1.44 ) and doing the same for the antiholomorphic
    modes, we find the following nonzero mode contribution to Eq. (
    4.1.43 ):

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.45)
      -- -------- -- ----------

-   To compute the zero mode contribution, one has to remember that the
    normal ordering prescription is such that @xmath are considered to
    be lowering operators. Then, one computes

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.46)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

    (times a momentum-conservation delta function, which we have
    suppressed; see Eq. ( 3 )).

Combining both contributions, we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The generalization is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If a boundary state is added to the correlator Eq. ( 4.1.43 ), there are
additional contributions of two kinds.

-   The first kind are zero mode contributions due to the momentum of
    the boundary state itself, see Eq. ( 4.1.25 ). These are easy to
    incorporate: one acts as if an extra @xmath were inserted at the
    origin. We shall not display the extra contribution explicitly here.

-   The other contributions due to the boundary state come from the
    nonzero modes in Eq. ( 4.1.13 ). In practice, the boundary state
    allows to also “contract” holomorphic with antiholomorphic fields,
    e.g.,

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (4.1.49)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    A reasoning analogous to the one leading to Eq. ( 4.1.44 ) then
    implies that in the presence of a boundary state Eq. ( 4.1.47 )
    should be multiplied by

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (4.1.50)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    (times the additional zero mode contribution mentioned in the
    previous item).

### 4.2 Checks of Wess-Zumino action: an overview

Sections 4.3 , 4.4 and 4.5 are devoted to some explicit checks of the
D-brane Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ). Those sections are based on
our papers [ 7 , 8 ] . In the present section, we give the reader an
overview of how the different terms in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) were found and of
which tests have been performed on them.

First, we summarize the situation as it was before [ 7 ] appeared.

-   The term

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.2.1)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    was found in [ 47 ] and recovered in the boundary state formalism in
    [ 60 , 45 ] . The boundary state computation amounts to computing
    the bracket of a R-R potential with the boundary state, i.e., a one
    point function of a closed string state in the presence of a
    D-brane.

-   The couplings involving only a R-R potential and the gauge field,

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.2.2)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    were derived in the boundary state formalism in [ 60 , 45 ] and
    interpreted in terms of branes inside branes in [ 61 ] . The
    boundary state computation amounts to computing the bracket of a R-R
    potential with a boundary state that is modified to describe a brane
    with a constant magnetic field turned on. The presence of the terms
    Eq. ( 4.2.2 ) was confirmed in [ 50 ] using an anomaly inflow
    argument.

-   Given the terms Eq. ( 4.2.2 ), the gauge invariance argument given
    after Eq. ( 3.4.16 ) implies the presence of

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.2.3)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    The presence of this term had not been checked directly.

-   One can use invariance under R-R gauge transformations Eq. ( 3.1.99
    ) to argue for the presence of Eq. ( 4.2.3 ) (see Eq. ( 3.4.19 )).
    Reversing the gauge invariance argument used in the previous item,
    this implies also the presence of the coupling Eq. ( 4.2.2 ).

-   The term

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.2.4)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    was found in [ 62 ] using a duality argument (see Section 6.5 ). Its
    presence was confirmed in [ 50 ] using an anomaly inflow argument.
    Direct tests had not been performed on this term.

-   The other curvature terms were found using anomaly inflow arguments
    [ 50 , 51 ] . No direct tests had been performed on them.

It is clear from all these studies that the different terms in Eq. (
3.4.9 ) all have to be present. They are needed for the consistency of
string theory. However, before [ 7 ] appeared, only the couplings to
@xmath had been explicitly computed from string theory. Strong as it
was, all the evidence for the couplings to the NS-NS fields ( @xmath and
the spacetime metric) was indirect.

In [ 7 ] , we started the project of directly computing these couplings
from string theory. This work was carried out further in [ 63 , 12 , 8 ]
.

In Section 4.3 , we explicitly compute a string scattering amplitude to
check the presence of the term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have chosen to give these computations, the result of which appeared
in our paper [ 7 ] , in detail in this thesis. The reason is that they
are simple enough to be done explicitly in a reasonable amount of time
and space, and just complicated enough to illustrate the main features
of scattering amplitudes with boundary states. ⁸ ⁸ 8 They have the
disadvantage that they are less “clean” than the computations of the
curvature terms. First, the limitation that only on-shell questions can
be addressed by string scattering amplitudes will make it hard to relate
our computations directly to “measurable” quantities like cross
sections. A way out will be proposed in footnote 16 . Second, the field
theory amplitude with which we shall compare the result of our string
computation gets two different contributions: one from the source term
Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) we are interested in, but also one in which the bulk
interactions Eq. ( 3.1.84 ) or Eq. ( 3.1.95 ) play a role. We invite the
reader not to be distracted too much by these two subtleties, as they
are not present for the computations of the curvature couplings. On the
other hand, this kind of problems occur rather often in string
computations (see Section 7.2 for another example). Especially the fact
that string perturbation theory is blind for off-shell questions is one
of its major drawbacks.

In Section 4.4 , we check the presence of the terms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which involve a four-form constructed from the curvature two-forms.
These computations were done in [ 7 , 8 ] .

In Section 4.5 , we consider the terms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

involving an eight-form constructed from the curvature two-forms. The
computations for the terms involving only the curvature two-form @xmath
of the tangent bundle were done in [ 12 ] . They were generalized to
include the normal bundle curvature @xmath in [ 8 ] . In the latter
paper, we also found additional couplings of a D @xmath -brane to a (
@xmath )-form R-R potential. These couplings are not anomalous, which is
why they were not found in [ 51 ] . They are to be added to Eq. ( 3.4.9
).

The computations we discuss in this thesis follow [ 7 , 12 , 8 ] .
However, the various terms in the Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) were
also checked in an alternative formalism in [ 63 ] , which, in fact,
appeared between [ 7 ] and [ 12 , 8 ] .

### 4.3 The @xmath interaction

This section is an expanded version of the second section of [ 7 ] . To
probe the presence of the term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ), considered as a source term in Eq. ( 3.1.82 ) or Eq. (
3.1.93 ), we shall compute the tree level string amplitude for a D
@xmath -brane to absorb a @xmath -field and emit a ( @xmath )-form R-R
potential. ⁹ ⁹ 9 or to absorb a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential and emit a
@xmath -field. The low-energy limit of this string amplitude will be
compared with the corresponding on-shell amplitude in supergravity.

We shall work in static gauge (see Section 3.4 ) and take the D @xmath
-brane to be extended along the directions @xmath . We choose the
nonzero polarizations @xmath and @xmath to be along the brane
directions: @xmath .

First, we write down the supergravity amplitude @xmath . It receives two
contributions (see Fig. 4.2 ).

The first contribution comes from the term Eq. ( 4.3.1 ) we are
interested in. It is equal to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where here and below we omit the delta function corresponding to
momentum conservation in the directions along the D-brane. The second
contribution comes from the bulk supergravity action. The field strength
@xmath of @xmath is not just @xmath but has the form Eq. ( 3.5.1 ). As a
consequence, the corresponding kinetic term induces a three point bulk
coupling between @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus, the scattering
amplitude we are considering also gets a contribution from the D @xmath
-brane emitting a @xmath potential which combines with the incoming
@xmath potential to give an outgoing @xmath -field. This contribution
equals ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In the computation that leads to this result, the
mass-shell conditions for the external fields @xmath and @xmath are
used.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Summing Eq. ( 4.3.2 ) and Eq. ( 4.3.3 ), we find the total amplitude in
supergravity:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The amplitude Eq. ( 4.3.4 ) will be compared to the low-energy limit of
the amplitude we shall now compute in string theory.

In string theory, the tree level amplitude for a D @xmath -brane to
absorb a @xmath -field and emit a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential is given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(see Fig. 4.3 ).

In Eq. ( 4.3.5 ), the “bra” is the R-R state Eq. ( 3.3.50 ) and the
“ket” is the boundary state in the R-R sector. Because the pictures of
the R-R state Eq. ( 3.3.50 ) and the boundary state Eq. ( 4.1.23 ) add
up to ( @xmath , @xmath ), we have taken the (0,0) vertex operator Eq. (
3.3.49 ) for the @xmath -field (see Section 3.3 for an introduction to
pictures):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the integration region is as in Eq. ( 4.1.41 ).

The @xmath potential has momentum @xmath , the momentum of the @xmath
-field is @xmath and the momentum of the boundary state will now be
denoted by @xmath . As usual in perturbative string theory (see Section
3.3.1 ), the external states described by @xmath and @xmath are
on-shell, which means

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Momentum conservation (see Eq. ( 3 ) and Eq. ( 4.1.28 )) says that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and that the components of @xmath in the directions along the brane are
zero.

Let us first comment on the fermion zero modes and the gamma matrices.
From Eq. ( 3.3.51 ), Eq. ( 3.3.52 ), Eq. ( 3.3.6 ), Eq. ( 4.1.19 ) and
Eq. ( 4.1.20 ), one can see that the result will involve a trace of a
product of gamma matrices. The boundary state provides @xmath gamma
matrices (and possibly a @xmath ), whereas the R-R state gives @xmath of
these gamma matrices (and possibly a @xmath ).

To get a non-vanishing trace, we need two gamma matrices from fermion
zero modes. In @xmath , each fermion carries a vector index that is
contracted with either @xmath or @xmath . The result of performing the
trace will be that the two indices contracted with the fermion zero
modes are antisymmetrized with the @xmath indices of @xmath . It is not
difficult to convince oneself that only the four fermion part of @xmath
can contribute. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 If one tried a two fermion piece, say the two
holomorphic fermions, the @xmath would have nothing to contract its
index with (remember that @xmath from BRST invariance, that the boundary
state carries only transverse momentum, and that contracting @xmath with
the momentum factor of the R-R potential inserted at infinity would give
an infinite denominator). The two fermions that are not needed in the
trace will have to be contracted with each other, either via the nonzero
modes of the boundary state, or by symmetrizing the gamma matrices
coming from their zero modes. As we cannot contract @xmath with an index
on @xmath , ¹² ¹² 12 Again, this is because @xmath ; as @xmath has all
its indices along the brane, contracting indices via the matrix @xmath
(see Eq. ( 4.1.8 )) does not make a difference. and as @xmath cannot be
antisymmetrized with itself, the fermions contracted with the indices of
@xmath will be used in the trace and @xmath will be contracted with
itself (via the matrix @xmath ).

To be a little bit more explicit about the contribution from the fermion
zero modes in general, we write it down schematically:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a product of @xmath -matrices corresponding to the
left-over left-moving fermions, @xmath a product of @xmath ’s for the
right-moving fermions and @xmath is the total number of @xmath ’s in
@xmath . The matrices @xmath and @xmath show up in the boundary state
and the RR state respectively. Note that Eq. ( 4.3.10 ) is schematic: in
fact, keeping track of all factors of @xmath and minus-signs is crucial
to obtain correct results. We refer the reader to Eq. ( 4.3.17 ) for a
more explicit expression, at least for the case we are considering in
this section. This ends the comment on the fermion zero modes and the
gamma matrices.

In general, to contract holomorphic with antiholomorphic fields, one
proceeds as we did at the end of Section 4.1.4 : one pulls the non-zero
mode operators

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

from the boundary state to the left where they annihilate the out
vacuum. ¹³ ¹³ 13 In practice, one just supplements the usual two point
functions

@xmath @xmath @xmath (4.3.13) @xmath @xmath @xmath (4.3.14)

with the holomorphic-antiholomorphic contractions

@xmath @xmath @xmath (4.3.15) @xmath @xmath @xmath (4.3.16)

and uses Wick’s theorem. Note that @xmath and @xmath take values on the
complement of the unit disc, so that the holomorphic-antiholomorphic
contractions do not have singularities unless both fields approach the
boundary.

As a last general remark before going into the concrete computations of
Eq. ( 4.3.5 ), we note that the ghost sector has been dealt with in
Section 4.1.4 , whereas the superghost sector contributes a factor 1/2 [
44 ] (this will also be the case for the amplitudes in Section 4.4 and
Section 4.5 ).

We shall first compute the contribution from the fermion zero modes and
the gamma matrices, then the integral that remains after the
contractions and finally the overall normalization factor.

We compute the trace of the gamma matrices for the amplitude Eq. ( 4.3.5
). In Eq. ( 4.3.12 ) and Eq. ( 4.3.16 ), we have taken a boundary state
with a specific @xmath , and the result of the contractions is
proportional to @xmath . This @xmath also appears in the zero mode part
Eq. ( 4.1.20 ) of the boundary state. The GSO projection Eq. ( 4.1.23 )
instructs us to average the final result over @xmath . Analogously, the
R-R state Eq. ( 3.3.50 ) is the average over @xmath of a state depending
on @xmath . We shall first compute the trace for specific values of
@xmath and @xmath and in the end take the averages.

Using Eq. ( 3.3.53 ) and Eq. ( 3.3.6 ), we find ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 We shall not
keep track of the overall sign of the amplitude Eq. ( 4.3.5 ). In the
following computations, “ @xmath ” means equality possibly up to a sign,
and up to the normalization factor in Eq. ( 3.3.52 ), which we restore
later.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.17)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

it is clear that the average over @xmath and @xmath of the previous
expression is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is the contribution from the fermion zero modes and gamma matrices.

Now, we turn to the contractions. It follows from the considerations at
the end of Section 4.1.4 that the contribution to Eq. ( 4.3.5 ) from the
@xmath sector is proportional to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the last factor comes from contracting @xmath with the momentum
factor @xmath of the boundary state, and using @xmath and @xmath .

As stated above, only the zero mode of the fermions contracted with
@xmath contribute: they give a factor @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.1.29 )). The
remaining two fermions can be contracted either via the zero mode part
or the nonzero mode part of the boundary state @xmath (see Eq. ( 4.1.17
)). We shall be interested in the nonzero mode part. ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 The
zero-mode contribution is proportional to @xmath for small on-shell
momenta. Further investigations suggest that this vanishes whenever the
@xmath interaction could contribute to cross-sections, as we shall argue
in footnote 16 . This is proportional to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, the integral we have to do is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the approximation is for small momenta ( @xmath ), which is the
limit in which string theory and supergravity should agree. Thus, the
integral resulting from the contractions contributes a factor @xmath .

Now, we compute the global normalization factor.

-   There is a factor @xmath from Eq. ( 4.1.41 ), a factor @xmath from
    item ( 6a ) on page 6a and a factor @xmath from items ( 6b ) and (
    6d ).

-   The boundary state normalization factor is @xmath (see Eq. ( 4.1.12
    )).

-   We have to restore the @xmath factor from Eq. ( 3.3.52 ).

-   From Eq. ( 4.3.7 ), we get a factor @xmath and two @xmath factors,
    one of which has in fact been absorbed in the integral Eq. ( 4.3.22
    ).

-   There is a factor 16 from Eq. ( 4.3.19 ), a factor @xmath from the
    two fermion zero modes and Eq. ( 3.3.6 ), and another factor @xmath
    from the superghost sector [ 44 ] .

The total string amplitude is thus given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the last equality is valid for small momenta. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 We would
like to give a comment which is related to footnote 15 . Because of the
decoupling of longitudinal polarizations, one can check that the
amplitude vanishes if @xmath (or equivalently @xmath ) has a non-zero
component along the brane directions. In computing cross-sections, one
has to average over neighbouring momenta. So in order to have a
non-vanishing cross-section, one needs the possible momentum components
along the brane to be discrete, i.e., all worldvolume directions should
be compactified. This suggests considering Euclidean branes. In that
case, one can have on-shell momenta without a component along the brane
world-volume. For such momenta, the numerator of the expression in
footnote 15 vanishes.

We see that, for small momenta, the string amplitude Eq. ( 4.3.25 )
precisely matches the supergravity amplitude Eq. ( 4.3.4 ). The
computations we have done thus provide direct evidence for the presence
of the term Eq. ( 4.3.1 ) in the Wess-Zumino action of the D-brane.

### 4.4 The @xmath interactions

In this section, which is based on results reported in our paper [ 7 ] ,
we check the presence of the terms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the Wess-Zumino action of a D @xmath -brane (with @xmath ). We
compute the tree level string amplitude for a D @xmath -brane to absorb
two gravitons and emit a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential. The low energy
limit of this string amplitude is compared to the corresponding
amplitude in supergravity.

As in the previous section, we work in static gauge. The polarization of
the R-R potential is chosen to be nonzero only for all indices along the
brane directions: @xmath is only nonzero if @xmath .

Although the terms Eq. ( 4.4.1 ) involve curvature two-forms, we
consider a flat, infinitely extended D-brane in a flat, Minkowski
background. We probe the presence of the terms involving the curvature
by scattering gravitons. Gravitons are small fluctuations of the
spacetime metric around its flat background value, see the discussion
around Eq. ( 3.2.3 ). A graviton with polarization tensor @xmath and
momentum @xmath corresponds to the following fluctuation of the
spacetime metric:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In supergravity, the fact that we are considering small fluctuations
around a flat background allows us to use the linearized expressions for
the curvature two-forms. The supergravity amplitude for a D @xmath
-brane to absorb two gravitons (with polarization tensors @xmath and
@xmath , and momenta @xmath and @xmath ) and emit a @xmath potential
(with polarization tensor @xmath and momentum @xmath ) only gets
contributions from the term Eq. ( 4.4.1 ) we are interested in (see Fig.
4.4 ).

The amplitude reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We explain the notation. A dot means contraction of one Lorentz index,
so when a graviton polarization tensor is dotted with another tensor one
free Lorentz index remains. The superscripts @xmath or @xmath on two
vectors that are contracted with one another have the following meaning.
A @xmath means that the Lorentz index that is being summed over only
runs over the directions along the brane. A @xmath means that the
Lorentz index that is being summed over only runs over the directions
transverse to the brane. For instance, for vectors @xmath and @xmath one
has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In Eq. ( 4.4 ), the first two terms in square brackets come from the
curvature two-form @xmath of the tangent bundle to the D-brane
world-volume. The last two terms come from the curvature two-form @xmath
of the normal bundle.

In string theory, the tree level amplitude for a D @xmath -brane to
absorb two gravitons and emit a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential is given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(see Fig. 4.5 ).

Here,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with, as in Eq. ( 3.3.48 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As the computation is analogous to the one presented in Section 4.3 but
considerably longer, we shall not give all manipulations in detail.
Instead, we shall first write down the result, and give some comments
for readers who would like to reproduce it. The result, in a form
analogous to Eq. ( 4.3 ), reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The matrix @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 4.1.8 ). In terms of the @xmath
and @xmath superscripts, we have, for vectors @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now give some observations on how to obtain Eq. ( 4.4 ).

The fermion zero modes have to provide the four gamma-matrices with
Lorentz indices in the worldvolume directions complementary to the ones
of the RR potential that is being considered. The graviton vertex
operator Eq. ( 4.4.7 ) naturally splits into four terms, according to
whether one takes the bosonic or the fermionic pieces of the holomorphic
and the antiholomorphic sectors, respectively. As a consequence, the
amplitude Eq. ( 4.4.5 ) naturally splits into sixteen pieces. These
pieces can be grouped according to the number of fermions they contain.
The piece with the maximal number of fermions (eight) will be called the
“eight fermion part”, etc.

The factor in square brackets in Eq. ( 4.4 ) involves four momenta and
two graviton polarization tensors, together carrying eight Lorentz
indices. Four of these are contracted with the @xmath -symbol; the
others are contracted with one another. Note that in each term one
contraction involves the matrix @xmath and the other does not. This
feature arises in the computations in a nontrivial way, which we now
explain.

As a preliminary remark, the only contributions come from the four and
eight fermion parts.

To look for terms with precisely one @xmath , one can do one left-right
contraction and one left-left or right-right contraction. For the terms
where the graviton polarizations are contracted with momenta, this is
the whole story: the contributions of the eight and four fermion parts
combine into the corresponding terms in Eq. ( 4.4 ).

For the terms involving graviton polarizations contracted with each
other (and consequently also momenta with each other), one does not find
the complete result in this way. There are extra terms coming from doing
two left–left or right–right contractions in the eight fermion part,
which thus, at first sight, do not involve the matrix @xmath . (There
are also terms involving two mixed contractions, and thus twice the
matrix @xmath ; that story is completely analogous, so we shall not
discuss it in detail here.)

The point is that the extra terms, which did not seem to involve the
matrix @xmath , combine with extra terms from the four-fermion part. The
combination allows an integration by parts that brings it to a form that
fits in Eq. ( 4.4 ) after all.

To be explicit, we display the extra terms, which are proportional to
@xmath (this factor will not be displayed). We have fixed the angular
coordinate of @xmath , and denote the angle of @xmath by @xmath . We
shall only write down the @xmath -dependent factors of the integrand:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first term in braces comes from the eight fermion part, the other
two from the four fermion part. This expression can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Integrating by parts, this leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.12)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is of the right form to appear in Eq. ( 4.4 ). This ends the
observations on how to obtain Eq. ( 4.4 ).

Since we want to compare the amplitude Eq. ( 4.4 ) to supergravity, we
are interested in its low-energy behaviour. Restricting to small
momenta, the momenta in the exponents can be put to zero, such that the
integral simplifies to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As has been shown in [ 12 ] , the integral then evaluates to @xmath .

Using Eq. ( 4.4.4 ) and Eq. ( 4.4.9 ), we can then, for small momenta,
rewrite Eq. ( 4.4 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The string amplitude Eq. ( 4.4 ) precisely agrees with the supergravity
amplitude Eq. ( 4.4 )! It is remarkable that, for small momenta, the
string amplitude nicely splits into tangent and normal bundle
contributions.

In this section, we have directly checked the presence of the terms
Eq. ( 4.4.1 ) in the D-brane Wess-Zumino action.

### 4.5 Four graviton amplitude and non-anomalous couplings

This section is based on the results of [ 8 ] . We want to check the
presence of the eight-form curvature terms in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The stategy is precisely the same as in Section 4.3 and Section 4.4 :
compute the amplitude of a D @xmath -brane with @xmath to absorb four
gravitons and emit a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential in supergravity, and
compare the result with the low-energy limit of the corresponding tree
level amplitude in string theory.

As the explicit formulas are analogous to but much longer than the ones
in Section 4.4 , we shall not give all of them in detail. Rather, we
shall give most results in words, but focus on an unexpected feature of
the string amplitude [ 8 ] : it encodes more eight-form curvature
couplings than the ones present in Eq. ( 4.5.1 )!

Before we discuss these new couplings, let us describe the string
amplitude one has to compute. It reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For notational convenience, we shall consider polarization tensors of
the special form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

However, this is not essential: the general results can always be
obtained by replacing @xmath by @xmath in the formulas.

In [ 12 ] , the amplitude we have just described was computed for the
special case of all momenta and polarizations along the D-brane. In this
section, we extend the computation to general momenta and graviton
polarizations. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 The polarization of the R-R potential is still
taken to be along the brane.

The structure of the amplitude Eq. ( 4.5.2 ) is as follows. From each
graviton, one momentum index and one polarization index is contracted
with the @xmath -symbol, giving rise to a universal factor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the string amplitude. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 The eight momentum and polarization
indices will correspond to the eight form-indices of the eight-form in
the curvatures. Each graviton contributes one more momentum and one more
‘‘half’’ polarization, ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 where “half” is in the sense of Eq. (
4.5.3 ). which each carry one Lorentz index. These eight indices have to
be contracted with one another. There are two substantially different
ways in which these contractions can be done.

First, one has terms in which the gravitons are divided in pairs and the
contractions are done within each pair, e.g.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The other terms of this kind can be obtained by permuting the gravitons
and antisymmetrizing in polarizations and momenta of each graviton. It
turns out that the part of the string amplitude coming from this class
of terms precisely reproduces the part of the supergravity ampitude
coming from the @xmath term in Eq. ( 4.5.1 ). To derive this, one can
use the computations of Section 4.4 : for small momenta the integrand of
the integral over @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath factorizes into,
say, the integrand of Eq. ( 4.4.13 ) and the same integrand with @xmath
replaced by @xmath .

Second, there are the terms for which such a factorization does not
occur. Their contribution to the string amplitude Eq. ( 4.5.2 ) turns
out to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

plus terms obtained from this by permuting the gravitons and
antisymmetrizing in polarizations and momenta of each graviton.

Using Eq. ( 4.4.4 ) and Eq. ( 4.4.9 ) to write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

it is clear that the expression in braces contains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the part derived in [ 12 ] , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It turns out that Eq. ( 4.5.8 ) reproduces the @xmath term in Eq. (
4.5.1 ) and that Eq. ( 4.5.9 ) reproduces the @xmath term.

Thus, we can conclude that all the terms in Eq. ( 4.5.1 ) are seen in an
explicit string scattering computation.

However, this is not the full story. Eq. ( 4.5 ) also contains terms
which are not accounted for by the anomalous gravitational couplings in
Eq. ( 3.4.9 ), such as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The other terms can be obtained from this one by obvious permutations,
and by taking three “transversal” factors rather than one (the latter
terms have an extra minus sign).

Is the presence of extra terms involving the metric, apart from the ones
in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ), a contradiction with the anomaly inflow arguments of [
50 , 51 ] ? These anomaly inflow arguments state that, in certain
D-brane configurations, the variation under local Lorentz
transformations of the curvature terms in Eq. ( 3.4.9 ) precisely
cancels the gravitational anomaly due to certain chiral modes. If the
extra terms we have just found also had a variation under local Lorentz
transformations, we would be in trouble: string theory in certain
D-brane backgrounds would not be invariant under local Lorentz
transformations.

The question thus is: are the extra terms invariant under local Lorentz
transformations? In fact, they need only be invariant under the Lorentz
transformations that leave the D-brane world-volume invariant: the other
Lorentz transformations are explicitly broken by the D-brane. Lorentz
transformations that leave the D-brane world-volume invariant are the
ones that do not mix directions tangent and perpendicular to the brane.

Now, we check whether the extra terms are invariant under local Lorentz
transformations that do not mix tangent and perpendicular directions. As
we know form Section 3.5.1 , we should first express the couplings in
terms of the R-R field strengths rather than the potentials. In terms of
the linearized spacetime curvature twoform @xmath , the extra terms
read, schematically,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant matrices projecting on indices
along and perpendicular to the brane, respectively. Integrating by
parts, this becomes, again schematically,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the linearized spin connection and @xmath is the R-R
field strength. Under local Lorentz transformations that do not mix
directions tangent and perpendicular to the brane world-volume, the
variation of @xmath is a block-diagonal matrix, such that the variation
of Eq. ( 4.5.12 ) vanishes.

We conclude that the extra terms we have found are non-anomalous, so
their presence is consistent with the anomaly inflow arguments.

### 4.6 Conclusions

Anomaly inflow arguments fix the different terms in the D-brane
Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 3.4.9 ). In this chapter, we have checked the
presence of three of these terms by explicit string theory computations.
These computations were performed in the boundary state formalism. As a
bonus of the explicit computations, we have found extra terms in the
D-brane Wess-Zumino action. These extra terms are non-anomalous and are
thus consistent with the anomaly inflow arguments.

## Chapter 5 Baryon vertex in AdS/CFT

In this chapter, we discuss an application of the D-brane world-volume
action: we show how it can be used to study strings ending on D-branes
in a D-brane background. We study one particular configuration, which is
largely motivated by studies of the baryon vertex in the AdS/CFT
correspondence, a recently proposed duality between conformal field
theories and string theories in certain backgrounds. Therefore, we
include very brief introductions to the AdS/CFT correspondence in
general and to the baryon vertex in particular.

### 5.1 Introduction

#### 5.1.1 AdS/CFT correspondence

In [ 2 ] (see [ 64 ] for an extensive review), Maldacena conjectured
that @xmath SU( @xmath ) super-Yang-Mills theory ¹ ¹ 1 There is a
subtlety about whether the gauge group is SU( @xmath ) or U( @xmath ) [
65 , 64 ] . Apparently, one has a choice here, related to whether one
includes certain degrees of freedom on the AdS side. We shall not go
into this and use the SU( @xmath ) version of the conjecture. in 3+1
dimensions is dual to type IIB superstring theory on @xmath .

The evidence for this conjecture comes from studying a system of @xmath
coincident D3-branes in type IIB string theory from two points of view.
In the first description, the D3-branes are described by a solution to
the type IIB supergravity equations of motion [ 66 ] . This solution,
whose explicit form will be given in Section 5.3 , involves a
non-trivial metric and five-form R-R field strength. In the second
description, one adds the effective D-brane action (see Section 3.4 ) to
the bulk spacetime action (which is the supergravity action plus higher
derivative corrections). In the latter description, the D-branes are
described by (the effective field theory of the massless modes of) the
open strings ending on them.

It turns out that in a low-energy limit both descriptions give rise to
two decoupled systems, one of which is supergravity in flat space. In
the first description, the other system is string theory on @xmath with
five-form flux

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can be derived from Eq. ( 5.3.5 ) and Eq. ( 5.3.4 ), using the fact
that the volume of the unit five-sphere is @xmath . The space @xmath is
the near horizon geometry of the D3-brane background, i.e., the “limit”
of the geometry of the D3-brane background as one approaches the
horizon. In the other description, the second system is @xmath SU(
@xmath ) super-Yang-Mills theory in 3+1 dimensions. Thus, it is natural
to identify string theory on @xmath with @xmath SU( @xmath )
super-Yang-Mills theory in 3+1 dimensions.

This identification is a strong/weak duality, which means that if one
description is weakly coupled, the other one is at strong coupling (see
Section 2.1 and Section 2.2 for examples of strong/weak dualities). Like
most strong/weak dualities, it is extremely hard to prove or disprove,
but very powerful. On the one hand, the gauge theory description gives a
non-perturbative definition of string theory on a certain background. On
the other hand, one can use string theory to learn something about
strongly coupled gauge theory. For instance, in the limit where string
theory is well-approximated by classical supergravity explicit
computations are fairly easy [ 67 , 68 ] . In the gauge theory, this
limit corresponds to the large @xmath limit at strong ’t Hooft coupling.

When string theory was originally discovered, it was meant to be a
theory of the strong interactions, which are nowadays described by
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The AdS/CFT correspondence realizes the
old idea of describing gauge theory by strings. Unfortunately, so far it
is not known whether there is a string theory dual of QCD.

Without going into the details, we mention that the gauge theory can be
thought of as living on the boundary of the anti-de Sitter (AdS) space [
67 ] . It can be argued that the gauge theory gives a holographic
description of the string theory.

#### 5.1.2 Baryon vertex

Since @xmath SU( @xmath ) super-Yang-Mills theory only contains matter
fields in the adjoint representation of the gauge group, there are no
dynamical quark fields in the theory. However, one can add external
quarks to the theory. These can be regarded as endpoints of fundamental
strings in the AdS space [ 69 , 70 ] . Indeed, it is clear from Eq. (
3.4.16 ) that the endpoints of a fundamental string are electrically
charged (with charge @xmath ) under the gauge field living on the
D-brane the string ends on. Thus, an endpoint of a fundamental string on
a D3-brane “at the boundary of AdS” will correspond to a charged object
in the dual gauge theory. Consider a fundamental string connecting two
points at the boundary of AdS. As the two endpoints of a string are
oppositely charged under the gauge field, such a string corresponds to
an external quark–antiquark pair.

Witten [ 71 ] succeeded in constructing a “baryon” out of these external
quarks, i.e., a gauge-invariant combination of @xmath external quarks.
Such a configuration should consist of @xmath strings, oriented in the
same way, with each one endpoint on the boundary and the other endpoints
joined by a “baryon vertex” in the interior of AdS. Witten argued that
the baryon vertex is simply a D5-brane wrapped on the @xmath of @xmath ,
i.e., a D5-brane with world-volume @xmath with a timelike curve in
@xmath .

The argument goes as follows. The D5-brane WZ action contains a term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, because of Eq. ( 5.1.1 ), Eq. ( 3.4.6 ) and Eq. ( 3.4.7 ),
contributes @xmath units of @xmath -charge. As @xmath is closed, this
charge should be cancelled by @xmath units of charge from some other
source. As we have seen above, @xmath fundamental strings (with the
right orientation) ending on the D5-brane do the trick.

Section 5.3 is devoted to the study of this baryon vertex and an
analogous configuration in the full (as opposed to near-horizon)
D3-brane background.

#### 5.1.3 BPS method

World-volume techniques have been a powerful tool in analyzing
configurations of strings and D-branes. In [ 72 , 73 ] , a fundamental
string ending on a D-brane was analyzed from the point of view of the
D-brane world-volume theory. That theory was shown to admit solutions
allowing an interpretation as fundamental strings ending on the brane.
In [ 74 ] , these solutions were interpreted along the lines of
Bogomol’nyi’s analysis in the context of magnetic monopoles [ 30 ] (see
Section 2.1 ). The square of the energy density is written as a sum of
squares, such that putting one of the squares equal to zero yields a
first order differential equation implying the equations of motion.

In the case of monopoles, Bogomol’nyi’s bound was reinterpreted by
Witten and Olive in terms of central charges in a supersymmetry algebra
[ 35 ] . A similar interpretation is possible here [ 75 ] .

The world-volume analysis of [ 72 , 73 ] was performed for branes in a
flat background. Our aim is to extend the method to the case of a brane
in the background produced by another brane. We have chosen the example
of a D5-brane in the background of @xmath D3-branes, since this
configuration is physically particularly interesting. In the near
horizon limit of the D3-brane geometry, it is related to the baryon
vertex in @xmath SYM [ 71 , 13 ] . In the non-near horizon case, it is
relevant for the Hanany-Witten effect [ 76 , 14 ] .

Section 5.2 contains a review of the world-volume analysis of a D5-brane
in a flat background. The Bogomol’nyi argument will be treated in
detail. For the interpretation in terms of supersymmetry algebras, the
reader is referred to the literature [ 75 , 77 , 9 ] .

In Section 5.3 , we write the energy density as (the square root of) a
sum of squares along the lines of [ 74 ] , derive a BPS bound and
interpret its physical meaning. For the interpretation in terms of
supersymmetry algebras, we refer the reader to our paper [ 9 ] .

What follows is mainly based on [ 9 ] .

### 5.2 BPS method for D-branes in a flat background

In this section, we will review the main points of the BPS method for
D-branes in a flat Minkowski background [ 75 , 74 ] . We will work with
the particular case of a D5-brane, since in the next section we will be
interested in extending this analysis to a D5-brane in a non-trivial
background.

Let us thus consider a D5-brane in a flat background. The action is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the D5-brane tension (from now on we set @xmath ),
@xmath is the metric on the D-brane world-volume induced by the
Minkowski spacetime metric and @xmath is the field strength of the
Born-Infeld (BI) gauge vector @xmath , in which we have absorbed the
factor @xmath present in Eq. ( 3.4.5 ). Let us fix the static gauge

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

corresponding to a brane extending (asymptotically) along directions
45678.

Now, we look for “spike-like” world-volume solutions describing a
fundamental string attached to the D5-brane. We consider configurations
with only one scalar excited and with purely electric BI field:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From the ten-dimensional spacetime point of view, one might represent
the configuration we are considering by the following array:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since we are interested in bounds on the energy for this configuration,
it is useful to pass to the Hamiltonian formalism. Let us denote the
canonically conjugate momenta associated to @xmath and @xmath by @xmath
and respectively. We define a Hamiltonian density

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the original Lagrangian density, @xmath , and in the
last step we have integrated @xmath by parts. In terms of fields and
canonical momenta, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first term is the desired expression for the energy density

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whereas the second term yields the Gauss law (constraint)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For static configurations, @xmath , the Hamiltonian reduces to [ 74 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to get a bound for the energy from the previous expression, we
should consider the “vacuum” or ground state solution of our flat
D5-brane and its energy density. The ground state solution corresponds
to @xmath not being excited and @xmath . This configuration is a
solution of the equations of motion and its energy density is @xmath .
Hence, the energy density in Eq. ( 5.2.6 ) can be split as @xmath ,
where @xmath is the deformation energy density of the brane, i.e., the
energy density of the brane relative to its ground state. After this
splitting, we obtain a bound for the energy density @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with equality when

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The bound on the density implies the following bound on the deformation
energy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the world-space of the D5-brane.

Let us now figure out the physical meaning of @xmath . Because of the
Gauss law constraint, solutions of Eq. ( 5.2.10 ) correspond to
solutions of @xmath . Solutions with isolated singularities in @xmath
are the BIons found in [ 72 , 73 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

corresponding to a charge @xmath at the origin. This charge at the
origin is the source of the BI vector. ² ² 2 The action Eq. ( 5.2.1 )
has no source for the BI vector. The case of a D5-brane in the
background of D3-branes, studied in the next section, is different since
for a generic configuration there is a source for the BI vector due to a
term in the D-brane Wess-Zumino action. For the configuration Eq. (
5.2.12 ), @xmath and thus @xmath are infinite. However, it is
instructive to have a closer look at this divergence by considering the
energy in a region @xmath for small @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath represents the “height” of the spike at a distance @xmath
from the origin. The charge @xmath should be quantized in the quantum
theory [ 72 ] . Setting it equal to its minimal positive value and
restoring the factor @xmath , one finds [ 72 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the tension of a fundamental string. This makes clear
the interpretation of @xmath as the energy of a fundamental string
attached to the D5-brane (see Fig. 5.1 ).

The analysis up to Eq. ( 5.2.11 ) is analogous to Bogomol’nyi’s analysis
[ 30 ] : the energy is bounded from below by a “topological” charge (by
which we mean a charge that is invariant under small local variations of
the fields; @xmath depends only on the limiting behaviour of the
solution, as is clear from Eq. ( 5.2.11 ) and Eq. ( 5.2.7 )).
Configurations saturating the bound will automatically solve the
equations of motion. In order to find such configurations, a first order
differential equation (rather than a second order one) should be solved
(see Eq. ( 5.2.10 )).

There also exists an analogue of the interpretation [ 35 ] of the
Bogomol’nyi bound in terms of central charges of a supersymmetry
algebra. The charge @xmath can be identified with a charge appearing in
the most general anticommutator of the supersymmetries left unbroken by
the D5-brane ground state. We refer the interested reader to the
literature for more details [ 75 , 77 , 9 ] .

### 5.3 D5-brane in D3-brane background

In this section, we derive a BPS bound on the energy of a D5-brane in
the background  geometry of a stack of @xmath D3-branes, by showing that
it is bounded from below by a topological quantity. Let us begin by
describing the D3-brane background. The ten-dimensional metric is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath are Cartesian coordinates on @xmath and @xmath is the line
element on a unit five-sphere @xmath , which we take to be parametrized
by standard angular coordinates @xmath , where @xmath are angular
coordinates on a four-sphere. Thus, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The coordinate @xmath parametrizes the radial distance to the branes, so
@xmath and @xmath are spherical coordinates on the six-dimensional space
transverse to the branes. The function @xmath is a harmonic function
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where two values for @xmath are of interest. The “full”, asymptotically
flat D3-brane background is described by @xmath . Its near-horizon (
@xmath ) limit is obtained by putting @xmath . The near-horizon geometry
is @xmath . The parameter @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the case @xmath , it coincides with the radius of both @xmath and
@xmath .

Apart from the metric, the supergravity solution describing the
D3-branes involves a non-vanishing Ramond-Ramond (R-R) five-form field
strength

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the volume form on a unit @xmath -sphere, @xmath and
@xmath (we are working in a background with @xmath , so @xmath , see
Eq. ( 3.1.98 )).

Now, let us consider a D5-brane coupled to the above background. It is
described by the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the pullback @xmath of the R-R field acts as source for the
world-volume gauge field @xmath through its coupling in the Wess-Zumino
term in Eq. ( 5.3.7 ). For all the configurations we shall consider,
only the second term in Eq. ( 5.3.5 ) contributes to this coupling.

We fix the static gauge by choosing @xmath as coordinates on the
D5-brane world-volume and by identifying

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For simplicity, we restrict ourselves to the following type of
configurations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Under these conditions, the D5-brane action reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath is the volume of a unit four-sphere. As in
Section 5.2 , we have absorbed a @xmath factor in the gauge field. From
now on, we set @xmath .

We pass to the Hamiltonian formalism in order to derive a bound on the
energy. The canonical momenta @xmath and @xmath conjugate to the fields
@xmath and @xmath in the action Eq. ( 5.3.10 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We define a Hamiltonian density

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where in the last step we have integrated @xmath by parts. Inverting the
relations ( 5.3.11 ), one can rewrite @xmath in terms of the fields and
their canonical momenta:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first term is the desired energy density

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas the second term yields the “modified” Gauss law

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Remark that, unlike in Section 5.2 , where we had the Gauss law @xmath ,
here we have a source term in the Gauss law Eq. ( 5.3.16 ), as a
consequence of the Wess-Zumino coupling to @xmath in the D5-brane
action. This is the difference referred to in footnote 2 on page 2 .

The Gauss law constraint is solved by [ 14 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an integration parameter. Its meaning will become clear
below (see also [ 14 ] ).

Now, we shall look for static solutions @xmath . To find them, we shall
use a Bogomol’nyi trick. For static configurations, the energy density
reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first key observation to prove the existence of a BPS bound on the
energy of the D5-brane is that Eq. ( 5.3.18 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The second key observation is that @xmath is a total derivative: ³ ³ 3
It is important to note that only the Gauss law solution Eq. ( 5.3.17 )
has to be used to deduce Eq. ( 5.3.22 ). The field equation for @xmath
is not needed.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A solution @xmath to the equations of motion will be parametrized by an
angle @xmath that takes values in a certain interval. If @xmath are good
coordinates to describe the solution, @xmath is single-valued (see, for
instance, Fig. 5.2 ). In this case, the range of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the “initial” and “final” angles. It is also
possible that @xmath is multiple-valued for a certain solution, so that
@xmath may take values outside the interval @xmath (see, for instance,
Fig. 5.3 ). In that case, it may be better to describe the solution in
different coordinates.

Eq. ( 5.3.22 ) implies that the integral

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

only depends on the “boundary values” @xmath and @xmath . This means
that, for fixed values of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is invariant under
local variations of the fields. It is in this sense that it is a
“topological” quantity. The importance of this will be that
configurations saturating the bound Eq. ( 5.3.25 ) we are about to
derive, minimize the energy for fixed boundary conditions and therefore
automatically solve the equations of motion.

From Eq. ( 5.3.19 ), we find the following BPS bound on the D5-brane
energy:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

through the following two inequalities

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The BPS bound Eq. ( 5.3.25 ) is saturated if and only if both
inequalities in Eq. ( 5.3.26 ) are. We shall first discuss the equation
implied by the saturation of the first inequality, and its solutions.
Then (on p. 5.3 ), we shall examine the condition that the second
inequality be saturated, at least for the case @xmath .

Saturation of the first inequality in Eq. ( 5.3.26 ) ⁴ ⁴ 4 If @xmath ,
the introduction of @xmath in Eq. ( 5.3.19 ) is not allowed. In this
case, saturation of the BPS bound implies that the numerator of @xmath
is zero too, leading to @xmath , which implies @xmath or @xmath . This
case can thus be neglected. yields a first order differential equation
on the D5-brane embedding @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This equation is valid for both the near-horizon case and the
asymptotically flat case (but the function @xmath is different for the
two situations). In the former case, it was derived in [ 13 ] by
imposing the preservation of some fraction of global world-volume
supersymmetry. For the latter case, it was proposed in [ 14 ] as a
plausible generalization of the result in [ 13 ] and shown to imply the
equations of motion of the D5-brane. In our approach, both cases can be
dealt with at once, and in both of them the BPS equation emerges from a
bound on the D5-brane energy.

For the near-horizon case ( @xmath ), Eq. ( 5.3.27 ) was solved
analytically in [ 14 ] . There are two types of solutions. Define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which depends on the parameter @xmath introduced in Eq. ( 5.3.17 ).
Then, the solutions of the first type, which will be called “upper
tubes” for reasons that will become clear soon, read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an arbitrary scale factor, reflecting the scale
invariance of the @xmath metric. Some of these solutions are plotted in
Fig. 5.2 [ 14 ] .

In [ 14 ] , the restriction was made to @xmath . We make the same
restriction in the main text. In this case, there is a unique point
@xmath in the interval @xmath for which @xmath . The solution Eq. (
5.3.29 ) only makes sense for @xmath , i.e., for

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solutions of the second type are “lower tubes”, given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which makes sense for @xmath . We shall restrict our attention to upper
tubes. ⁵ ⁵ 5 If one were to consider solutions with @xmath outside the
range @xmath , @xmath would have a definite sign on the interval @xmath
, so that, for @xmath , the solution @xmath can extend over the whole
interval @xmath , developing spikes at both @xmath and @xmath .

For the “full”, asymptotically flat D3-brane background ( @xmath ),
Eq. ( 5.3.27 ) was solved numerically in [ 14 ] and analytically in [ 78
] . Some of these solutions are plotted in Fig. 5.3 [ 78 ] .

These solutions are labelled by @xmath (introduced in Eq. ( 5.3.17 ))
and by the asymptotic value @xmath of @xmath (see Fig. 5.3 ).

Since the @xmath background can be considered as the @xmath limit of the
@xmath background, one expects the solutions for @xmath and @xmath to
approximately coincide for small @xmath . Indeed, it was observed in [
78 ] that this is indeed the case if the parameters @xmath and @xmath
are related by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The condition that the second inequality in Eq. ( 5.3.26 ) be saturated
states that @xmath should not change sign in the integration region in
Eq. ( 5.3.24 ). When Eq. ( 5.3.27 ) holds, the sign of @xmath is
determined by the sign of

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the function @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 5.3.28 ). For @xmath , we
precisely recover the condition that @xmath should have definite sign.
(We have not done the analysis for @xmath .)

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to the physical interpretation
of @xmath . It follows from Eq. ( 5.3.22 ) that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.34)
  -- -- -- ----------

We shall evaluate this expression for the solutions of Eq. ( 5.3.27 ),
displayed in Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.3 .

In the case @xmath , the second term in Eq. ( 5.3.34 ) vanishes for all
the solutions of Eq. ( 5.3.27 ), as is suggested by Fig. 5.2 . Using
Eq. ( 5.3.17 ) and restoring the factor @xmath , the first term gives
the divergent result

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the tension of a fundamental string and @xmath is the
(infinite) coordinate distance between the D3-branes at the origin of
Fig. 5.2 and the “upper end” of the D5-brane. However, the
interpretation of this divergence is clear: it is the tension of @xmath
infinitely extended fundamental strings.

For @xmath , the second term in Eq. ( 5.3.34 ) is infinite. However,
this infinity is to be expected for an infinitely extended D-brane. In
fact, it precisely equals the energy of an unexcited D5-brane whose
world-space is the @xmath hyperplane in the transverse space to the
D3-branes. Indeed, for such a D5-brane one computes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which agrees with the second term in Eq. ( 5.3.34 ) evaluated for the
solutions in Fig. 5.3 . ⁶ ⁶ 6 Incidentally, this unexcited D5-brane
corresponds to one of the @xmath configurations drawn in Fig. 5.3 . It
may sound counter-intuitive that an unexcited D5-brane is connected to
the D3-branes by @xmath strings. However, this is also what has been
found in other studies of this system [ 79 ] . We shall just subtract
the infinite second term in Eq. ( 5.3.34 ) from the energy and study the
deformation energy @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, for @xmath we rewrite the bound Eq. ( 5.3.25 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here, we have used Eq. ( 5.3.17 ) and the solutions in Fig. 5.3 . To
interpret @xmath , note that for @xmath , @xmath corresponds to the
tension of @xmath strings stretched between the D5-brane and the
D3-branes. At first sight, this might seem to be in contradiction with
the fact that there are really @xmath strings between the D5-brane and
the D3-branes. However, remember that an unexcited D5-brane is connected
to the D3-branes via @xmath strings. Thus, one can imagine that @xmath
of the @xmath strings are needed to bring the D5-brane in its unexcited
state and that only the remaining @xmath strings exert a force on the
D5-brane. By the way, note that this force is not sufficient to make the
infinitely heavy D5-brane move: we are really studying static
configurations.

To motivate the name @xmath , note that, from the ten-dimensional
spacetime point of view, we have been studying the triple intersection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In our analysis, the D3-branes are the background and the F1 plays the
role of a soliton of the D5-brane world-volume theory. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Triple
intersections from the point of view of world-volume theories have also
been studied in [ 75 ] and [ 80 ] . We have chosen the name @xmath
because of the direction in which the string stretches.

In our paper [ 9 ] , further evidence is provided in favour of the
interpretation of @xmath (or @xmath in the case @xmath ) as a charge
associated to fundamental strings ending on the D5-brane world-volume.
The additional evidence consists in the fact that @xmath (or @xmath )
has the right quantum numbers to appear as a central charge in the
D5-brane world-volume supersymmetry algebra. We refer the reader to [ 9
] for details. The analysis presented in this section has been
generalized to other configurations of intersecting branes in [ 78 , 81
] .

## Chapter 6 Type 0 string theory

In this chapter, we study some aspects of type 0 string theory [ 82 ] .
Compared to type II strings, type 0 strings have a tachyon, twice as
many R-R fields and no spacetime fermions in their perturbative spectra.
Because of the problems related to the presence of a tachyon, type 0
string theory became popular only one year and a half ago. Then, it was
noticed [ 83 , 84 ] that the tachyon may not be a big problem when one
is interested in D-brane world-volume field theories, as in the AdS/CFT
correspondence. In Section 6.1 , we give a brief review of this
motivation to study type 0 string theory. Type 0 string theory has also
been studied by itself, which has led to some interesting speculations
about type 0 dualities [ 85 ] .

In this chapter, we study the main building blocks in these
developments: type 0 strings, D-branes and NS-fivebranes. In particular,
we derive the D-brane Wess-Zumino action [ 10 ] , determine the massless
spectrum of NS-fivebranes [ 15 ] and combine these ingredients to
comment [ 15 ] on a type 0 duality [ 85 ] .

In Section 6.2 , we introduce type 0 strings and compare them to type II
strings [ 82 ] . In Section 6.3 , we introduce type 0 D-branes [ 86 , 84
] . As could be anticipated from the doubling of the R-R spectrum
compared to type II string theory, the number of different D-branes is
also doubled. Following our paper [ 10 ] , we derive a Wess-Zumino
action for type 0 D-branes. We use an anomaly inflow argument very
similar to the one used for type II D-branes. Again, the different terms
in the Wess-Zumino action can be checked via boundary state
computations.

In Section 6.4 , which is based on our paper [ 15 ] , we study NS
fivebranes in type 0 string theory. We derive their massless spectra and
find that they are non-chiral and purely bosonic for both type 0A and
type 0B. Type IIA NS fivebranes have a chiral, anomalous spectrum. The
anomaly is cancelled by anomaly inflow from the bulk of spacetime. We
compute that for both type 0A and type 0B there is no such inflow from
the bulk. This is consistent with the non-chiral and thus non-anomalous
spectra of type 0 NS fivebranes. We propose a speculative interpretation
of the type 0 NS fivebrane spectra in terms of “type 0 little strings”.

In Section 6.5 , we combine our studies of type 0 D-branes and NS
fivebranes to comment [ 15 ] on the recently proposed type 0B S-duality
[ 85 ] .

One of the themes in our studies of type 0 string theories is that,
although they are not supersymmetric, they resemble the supersymmetric
type II theories in many respects. A striking example is the analysis of
Section 6.3.1 [ 10 ] . However, we have to stress that, due to the
presence of a tachyonic mode in the bulk of spacetime, the results
presented in this chapter are on a less firm footing than the analogous
ones in type II.

### 6.1 Introduction

In Section 5.1.1 , we indicated how string theory can be used to study
the strong coupling limit of @xmath SU( @xmath ) super-Yang-Mills theory
in 3+1 dimensions. Interesting as it is, studying the strong coupling
limit of a supersymmetric gauge theory is not the final aim of high
energy physics. One of the real interests is non-supersymmetric gauge
theory. There have been several approaches towards this aim. In this
section, we briefly introduce one that is based on type 0 string
theories.

At the end of Section 3.1.1 , we restricted ourselves to supersymmetric
string theories. These theories satisfy consistency conditions like
modular invariance, and are free of tachyons, excitations with negative
mass squared. However, there also exist modular invariant
non-supersymmetric string theories. Two of them are the type 0A and type
0B closed string theories, to be introduced in Chapter 6 . They differ
from the type IIA and type IIB string theories in that they have
different GSO projections. The main differences with the type II
theories are that the type 0 theories have a doubled R-R spectrum, a
tachyon and no spacetime fermions.

The presence of a tachyon means that one is doing perturbation theory
around an unstable “vacuum”. This obviously makes it hard to do
computations in these theories. Nevertheless, the presence of a tachyon
does not imply that the theories are irrelevant to physics: it may well
be that the tachyon potential has a stable minimum in which the tachyon
can condense. This, in turn, raises another problem: determining the
tachyon potential requires off-shell information, which is not available
in perturbative string theory.

Despite these problems, one can guess an off-shell extrapolation of
on-shell results and check the internal consistency of the resulting
proposal. This is what Klebanov and Tseytlin did in [ 84 ] . They argued
that in certain backgrounds with a large five-form R-R flux the
tachyonic instability may be cured.

Like the R-R spectrum, the number of different D-branes is doubled in
type 0 with respect to type II. For instance, D3-branes can be
electrically or magnetically charged under the unconstrained five-form
R-R field strength. The configuration studied in [ 84 ] involves a
configuration of coincident electric D3-branes. In the spirit of
Maldacena’s conjecture, it is proposed that the field theory living on
the D-branes has a string theory dual. A crucial observation is that,
although there is a closed string tachyon in the bulk of the
ten-dimensional spacetime, the field theory on the branes (describing
the low-energy excitations of the open strings ending on them) is
tachyon-free. Thus, one may hope that D-branes will be stable objects
once the closed string tachyon has condensed.

The field theory one finds in this way is non-supersymmetric,
non-conformal (in fact, asymptotically free) and tachyon-free [ 84 , 87
, 88 ] .

One can also study stacks of an equal number of electric and magnetic
D3-branes [ 89 ] , giving rise to field theories that are conformally
invariant in the limit of a large number of branes. We shall not go into
these theories here, though we refer the reader to our paper [ 10 ] ,
where we study an orbifold of these models.

Type 0 string theories have also been studied independently of the
AdS/CFT correspondence. In particular, there have been some interesting
type 0 duality conjectures, one of which will be examined in Section 6.5
. It is unclear how to deal with the tachyonic instability of type 0
string theory in a flat background. Our point of view is that arguments
based on anomaly cancellation may be robust under continuous
deformations of the theory. Therefore, one may hope that, even though
the background one is expanding around is unstable, one could be able to
extract useful information from such anomaly arguments. However, we
repeat that the whole chapter is highly conjectural.

### 6.2 Strings: from type II to type 0

In the Neveu-Schwarz-Ramond formulation, type II string theories are
obtained by imposing independent GSO projections on the left and right
moving part. This amounts to keeping the following (left,right) sectors:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where for instance R+ and R- are the Ramond sectors projected with
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, @xmath being the world-sheet fermion
number (see Section 3.1.1 ).

There is another, equivalent choice for both theories (related to the
first choice by a spacetime reflection):

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

For the massless R-R sector, the difference between the primed and
unprimed theories shows up in opposite chiralities of the bi-spinor
containing the R-R field strengths. This implies a sign difference in
the Hodge duality relations among these field strengths, resulting in a
selfdual five-form field strength in IIB and an antiselfdual one in
IIB’, for instance.

The type 0 string theories contain instead the following sectors:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

Here are some differences between type 0 and type II string theory.
First, type 0 theories do not contain bulk spacetime fermions, which
would have to come from ‘‘mixed’’ (R,NS) sectors. ¹ ¹ 1 However,
fermions will occur when D-branes are introduced [ 86 ] . This will be
crucial for our results, see Section 6.3.1 . Second, the inclusion of
the NS-NS sectors with odd fermion numbers means that the closed string
tachyon is not projected out. Third, the type 0 R-R spectrum is doubled
compared to type II: the R-R potentials of the primed and unprimed type
II theories are combined, resulting for instance in an unconstrained
five-form field strength in type 0B.

We shall summarize the spectra of type 0 versus type II string theories
in a table at the end of Section 6.4.3 .

### 6.3 D-branes

D-branes in type 0 theories have been discussed in [ 86 ] and [ 84 ] .
First, we mainly review some of their results. Then, in Section 6.3.1 ,
we present a result from our paper [ 10 ] .

Because of the doubling of the R-R spectrum, in type 0B there are two
kinds of D3-branes, named electric and magnetic in contrast to the
selfdual D3-brane of type IIB.

A configuration with equal numbers of coincident electric and magnetic
branes is reminiscent of type II branes, which have been well studied.
It will turn out that many results can be transferred to type 0 almost
without effort. For instance, we shall see in Section 6.3.1 that chiral
fermions are present on certain intersections of electric and magnetic
branes, leading to anomaly inflow on the intersection via anomalous
D-brane couplings. These, in turn, lead to the creation of a string when
certain D-branes cross each other.

As discussed in Section 6.2 , the spectrum of type 0 theories contains
two ( @xmath )-form R-R potentials for each even (0A) or odd (0B) @xmath
. We will denote these by @xmath and @xmath , referring to the unprimed
and primed type II theories mentioned above. For our purposes, more
convenient combinations are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath , these are the electric ( @xmath ) and magnetic ( @xmath )
potentials [ 84 ] . We will adopt this terminology also for other values
of @xmath .

There are four types of “elementary” D-branes for each @xmath : an
electric and a magnetic one, i.e. charged under @xmath , and the
corresponding antibranes. In [ 84 ] , the interaction energy of two
identical parallel ( @xmath )-branes was derived by computing the
relevant cylinder diagram (see Fig. 6.1 ) in the open string channel,
analogously to the Polchinski computation [ 47 ] in type II.

Isolating, via modular transformation, the contributions due to the
exchange of long-range fields in the closed string channel, it is found
on the one hand that the tension of these branes is a factor @xmath
smaller than for type II branes. On the other hand, the R-R repulsive
force between two like branes has twice the strength of the
graviton-dilaton attraction [ 84 ] ; thus, the type 0 branes couple to
the corresponding R-R potentials @xmath with the same charge as the
branes in type II couple to the potential @xmath .

The cylinder diagram between two D-branes in type II can also be
considered as a tree-level diagram in which a closed string propagates
between two “boundary states”. Recall from Section 4.1 that a boundary
state is a particular BRST invariant closed string state that describes
the emission of a closed string from a D-brane. It satisfies conditions
that correspond to the boundary conditions for open strings ending on
the D-brane. In particular, for the fermionic fields @xmath the boundary
state @xmath , which depends on the sector, R or NS, and on an
additional sign @xmath , satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is diagonal, with entries @xmath in the worldvolume and
@xmath in the transverse directions. In type II theories, the GSO
projection requires a mixture of the two choices @xmath . Indeed,
starting, for instance, with @xmath , one finds that the type II
boundary state @xmath @xmath @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We remark that in the case of type 0 D-branes, the various cylinder
amplitudes between an electric (or magnetic) D-brane and an electric (or
magnetic) D-brane can simply be reproduced using the following
unprojected (and differently normalized) boundary states, whose sum is
@xmath times the type II boundary state:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath represents an electric brane and @xmath a magnetic one.

As a cross-check, with these boundary states one can compute the
one-point function on the disc of a R-R potential (as in [ 45 ] ).
Denoting by @xmath the out-state corresponding to the @xmath potentials,
the one-point function describing its coupling to a type 0 D @xmath
-brane will be @xmath . As one can see from Eq. ( 6.3.1 ), Eq. ( 6.3.3 )
and Eq. ( 6.3.4 ), this gives indeed the same charge as in type II,
where one would compute @xmath .

#### 6.3.1 Anomaly inflow and Wess-Zumino action

The D-branes we have just described show many similarities to their type
II cousins. In this section, we will push the analogy further to include
the whole Wess-Zumino action, i.e., all the anomalous D-brane couplings
² ² 2 and the non-anomalous ones found in [ 8 ] (see Section 4.5 ) .

The open strings stretching between two like branes are bosons, just
like the bulk fields of type 0. However, fermions appear from strings
between an electric and a magnetic brane [ 86 ] . Thus, one could wonder
whether there are chiral fermions on the intersection of an electric and
a magnetic brane. Consider such an orthogonal intersection with no
overall transverse directions. If the dimension of the intersection is
two or six, a cylinder computation reveals that there are precisely
enough fermionic degrees of freedom on the intersection to form one
chiral fermion.

In type II string theory, the analogous computation shows that chiral
fermions are present on two- or six-dimensional intersections of two
orthogonal branes with no overall transverse directions. That
observation has far-reaching consequences. As we discussed in Section
3.5.1 , the presence of chiral fermions leads to gauge and gravitational
anomalies on those intersections of D-branes [ 50 ] . In a consistent
theory, such anomalies should be cancelled by anomaly inflow [ 21 ] . In
the present case, the anomaly inflow is provided by the anomalous
D-brane couplings in the Wess-Zumino part of the D-brane action [ 50 ,
51 ] . These anomalous couplings have an anomalous variation localized
on the intersections with other branes.

A careful analysis of all the anomalies [ 51 ] shows that the anomalous
part of the D @xmath -brane action is given, in terms of the formal sum
@xmath of the various R-R forms, by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath denotes the D @xmath -brane tension, @xmath the gauge field
on the brane and @xmath the NS-NS two-form. Further, @xmath and @xmath
are the curvatures of the tangent and normal bundles of the D-brane
world-volume, and @xmath denotes the A-roof genus. We refer to Section
3.4 for details on the action Eq. ( 6.3.5 ).

These anomalous D-brane couplings have various applications. To mention
just one, using T-duality it has been argued [ 90 ] that they imply the
creation of a fundamental string whenever certain type II D-branes cross
each other. This string creation process is dual to the Hanany-Witten
effect [ 76 ] .

Let us now return to type 0 string theory. As stated above, here chiral
fermions live on intersections of electric and magnetic type 0 D-branes.
The associated gauge and gravitational anomalies on such intersections
match the ones for type II D-branes. To cancel them, the minimal
coupling of a D @xmath -brane to a ( @xmath )-form R-R potential should
be extended to the following Wess-Zumino action [ 10 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath in Eq. ( 6.3.6 ) distinguishes between electric and magnetic
branes. Note that @xmath denotes the tension of a type II D @xmath
-brane, which is @xmath times the type 0 D @xmath -brane tension.

The argument that the variation of this action ³ ³ 3 Again, to be
precise, as in type II [ 50 , 51 ] one should use an action expressed in
terms of the R-R field strengths instead of the potentials, which is
different from Eq. ( 6.3.6 ), see Section 3.5.1 . cancels the anomaly on
the intersection is a copy of the one described above in the type II
case, apart from one slight subtlety. For definiteness, consider the
intersection of an electric D5-brane (denoted D5 @xmath ) and a magnetic
D @xmath -brane (D5 @xmath ) on a string (see Fig. 6.2 ).

Varying the electric D @xmath -brane action (exhibiting the @xmath
potential, or rather, its field strength @xmath ), one finds that the
variation is localized on the intersection of the electric D @xmath
-brane with branes charged magnetically under the @xmath field strength.
Using Eq. ( 6.3.1 ), the different behaviour under Hodge duality of the
R-R field strengths of type II and II’ shows that these are precisely
the branes carrying (electric) @xmath charge, i.e., what we called the
magnetic D @xmath -branes. Schematically,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.3.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

A completely analogous discussion goes through for the variation of the
magnetic D @xmath -brane action.

This anomaly inflow argument fixes (the anomalous part of) the
Wess-Zumino action, displayed in Eq. ( 6.3.6 ). The presence of these
terms (and of a similar non-anomalous one [ 8 ] ) can be checked by a
disc computation, as in type II [ 7 , 12 , 8 ] , see Chapter 4 . In
fact, the computation is practically the same, confirming the form of
the action Eq. ( 6.3.6 ).

Assuming T-duality to hold between type 0A/B, the arguments of [ 90 ]
indicate the creation of a fundamental string when certain electric and
magnetic branes cross each other. In type II, this is linked to the
Hanany-Witten effect [ 76 ] by a chain of dualities. However, this chain
involves type IIB S-duality. It is not clear whether S-duality exists in
type 0B string theory (see Section 6.5 ).

The conclusion of Section 6.3 is that type 0 D-branes are similar to
type II D-branes. In particular, their interaction with R-R potentials
is described by the Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 6.3.6 ).

### 6.4 NS-fivebranes

This section is based on our paper [ 15 ] . First, we derive the spectra
of type 0 NS5-branes using T-duality. These spectra are non-chiral for
both type 0A and type 0B. Then, we check that this non-chirality is
consistent with anomaly considerations. Finally, we propose a
speculative interpretation of these spectra in terms of “type 0 little
strings”.

#### 6.4.1 NS fivebrane spectra

In type II string theories, the massless spectrum on NS5-branes can be
derived via an analysis of the zero-modes of the classical supergravity
NS5-brane solutions [ 52 ] . We will find it convenient to do the
analysis for the T-dual objects, since there the geometrical
interpretation is manifest.

Under T-duality, the type IIA/B NS5-branes are mapped to type IIB/A
Kaluza-Klein (KK) monopoles (see, for instance, [ 91 ] ). A KK monopole
is described by a supergravity solution with six worldvolume directions
and a Euclidean Taub-NUT (ETN) metric in the transverse space [ 92 ] .
The massless fields on the KK monopole correspond to the zero-modes of
the bulk supergravity fields on ETN. The normalizable harmonic forms on
ETN consist of one selfdual two-form [ 93 ] . In the NS-NS sector, there
are three zero-modes from broken translation invariance and one scalar
from the NS two-form. These four scalars correspond to the translation
zero-modes on the corresponding NS5-branes. The R-R fields give
additional bosonic zero-modes: on the IIB KK monopole, the R-R two-form
gives rise to a scalar and the selfdual ⁴ ⁴ 4 By abuse of language, we
term the potential forms (anti-)selfdual, according to the
(anti-)selfdual nature of their respective field strengths. R-R
four-form potential leads to a selfdual two-form; the IIA KK monopole
has a vector coming from the R-R three-form. In addition, there are
fermionic zero-modes from broken supersymmetry: two fermions with
opposite chirality for the IIA KK monopole and of the same chirality for
IIB.

All in all, this leads to an @xmath tensor multiplet on the IIA NS5 and
an @xmath vector multiplet on the IIB NS5.

Repeating this analysis for type 0 NS5-branes, it is clear that the
fermionic zero-modes disappear (because there are no fermions in the
bulk). Nothing changes as far as the NS-NS zero-modes are concerned, but
from the R-R fields we find extra zero modes from the doubled R-R
spectrum in the bulk. On the 0B NS5, there is an extra vector (compared
to the IIB NS5), whereas the 0A NS5 gets an extra scalar and an
anti-selfdual tensor. In particular, the spectrum is non-chiral on both
branes.

Note that, although type 0 NS5-branes are not supersymmetric, their
massless spectra consist of the bosonic part of @xmath supermultiplets.
At the end of Section 6.4.3 , we shall summarize the massless spectra of
type II and type 0 NS5-branes in a table.

#### 6.4.2 Absence of anomalies

We discussed in Section 3.5.2 that at one string loop the type IIA tree
level supergravity action is supplemented with the Wess-Zumino type term
@xmath coupling the NS-NS two-form @xmath to four gravitons. @xmath is a
quartic polynomial in the spacetime curvature two-form. The original
derivation of this one-loop term [ 54 ] provided a non-trivial
consistency check for six-dimensional heterotic-type II duality. Apart
from that, this specific piece of the action is also responsible for
gravitational anomaly cancellation on IIA NS fivebranes [ 53 ] .

Let us first highlight some aspects of the direct calculation in type
II, which will enable us to draw conclusions about the analogous type 0
amplitude almost without effort. First, as the interaction contains the
ten-dimensional @xmath symbol, only odd spin structures on the torus can
contribute, i.e., either the left-moving or the right-moving fermions
but not both, have to be in the odd spin structure. Furthermore, the
even spin structures are summed over to achieve modular invariance. From
a different perspective, this may also be seen as performing the GSO
projection on the closed string states in the loop [ 94 ] . In a
Hamiltonian framework, the torus vacuum diagram is written as a trace
over the closed string Hilbert space, which decomposes in four different
sectors as in Eq. ( 6.2 ). Chiral traces over these sectors can be
expressed in terms of traces over fermion sectors with periodic (P) or
antiperiodic (A) boundary conditions in the ( @xmath , @xmath )
world-sheet directions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Notice that the odd @xmath spin structure only occurs in the Ramond
sector. From the GSO-projected spectrum in Eq. ( 6.2 ), only (R,NS) and
(R,R) sectors contain (odd,even) pieces, yielding

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The right-moving combination is modular invariant, and in fact vanishes
as a consequence of Jacobi’s “abstruse identity”. If one calculates the
amplitude for one B-field and four gravitons, one inserts vertex
operators in the appropriate pictures. Still, the right-moving even
structures are summed over as in Eq. ( 6.4.1 ). In contrast with the
partition function, however, in this case a non-vanishing result is
found [ 54 ] . It is also argued there that in type IIB the (odd,even)
and (even,odd) contributions cancel out whereas they add in type IIA. So
only in the latter case is the probed interaction present.

This difference between type IIA and IIB could have been inferred from
their respective NS fivebrane worldvolume spectra, a chiral one in type
IIA and a non-chiral one in type IIB. The chiral spectrum suffers from a
gravitational anomaly in six dimensions, which is neatly cancelled by
the standard anomaly inflow [ 21 ] from the bulk through the above
derived coupling [ 53 ] .

Let us repeat the argument for the one-loop correlator in type 0 string
theories. Now, it is only (R,R) sectors that contribute to the
(odd,even) piece in the one-loop partition function, yielding

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

both for 0A and 0B. As in type II, one may now wish to insert vertex
operators. However, it is obvious that the obligatory sum over spin
structures as in Eq. ( 6.4.2 ) now yields a vanishing result for the
(odd,even) part by itself. Analogously, the (even,odd) part will vanish
by itself. Whence the absence of the anomaly-cancelling term in both
type 0A and 0B.

Reversing the anomaly inflow argument, in type 0A the selfdual two-form
must be supplemented with an anti-selfdual two-form, in order not to
give rise to gravitational anomalies. This nicely agrees with the
unconstrained two-form on the NS fivebrane, derived in Section 6.4.1 .
From T-duality, an additional vector (compared to the IIB NS5-brane) is
then to be expected on the type 0B NS5-brane, which is also consistent
with Section 6.4.1 .

#### 6.4.3 A little string interpretation

In type II string theories, the fivebrane worldvolume theories have been
conjectured to be properly described by “little strings” [ 95 ] . These
non-critical closed string theories have hitherto remained mysterious,
although some qualitative features may be understood. We briefly recall
some of these, focusing on the type IIB case. However, we prefer first
to treat the more familiar example of a fundamental string, providing a
guiding reference when dealing with the little strings.

A fundamental string solution in supergravity breaks half of the 32 bulk
supersymmetries. These broken symmetries give rise to fermion zero-modes
on the string, of which 8 are left-moving and 8 right-moving. They are
identified with the Green-Schwarz space-time fermion fields on the
world-volume. Upon quantization of these fermions, 128 bosons and 128
fermions are found, together building the on-shell @xmath = 2
supergravity multiplet. This multiplet is also found in the RNS
formalism used in this thesis, so the picture is consistent. In the
latter formulation, it is not hard to see that the NS-NS sector fields
together with, say, the R-NS sector build an @xmath = 1 supergravity
multiplet. Likewise, the NS-R and R-R sector are combined into one
multiplet of @xmath = 1.

Let us move on now to little strings. One way to derive properties of
little strings in type IIB is to consider a gauge instanton on a D5
brane. Half of the bulk supersymmetries are unbroken by the D5-brane.
Sixteen real supercharges are thus found, obeying an @xmath =(1,1)
superalgebra. Of the sixteen supersymmetries, half are broken by the
instanton. On the macroscopic string, there are thus eight fermionic
modes, four left-moving and four right-moving ones. Upon quantization of
these zero-modes, one finds 8 bosonic and 8 fermionic states. They
correspond to the on-shell degrees of freedom of one @xmath =(1,1)
vectormultiplet. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Since the little strings of type IIB are
non-chiral, we will name them type iia little strings. Upon
decomposition with respect to @xmath = 1 six-dimensional supersymmetry,
one hypermultiplet and one vectormultiplet result. It is conceivable
that a similar analysis in type IIA, if possible at all, would give a
@xmath =(2,0) tensormultiplet, decomposing into one hypermultiplet and
one tensormultiplet of @xmath =1 supersymmetry. We remark that the
tensormultiplet has a bosonic content that consists of one scalar and
one two-form potential with self-dual field strength.

All in all, one may wish to draw the following analogies between type ii
little strings and type II strings. In both cases, there is one
universal sector, the hypermultiplet resp. the (NS-NS + R-NS) sector.
The other sector depends on whether or not the supersymmetry in the
“bulk” is chiral, where “bulk” means the fivebrane worldvolume for the
little string and ten-dimensional spacetime for the type II string. For
the non-chiral type IIA and little type iia, the remaining bosonic
fields are odd @xmath -form potentials, coupling to even @xmath D @xmath
- resp. d @xmath -branes. As to chiral type IIB/iib, the R-R sector has
only even @xmath -form potentials, of which one has a self-dual field
strength. In these theories, only odd @xmath D @xmath or d @xmath
-branes occur. So this analogy, however formal, is at least remarkable.
We shall visualize it in the tables at the end of this section.

As to the various fivebranes, the type IIA NS fivebrane theory is
conjectured to be described by chiral iib little strings, whereas iia
little strings would do the job for type IIB fivebranes.

One may then proceed and construct “little type 0a/b strings” by
mimicking the procedure for the bulk strings: spacetime fermions are
removed and there is a doubled R-R spectrum compared to the superstring.
Concretely, this would imply that the massless spectrum of little type
0a strings consists of the bosonic contents of one hypermultiplet and
two vectormultiplets, in @xmath =1 language. This precisely matches with
the spectrum on the type 0B NS fivebrane. Little type 0b strings would
then generate the bosonic content of one hypermultiplet, one selfdual
tensormultiplet and one anti-selfdual tensormultiplet. Also here, this
seems to be consistent with the spectrum of the type 0A NS fivebrane.

In the following tables, we summarize the spectra of type II versus type
0 string theories

  ----------- -------------- ------------ -------------- --------------
              II                          0              
              A              B            A              B
  Universal   @xmath                      @xmath         
  sector      + fermions                                 
  Other       @xmath         @xmath       @xmath         @xmath
  sector      + fermions     + fermions                  @xmath
              (non-chiral)   (chiral)     (non-chiral)   (non-chiral)
  ----------- -------------- ------------ -------------- --------------

and of type ii versus type o little string theories:

  ----------- -------------- ----------------- -------------- --------------
              ii                               o              
              a              b                 a              b
  Universal   4 scalars                        4 scalars      
  sector      + fermions                                      
  Other       vector         @xmath , scalar   2 vectors      @xmath ,
  sector      + fermions     + fermions                       2 scalars
              (non-chiral)   (chiral)          (non-chiral)   (non-chiral)
  ----------- -------------- ----------------- -------------- --------------

To summarize Section 6.4 , we have derived the massless spectra of type
0 NS5-branes. We have shown that they are consistent with anomaly
considerations. We have proposed a speculative interpretation of the
spectra in terms of “type 0 little strings”.

### 6.5 Type 0B S-duality

In this section, we combine results from Section 6.3.1 and Section 6.4
to comment [ 15 ] on the type 0B S-duality conjectured in [ 85 ] .

###### Strings

In type IIB string theory, the fundamental string is mapped to the
D-string under S-duality. The Green-Schwarz light-cone formulation of
the fundamental type IIB string involves eight spacetime bosonic fields
and sixteen spacetime fermionic ones. All fermions transform in the
@xmath representation of the transverse SO(8) rotation group. Upon
quantization, their zero-modes generate the 256-fold degenerate
groundstate, transforming in the @xmath of SO(8).

The excitations of a D1-brane can be described in string perturbation
theory by quantizing the open strings beginning and ending on it. Doing
so, the NS sector gives eight massless bosons and the R sector sixteen
massless fermions.

Note that these massless excitations of both the fundamental string and
the D-string can be interpreted as Goldstone modes for broken
translation invariance and broken supersymmetry.

It is believed that the IIB D-string at strong (fundamental) string
coupling is the same object as a fundamental IIB string at weak
coupling. The evidence for this conjecture is largely based on
supersymmetry. For one thing, the ground state of the D-string is BPS,
so that it can safely be followed to strong coupling and compared to the
ground state of the weakly coupled fundamental string.

Type 0B string theory is not supersymmetric, which complicates the
analysis of its strong coupling limit enormously. Let us nevertheless
try to proceed.

The fundamental type 0B string can be obtained from the fundamental type
IIB string by performing a @xmath orbifold, where @xmath is the
spacetime fermion number. In the untwisted sector of this orbifold, the
massless states in the @xmath survive the @xmath projection. The light
modes in the twisted sector, which has to be added for modular
invariance, are a singlet tachyon and the extra massless R-R states in
the @xmath .

Bergman and Gaberdiel conjectured [ 85 ] that the fundamental type 0B
string should be S-dual to a bound state of an electric and a magnetic
D1-brane. This proposal immediately raises two questions. First, when
one quantizes the open strings on a coincident electric-magnetic
D-string pair, one naively seems to find twice as many massless
excitations as on a fundamental string: sixteen bosons and thirty-two
fermions. This would lead to too many states of the D-string pair
compared to the fundamental string. How could the extra degrees of
freedom disappear? Second, assuming that we have found a way to get rid
of the superfluous degrees of freedom, how does the @xmath projection
appear on the D-string pair?

As to the first question, in order to count modes one should really
compactify the system: saying that one has two continua of states rather
than one continuum does not make much sense. When a direction is
compactified, the proposal in [ 85 ] involves a monodromy on one side of
the duality. It turns out that this monodromy eliminates the redundant
would-be massless fermions.

As to the second question, the @xmath projection might be related to a
gauging of a @xmath subgroup of the gauge symmetry on the D-string pair.
However, it looks hard to make this idea more precise.

###### Fivebranes

Type IIB NS5-branes are S-dual to D5-branes. These objects have the same
light excitations (the reduction of an @xmath , D=10, U(1) vector
multiplet to D=6). As in the case of IIB strings, part of the spectrum
is protected by supersymmetry.

Given the story for strings, it is tempting to propose [ 85 ] that the
type 0B NS5-brane is S-dual to an electric-magnetic D5-brane pair. This
raises two puzzles.

First, how do the spectra match? Is the doubled gauge spectrum of type
0B NS5-branes at weak coupling related to the two gauge fields on the
D5-brane pair? This is not clear, since to compare the two objects one
has to take one of them to strong coupling, where it is unclear what
happens. For one thing, the doubling of the gauge field on the type 0B
NS5-brane (compared to the IIB NS5-brane) is related to the doubled R-R
spectrum of the bulk of type 0A, as shown in Section 6.4.1 . The latter
doubling is not expected to persist at strong coupling [ 85 ] . Are
there fermionic zero-modes on NS5-branes? We have not found any from a
zero-mode analysis of the bulk gravity theory, but this does not exclude
that they could appear in a non-perturbative way. This would be
analogous to the (not completely understood) case of the fundamental
type 0 string, where it looks impossible to interpret the fermion
zero-modes as zero-modes of bulk fields.

Second, do type 0B NS5-branes carry anomalous gravitational couplings,
which are known to be carried by type 0B D-branes [ 10 ] ? Since these
couplings are related to anomalies and thus to topology, we expect that
their presence or absence could be invariant under continuously changing
the coupling from zero to infinity. If this is the case, answering this
question could provide a test of type 0B S-duality. The rest of this
section will be devoted to analysing this question.

We first remind the reader of the familiar story in type IIB. Consider,
for instance, the intersection of two D5-branes on a string. The open
strings from one brane to the other give rise to chiral fermions living
on the intersection. These chiral fermions lead to gauge and
gravitational anomalies, which are cancelled by anomaly inflow from the
branes into the intersection [ 50 ] . For this to happen, the D5-branes
need, amongst other terms, a

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

term in their Wess-Zumino action, where @xmath is the R-R two-form
potential and @xmath the first Pontrjagin class of the tangent bundle of
the D5-brane worldvolume. We have checked the presence of this term by
an explicit string computation [ 7 ] . Now, type IIB S-duality implies
the presence of chiral fermions on the intersection of two NS5-branes on
a string, and thus a

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

term on the worldvolumes of each NS5-brane ( @xmath is the NS-NS
two-form). Indeed, the following argument ⁶ ⁶ 6 In fact, this is how the
@xmath coupling on D5-branes was first discovered. for the presence of
this term was given in [ 62 ] . Under T-duality in a transverse
direction, the NS5-brane is mapped to a Kaluza-Klein monopole in type
IIA. This object is described by a Euclidean Taub-NUT metric in the
transverse space. Since @xmath and the @xmath term discussed in the
previous section contains a piece proportional to @xmath , reducing this
term gives rise to the required @xmath term on the IIA Kaluza-Klein
monopole and thus on the IIB NS5-brane.

What about type 0B? On the one hand, it has been argued [ 10 ] that
chiral fermions and thus anomalies are present on the intersection of
electric and magnetic D5-branes (see Section 6.4.2 ). Hence, type 0
D5-branes have the @xmath couplings in their Wess-Zumino actions (this
has also been checked via a string computation [ 10 ] ). We expect that
the number of chiral fermion zero-modes on these intersections cannot
change under a continuous increase of the string coupling. On the other
hand, in Section 6.4.2 we have argued that there is no @xmath term in
type 0A, so we expect no @xmath coupling of type 0B NS5-branes, and thus
no chiral fermions on intersections of NS5-branes. If this argument is
correct, it could be a problem for type 0B S-duality.

## Chapter 7 Non-BPS branes

This chapter deals with non-BPS D-branes. These are objects on which
open strings can end, but that preserve no supersymmetry. In some string
theories, such objects can be stable, but in ten-dimensional type II
string theory they are not. Our main aim will be to derive a Wess-Zumino
action for non-BPS D-branes in type II string theory. This will be done
in Section 7.2 , which is based on our paper [ 11 ] .

Before we come to that, we review how work by Sen and other people has
motivated the study of non-BPS branes. Good references include [ 96 , 97
, 98 , 99 , 100 , 101 , 102 ] .

### 7.1 Motivation

In Sen’s construction [ 97 , 98 , 101 ] , non-BPS D-branes are
constructed as kink solutions of the tachyon field (i.e., a field with
negative mass squared) on a coincident D-brane–anti-D-brane pair. In
Section 7.1.1 , we give an introduction to brane-antibrane systems. In
Section 7.1.2 , we outline how such systems have been used in testing
string dualities (we concentrate on one example [ 98 ] ). Finally, in
Section 7.1.3 , we indicate how a closely related development leads to
K-theory [ 103 , 104 ] as the appropriate mathematical framework to
discuss D-brane charges [ 99 ] .

#### 7.1.1 Brane–anti-brane systems

Consider in a type II string theory a D @xmath -brane coincident with an
anti-D @xmath -brane (denoted D @xmath ). ¹ ¹ 1 We shall call such a
configuration a D @xmath -D @xmath pair, without explicitly mentioning
the fact that the constituents are coincident. The dynamics of this
system is described by the four kinds of open strings beginning and
ending on D @xmath or D @xmath (see Fig. 7.1 ).

If it were not for the GSO projection, one would find the following
spectrum for each of the four kinds of open strings. In the NS sector,
the ground state is tachyonic, meaning that it corresponds to a
fluctuation of the D @xmath -D @xmath system with negative mass squared.
At the massless level, one finds the reduction of a ten-dimensional
vector: a vector and @xmath scalars. The other states have masses of the
order of the string scale. The R sector contains the reduction of a
ten-dimensional Majorana spinor and a tower of massive fermions.

For the @xmath -strings (going from D @xmath to itself) and the @xmath
-strings, the GSO-projection is the ordinary one (see the end of Section
3.1.1 ): it eliminates the tachyon, keeps the massless vector and
scalars, and restricts the massless fermions to a single ten-dimensional
chirality. The scalars can be interpreted as the Goldstone modes for
broken translation invariance: they describe the transverse fluctuations
of the brane or anti-brane. The sixteen fermionic states are the
Goldstone fermions corresponding to the supersymmetries broken by the
ground state of the brane. The spectrum of the @xmath -strings (and of
the @xmath -strings) is supersymmetric.

The other (“wrong”) GSO projection is taken for the @xmath - and @xmath
-strings: in the NS sector, the tachyon is kept, and in the R sector,
the projection is on the other chirality than above. The resulting
spectrum is clearly non-supersymmetric (since the bosons and the
fermions have different masses). To see why the “wrong” GSO-projection
should be performed, consider the one-loop vacuum diagram of, e.g., the
@xmath -strings (see Fig. 7.2 ). The world-sheet is a cylinder, with
world-sheet time running around the loop. By world-sheet duality (i.e.,
interchanging world-sheet time and space), this diagram can equivalently
be regarded as a closed string tree diagram: the two branes interact by
emitting and absorbing closed string states, such as the graviton and
(fluctuations of) the appropriate R-R potential (see Fig. 7.2 ).

In the open string channel, the amplitude can be written as the sum of
four pieces (one of which vanishes in the cases we will be considering):
the NS and R sector contributions, in each case with or without @xmath
from the GSO projection inserted, where @xmath is the world-sheet
fermion number (see Section 3.1.1 ). It turns out that the contributions
with @xmath inserted correspond, in the closed string channel, to
exchange diagrams of closed strings in the R-R sector. Knowing this, we
can argue why, for instance, the @xmath strings have the other GSO
projection than the @xmath strings. The difference between a brane and
an anti-brane is the sign of their charges, in particular of their R-R
charges (see, for instance, Eq. ( 7.1.6 )). Therefore, the sign of the
R-R contribution to the amplitude is different for the two cases, which
in the open string channel is interpreted as a different GSO projection.

The lowest-lying bosonic spectrum of the D @xmath -D @xmath system can
be summarized in the following matrix:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the first (second) row/column denotes the strings beginning/ending
on the brane (anti-brane) and by @xmath we mean the full reduction of a
ten-dimensional vector to @xmath dimensions (so not only the vector
@xmath but also the scalars). The two tachyons (distinguished by the
orientation of the strings they are a mode of) are denoted @xmath and
@xmath .

Now specialize to a type IIB D-string–anti-D-string system, and perform
the world-sheet parity projection @xmath (see the end of Section 3.1.1 )
leading to a type I D-string–anti-D-string system. Only the @xmath
combination (to be denoted by @xmath in the following section) of the
two tachyons survives the projection, so that we end up with one real
tachyon. The gauge fields @xmath and @xmath are projected out by @xmath
, so that the U(1) gauge symmetries on each of the branes are lost.
However, a discrete @xmath subgroup of each U(1) survives the
projection. This makes it possible to turn on a @xmath Wilson line on
the string and/or anti-string. Further, tadpole cancellation implies
that the vacuum must be filled with 32 D9-branes. This leads to
additional degrees of freedom on the (anti-)D-strings, corresponding to
open strings between the (anti-)D-strings and the D9-branes.

#### 7.1.2 Testing string dualities

The brane–anti-brane systems described in Section 7.1.1 have recently
been studied by Sen. His main motivation [ 96 ] was checking string
dualities at a non-BPS level. For instance, the type I superstring has
been conjectured to be dual to the SO(32) heterotic string [ 105 , 106 ]
. This duality is a strong/weak duality and as such rather difficult to
test. One piece of evidence is that the low-energy limits of both
theories are equivalent [ 105 ] , but this just follows from
supersymmetry. Other evidence is provided by the fact that the D-string
of type I has the same world-sheet structure as the heterotic string [
106 ] . Non-trivial as this statement is, supersymmetry does play an
important role in it: one has to use the BPS property of the D-string in
order to be able to follow it to strong coupling. We refer to Section
2.2 for more information about BPS states.

What Sen was after was a test of this and other dualities beyond the BPS
level. Such a test was already hinted at in a footnote in [ 105 ] : ‘The
SO(32) heterotic string has particles that transform as spinors of
SO(32); these are absent in the elementary string spectrum of Type I and
would have to arise as some sort of solitons if these two theories are
equivalent.’ In 1998, Sen found this sort of soliton in the type I
string theory [ 98 ] . Note that the SO(32) spinor particles in the
heterotic string spectrum do not preserve any supersymmetry: they are
non-BPS. Therefore, the identification of these states as solitons in
the type I string theory tests the heterotic/type I duality at a
non-supersymmetric level. The states that are being compared in both
theories are non-BPS but stable: by charge conservation, the lightest
SO(32) spinor state has nothing it can decay into.

It is not difficult to get a rough idea of Sen’s construction [ 97 ]
(the complete analysis is much more sophisticated and will not be dealt
with here; we refer to the original paper [ 98 ] and the reviews [ 101 ]
and [ 102 ] ). First, compactify one space direction of ten-dimensional
Minkowski space-time to a circle (this circle will eventually be
decompactified). Consider a type I D-string–anti-D-string pair wrapped
around this compact dimension.

The effective potential for the real tachyon field @xmath that survives
the @xmath projection is not known ² ² 2 However, see [ 107 ] for string
field theory computations of this potential. , but it is known to be
even and we assume that it has precisely two minima, at @xmath (see Fig.
7.3 ).

The fact that a small fluctuation of the field @xmath around @xmath has
negative mass squared, from which the field inherits the name ‘tachyon’,
signals that the system is unstable. It has been argued [ 97 , 107 ]
that the system can decay into the vacuum if the tachyon field condenses
to one of the minima of its potential.

However, more interesting tachyon configurations are possible. One can
turn on a @xmath Wilson line on the anti-string (or the string). Doing
this implies that the tachyon field @xmath is anti-periodic along the
compactification circle, so the trivial condensation considered above is
no longer allowed. In the decompactification limit, this amounts to
considering a topological sector in which the tachyon approaches @xmath
for @xmath (where @xmath is the coordinate along the direction that used
to be compactified) and @xmath for @xmath (see Fig. 7.4 ).

Such a kink solution of the tachyon equations of motion would have a
core where the tachyon field vanishes, and where its energy is
concentrated (as the configuration resembles the vacuum far away from
the core). Hence, the type I D-string–anti-D-string system with this
tachyon configuration can be interpreted as a localized particle, which
we call a non-BPS D0-brane. The reason why we call it a D0-brane is that
open strings can end on it. Intuitively, this is because near the core
of the kink the system resembles the original D-string–anti-D-string
pair, so open strings should be allowed to end there.

This D0-brane is a spinor of SO(32). To see this, we go back to the
D-string–anti-D-string pair wrapped around the compact dimension, with a
@xmath Wilson line on the anti-string (and not on the string). The open
strings between the D-string and the 32 D9-branes in the vacuum give
rise to 32 fermion zero modes, whose quantization leads to the
conclusion that the states of the D-string transform as a spinor of
SO(32). If there were no Wilson line on the anti-D-string, the same
conclusion would hold for the anti-D-string as well, so that the total
system would not be a spinor. However, putting in the Wilson line
eliminates the zero modes of the anti-D-string, so that the total
system, and consequently the non-BPS D0-brane, is a spinor.

For future reference, note that the topological stability of the kink
solution is guaranteed by the fact that the set of minima of the tachyon
potential is disconnected: @xmath .

The use of non-BPS branes in checking string dualities is not limited to
heterotic/type I duality. We refer the reader to [ 108 , 109 , 110 ] for
other examples.

#### 7.1.3 K-theory

This section is based on [ 98 , 99 , 100 ] . Consider a D-string
coincident with an anti-D-string in type IIB rather than type I. In this
case, there is complex tachyon @xmath living on the common world-sheet
of the D-string and the anti-D-string. We assume the vacuum manifold to
be a circle @xmath . Since this circle is connected, the analogue of the
kink solution described in the previous subsection is not stable: a real
tachyon remains on the resulting non-BPS D0-brane world-volume. ³ ³ 3 By
the way, this tachyon is odd under the world-sheet parity operator
@xmath , which is consistent with the fact that the type I
D-string–anti-D-string configuration studied in Section 7.1.2 is stable.
In fact, the excitations of the non-BPS D0-brane are described by open
strings without a GSO-projection. To summarize: it is possible to
construct a type IIB D0-brane, but this object is unstable, which is
signaled by a tachyonic fluctuation in the world-volume theory.

This unstable D0-brane can also be described by a boundary state [ 109 ,
111 ] . In this approach, the absence of a GSO-projection on the open
strings is reflected by the absence of a R-R component of the boundary
state. Analogous unstable D @xmath -branes can be constructed for all
odd (even) values of @xmath in type IIA (IIB).

We have just used the fact that the first homotopy group of @xmath is
trivial to argue that a kink configuration of the tachyon field is not
topologically stable. However, the circle does have a non-trivial
homotopy group, namely the first one: @xmath . For a complex tachyon,
this opens up the possibility that a vortex configuration is
topologically stable. Consider, for instance, a D2–anti-D2 system in
type IIA. The complex tachyon is charged oppositely under the gauge
fields @xmath and @xmath on the D2 and the anti-D2, respectively.
Therefore, its kinetic term takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consider the following static, finite energy vortex configuration, in
polar coordinates @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This soliton has its energy concentrated near the core (where the
tachyon vanishes) and describes a stable, finite mass particle in type
IIA string theory.

To see which particle it is, observe that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so there is one unit of magnetic flux associated with the gauge field
@xmath . This implies that the particle carries (one unit of) D0-brane
charge, as can be seen as follows. The Wess-Zumino actions for the D2
and the anti-D2 contain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the minus sign is due to the fact that the second brane is an
anti-brane rather than a brane. If the two world-volumes coincide, this
reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the core of the vortex solution (where the flux is localized)
carries charge @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.4.6 )) under @xmath . As a
consequence, the soliton we are studying has every right to be
identified with the usual, BPS D0-brane of type IIA. Thus, we have
constructed a stable type IIA D0-brane out of a D2–anti-D2 pair.

In the previous discussion, it was crucial that the “relative” gauge
field @xmath carried magnetic flux. This flux implies that the gauge
bundles on the brane and the anti-brane are inequivalent. Formal
differences of vector bundles are the subject of K-theory, which is the
appropriate mathematical setting for the constructions described in this
section [ 112 , 99 ] . The mathematical literature on K-theory includes
[ 103 , 104 ] . A reference that is perhaps more easily accessible to
physicists is [ 113 ] .

Slightly generalizing the above constructions, we have the following
relations between the stable and unstable type II D-branes. First,
starting from a D @xmath –D( @xmath ) system (i.e., an unstable
combination of stable constituents) we can construct a stable, BPS D
@xmath -brane by considering a vortex configuration of the complex
tachyon field. Second, an unstable D( @xmath )-brane can be obtained as
a kink configuration of the real part of the complex tachyon of the D
@xmath –D( @xmath ) system. The instability of the resulting brane is
signaled by the presence of a real tachyonic fluctuation. (For the case
@xmath this tachyon can be projected out by going to type I.) Third, a
result we have not discussed yet is that a BPS D @xmath -brane can be
viewed as a kink configuration of the left-over real tachyon on the
unstable D( @xmath )-brane [ 100 ] . The latter mechanism is the subject
of Section 7.2 .

Iterating the first construction in the previous paragraph (or via a
more direct procedure [ 99 ] ), one can construct all stable type IIB
D-branes out of sufficiently many space-time-filling
D9-brane–anti-D9-brane pairs [ 99 ] . As shown above, in this procedure
the origin of the lower D-brane charges is clear from the appearance of
magnetic fluxes in the Wess-Zumino action. This gives a unified
K-theoretic picture of type IIB D-brane charges.

In type IIA, the situation is complicated by the fact that there are no
stable, space-time filling D-branes. However, a K-theoretic construction
of all branes is possible starting from a sufficient number of unstable
type IIA D9-branes [ 100 ] . Of course these objects cannot be obtained
as tachyon configurations on a higher-dimensional system, but they can
be introduced by their boundary states as in [ 109 ] . These unstable
branes are non-BPS and do not carry Ramond-Ramond charges. This raises
the following question: how can BPS branes, which do carry R-R charge,
be obtained as tachyon configurations on non-BPS branes? This question
is addressed in the following section.

### 7.2 Anomalous couplings

This section mainly follows our paper [ 11 ] . In Section 3.4 , we have
seen that type II BPS D-branes couple to Ramond-Ramond gauge fields
through the Wess-Zumino action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath denotes the D @xmath -brane tension, @xmath a formal sum of
R-R potentials, @xmath the gauge field on the brane and @xmath the NS-NS
two-form. The trace is over the Chan-Paton indices. Further, @xmath and
@xmath are the curvatures of the tangent and normal bundles of the
D-brane world-volume, and @xmath denotes the A-roof genus.

In the setup of [ 99 ] , where one starts with an unstable configuration
of supersymmetric branes and anti-branes, the R-R couplings of the BPS
D-branes corresponding to nontrivial tachyon configurations are
inherited from the similar couplings of the parent branes.

In the scenario of [ 100 ] , one starts from non-BPS D-branes, on which
certain vortex configurations of the tachyon field correspond to BPS
D-branes. Before our paper [ 11 ] appeared, it was not clear how the
resulting objects acquire the desired couplings in Eq. ( 7.2.1 ).

In this section, we argue that all type II non-BPS branes couple
universally to Ramond-Ramond fields as given by [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant ⁴ ⁴ 4 This constant will be fixed in the next
paragraph by imposing that the BPS D( @xmath )-brane we find there have
the expected R-R charge. Then this action predicts the R-R charges of
the lower BPS D-branes that can be constructed from the non-BPS D @xmath
-brane. and @xmath is the real tachyon field living on the non-BPS
brane. Like the gauge field strength @xmath , @xmath transforms in the
adjoint representation of the gauge group.

One term of this action (the one describing the coupling of a non-BPS D
@xmath -brane to @xmath ) was discussed in [ 114 , 100 , 101 ] . Below,
we will show how, in nontrivial configurations of the tachyon field,
these non-BPS “Wess-Zumino” couplings induce the appropriate Wess-Zumino
action for the resulting BPS-branes. The cases D @xmath @xmath D( @xmath
) and D @xmath @xmath D( @xmath ) will be treated in detail. It will
turn out, for instance, that the R-R charges of the D8-branes and
D6-branes one constructs from unstable D9-branes [ 100 ] have the
expected ratio. Moreover, we check the presence of these R-R couplings
by performing various disc amplitudes with an open string tachyon
inserted at the boundary [ 11 ] .

Before we proceed, we note that the action Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) is gauge
invariant. For instance, the argument for invariance under R-R gauge
transformations can be copied from Eq. ( 3.4.19 ).

###### Relation to Wess-Zumino action

In [ 100 ] , Horava described how to construct BPS D( @xmath )-branes as
bound states of (sufficiently many) unstable D @xmath -branes. The D(
@xmath )-branes arise as vortex configuration of a tachyon field,
accompanied by non-trivial gauge fields. We show now how the R-R
couplings that we propose in Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) account for the R-R couplings
Eq. ( 7.2.1 ) that the BPS D( @xmath )-branes must possess.

Consider first a single non-BPS D @xmath -brane. There is a real tachyon
field living on its world-volume. The tachyon potential is assumed to be
such that the vacuum manifold consists of the two points @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5
The symbol @xmath should not be confused with the tension of a D0-brane,
which will never explicitly appear in this section. Consider a
non-trivial (anti)-kink configuration @xmath depending on a single
coordinate. The R-R coupling Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) on the D @xmath -brane reads
in this case

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

was suggested in [ 100 ] and shown to be present by a disc computation
(in an alternative formalism) in [ 114 , 101 ] . It involves the
topological density @xmath , which is localized at the core of the kink
and is such that @xmath . In the limit of zero kink size, we would have
@xmath , and the above action would take the form ⁶ ⁶ 6 Actually, trying
to follow the reduction of a D @xmath -brane to a lower-dimensional one,
there is a puzzle concerning the gravitational part @xmath . The
directions along the parent brane transverse to the smaller brane
contribute originally to @xmath . It is not clear to us how they are
reassigned to the normal bundle in the reduced action. In fact, this
problem seems also to be present for the reduction of brane-antibrane
pairs to lower-dimensional BPS branes as in [ 99 ] , where only the
standard WZ actions Eq. ( 7.2.1 ) are involved. of the usual Wess-Zumino
effective action for a BPS D( @xmath )-brane, localized in the @xmath
-direction at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In reality, the D( @xmath )-brane will have a certain thickness in the
direction of the kink.

Note that the constant @xmath can be fixed in terms of @xmath by
equating @xmath with the tension @xmath of a BPS D( @xmath )-brane. This
being done, the remainder of this paragraph provides a non-trivial check
on our couplings in Eq. ( 7.2.2 ).

As a less trivial example, let us start from two coincident unstable D
@xmath -branes. The tachyon field @xmath , transforming in the adjoint
of the @xmath gauge group, can form a non-trivial vortex configuration
in co-dimension three. The tachyon potential is assumed to be such that
the matrices @xmath minimizing the potential have eigenvalues @xmath ,
so that the vacuum manifold is @xmath . The possible stable vortex
configurations @xmath , depending on @xmath coordinates @xmath
transverse to the ( @xmath )-dimensional core of the vortex, are
classified by the non-trivial embeddings of the “sphere at infinity”
@xmath into the vacuum manifold, namely by @xmath .

Apart from the “center of mass” @xmath subgroup, we are in the situation
of the Georgi-Glashow model, where the tachyon field @xmath ( @xmath
being the Pauli matrices) transforms in the adjoint representation of
@xmath and the vacuum manifold is described by @xmath . The vortex
configuration of winding number one, which is the ’t Hooft-Polyakov
monopole, is of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the radial distance in the three transverse directions,
and the prefactor @xmath goes to a constant for @xmath and approaches
@xmath for @xmath .

The finite energy requirement implies that @xmath vanishes sufficiently
fast at infinity, from which it follows that a vortex is accompanied by
a non-trivial gauge field. For the case Eq. ( 7.2.6 ) above, the
non-trivial part of the SU(2) gauge field has the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath approaching a constant for @xmath , while @xmath at
infinity.

Define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because of the finite energy condition, @xmath approaches ’t Hooft’s
U(1) field strength ⁷ ⁷ 7 ’t Hooft’s U(1) field strength @xmath is
defined by [ 29 ]

@xmath (7.2.9)

where @xmath . It has the property that it reduces to

@xmath (7.2.10)

in regions where @xmath . A vortex configuration carries a magnetic
charge

@xmath (7.2.11)

where @xmath denotes the ‘sphere at infinity’ and @xmath is the winding
number of the vortex configuration. Thus, the mininal magnetic charge is
@xmath in our conventions, which is consistent with Eq. ( 2.1.13 ),
Eq. ( 2.1.16 ) and Eq. ( 2.3.6 ). far away from the core of the vortex.
Thus, we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for our vortex configuration Eq. ( 7.2.6 ) of winding number one. In the
approximation that the “magnetic charge” (as measured by the field
@xmath ) is concentrated in one point at the center of the core, we may
write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The WZ action Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) for the D @xmath -brane can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have split the U(2) field-strength into its SU(2) part @xmath
and its U(1) part @xmath . ⁸ ⁸ 8 To avoid confusion about our notation,
we note that the hat has nothing to do with a pullback. Inserting the ’t
Hooft-Polyakov configuration for the tachyon and the SU(2) gauge field,
we see that Eq. ( 7.2.14 ) involves precisely the field @xmath . Using
Eq. ( 7.2.13 ), we get

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ----------
           @xmath            (7.2.15)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ----------

Thus, we have a distribution of D( @xmath )-brane charge localized at
the core of the vortex. In particular, in the zero core size
approximation we are working in we recover the R-R couplings Eq. ( 7.2.2
) of a BPS D( @xmath )-brane that supports the U(1) gauge field @xmath .

We note that Eq. ( 7.2.15 ) and the remark after Eq. ( 7.2.5 ) lead to
the expected ratio @xmath for the R-R charges of D( @xmath )- and D(
@xmath )-branes.

The mechanism we have just described generalizes to the construction of
a BPS D @xmath -brane as a vortex solution of the tachyon field on a
non-BPS D @xmath -brane, described in [ 100 ] . In this case, it is
convenient to start with @xmath unstable D @xmath -branes. The
configuration of vorticity one for the tachyon field, which sits in the
adjoint of U @xmath , is of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the radius in the @xmath transverse dimensions @xmath ,
and the @xmath -matrices in these dimensions are viewed as U( @xmath )
elements. Eq. ( 7.2.16 ) is a direct generalization of the ’t
Hooft-Polyakov case, Eq. ( 7.2.6 ). Again, the finite energy requirement
should imply a non-trivial gauge field configuration, leading to a
non-zero generalized magnetic charge @xmath . In such a background, the
WZ action Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) contains the factor @xmath ; the (generalized)
magnetic charge density @xmath is concentrated at the core of the
vortex, and in the zero-size limit reduces to a delta-function in the
transverse space. Thus, we are left with the WZ action for a D @xmath
-brane.

###### String computation

To compute the disc scattering amplitudes necessary to check Eq. ( 7.2.2
), it is convenient to conformally map the disc to the upper half plane
and use the “doubling trick” as described, for instance, in [ 115 ] (see
also the paragraph on ‘Closed and open strings’ in Section 3.1.1 ). This
trick consists in replacing, e.g., @xmath by @xmath , where @xmath is
diagonal, with entries @xmath in the worldvolume and @xmath in the
transverse directions, and then treating the fields depending on @xmath
as if @xmath were a holomorphic variable living on the lower half plane.
The fermionic @xmath fields are treated in the same way. As to the spin
fields in the R-R sector, for BPS D @xmath -branes in type IIA @xmath is
replaced by @xmath (where the chirality flips because @xmath is even).
For type IIB, @xmath is replaced by @xmath , where now @xmath is odd.
For the non-BPS D @xmath -branes we are studying here, @xmath is odd in
IIA and even in IIB, so that there is a chirality flip in IIB and not in
IIA. The explicit computations below will be done for IIA, but the story
is, of course, completely analogous for IIB.

The first amplitude we are going to compute is the two point function of
one open string tachyon and a R-R potential in the presence of a single
non-BPS D @xmath -brane in IIA (see Fig. 7.5 ). ⁹ ⁹ 9 This has been done
before in a formalism in which non-BPS D-branes are constructed in an
alternative way [ 114 , 101 ] .

This will establish the first term in the expansion of Eq. ( 7.2.2 ). We
take the R-R vertex operator in the ( @xmath ) picture (which exhibits
the R-R field strengths ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In this chapter, we denote the bispinor
containing these field strengths (see Eq. ( 3.1.102 )) by @xmath rather
than @xmath . The choice for @xmath rather than @xmath is to avoid
confusion with the field strength @xmath of the gauge field on the
brane. The @xmath indices of Eq. ( 3.1.102 ) are 32-component spinor
indices. For type IIA, the GSO-projections mentioned below Eq. ( 3.1.102
) impose that the first index on the bispinor @xmath should be chiral
and the second one antichiral. These chiralities are reflected by the
16-component @xmath spinor indices; the presence or absence of a dot
reflects the chirality. rather than the potentials):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the bispinor containing the R-R field strengths and
@xmath the momentum of the R-R potential. We do not keep track of the
overall normalization, since we are not able to directly determine the
constant @xmath in Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) anyway. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 However, we are
interested in the relative normalization of this amplitude with respect
to the ones with photons inserted. The constant @xmath itself was fixed
in the previous paragraph. The tachyon vertex operator is put in the
@xmath picture:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the tachyon polarization and momentum and
@xmath is a point on the real axis. The three insertion points @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath have been fixed by introducing ghost fields. The
contributions of the ghost, superghost and @xmath sectors combine into
@xmath . The contraction of the two spin fields in the fermionic sector
gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath the charge conjugation matrix. Thus, the amplitude becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a global factor. Tracing over the spinor indices, only
the part of @xmath proportional to @xmath contributes, making the
amplitude proportional to @xmath . Upon integration by parts, this
confirms the first term of Eq. ( 7.2.2 ).

There is a kinematical subtlety in this computation. String scattering
amplitudes can only be computed for on-shell external particles. It is
easy to convince oneself that, since the tachyon carries only momentum
along the brane and the momentum along the brane is conserved, the
tachyon and the R-R potential cannot be both on-shell. As a way out, one
could consider branes with Euclidean signature, for which this
kinematical problem does not occur, and then extrapolate the couplings
one finds there to their Minkowski cousins. The situation is analogous
to the one we commented on in footnote 16 on page 16 .

To check the second term of Eq. ( 7.2.2 ), depending linearly on @xmath
, we add to the previous amplitude a vertex operator for a gauge field
(see Fig. 7.6 ).

This vertex operator is in the 0 picture:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where this time we have kept track of all normalization factors. Here,
@xmath is the polarization of the gauge field, @xmath is its momentum
and @xmath is on the real axis. Only the fermionic part of the photon
vertex operator can lead to terms of the type we are looking for (the
photon should provide two gamma-matrices). We compute that part of the
amplitude to lowest order in the photon momentum. This means that we
will put @xmath equal to zero in the bosonic sector, thus keeping only
the explicit @xmath dotted with a @xmath in Eq. ( 7.2.21 ). We follow
the previous computation as closely as possible by fixing again @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , such that only @xmath needs to be integrated over.
In the limit of small photon momentum, the ghost, superghost and @xmath
sector contributions are unchanged (they multiply to @xmath ). The
fermionic correlator is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The resulting integral can be done by a contour integration:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

leading to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for the amplitude. This corresponds indeed to the term in Eq. ( 7.2.2 )
linear in @xmath . Note that the factor @xmath multiplying @xmath in
Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) comes out correctly.

The generalization to multiple (low-momentum) photon insertions is
straightforward. The dependence on the photon insertion points of the
relevant part of the fermionic correlator factorizes, such that each
integration reduces to the one-dimensional integral in Eq. ( 7.2.23 ).
One can also include Chan-Paton factors in the computations, leading to
the trace in Eq. ( 7.2.2 ). Finally, one could check the presence of the
gravitational terms in Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) explicitly. Since all graviton
vertex operators can be inserted in the ( @xmath ) picture, the various
contractions will be identical to the ones used in [ 7 , 12 , 8 ] .

Note that, from a technical point of view, the only role of the tachyon
in the above computations is to provide its superghost part, allowing
one to insert the R-R vertex operator in the @xmath picture, instead of
the ( @xmath ) picture. Thus, the inclusion of the tachyon proves wrong
one’s first impression that non-BPS D-branes cannot couple to the closed
string R-R sector because of the GSO-projection. Apart from this, the
above computations perfectly parallel their counterparts for BPS
D-branes.

We mention some of the related developments in the recent literature.
First, a Wess-Zumino action for brane–anti-brane pairs has been given in
[ 116 ] . Second, it has been checked [ 117 , 118 ] that the Wess-Zumino
action Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) for non-BPS D-branes in type II string theory is
consistent with T-duality, at least if the curvature terms are
neglected. Third, this Wess-Zumino action has been supplemented with a
Born-Infeld action [ 119 , 120 , 117 , 118 ] . Finally, in [ 121 ] , the
non-BPS D-branes in type II string theory have been associated to
non-trivial loops in the configuration space of type II string theory.

To summarize Chapter 7 , we have introduced non-BPS D-branes as kink
solutions of the tachyon field on a coincident D-brane–anti-D-brane
pair. We have indicated how non-BPS D-branes play a role in checking
string dualities and how D-brane charges are related to K-theory. The
main result in this chapter is that non-BPS D-branes in type II string
theory couple to R-R fields via the Wess-Zumino action Eq. ( 7.2.2 ) [
11 ] . This action explains how vortex solutions of the tachyon field on
the non-BPS D-brane, which were conjectured to correspond to BPS
D-branes [ 100 ] , acquire R-R charge. We have checked the action Eq. (
7.2.2 ) by explicit string computations.

## Appendix A Samenvatting

### a.1 Snaartheorie

Een goede fysische theorie verklaart vele experimentele waarnemingen op
een consistente manier vanuit een klein aantal fundamentele principes.

De algemene relativiteitstheorie is hiervan een voorbeeld. Haar principe
is dat gravitatie veroorzaakt wordt door kromming van de ruimte-tijd. Ze
verklaart diverse fenomenen, gaande van de zwaartekracht op de aarde tot
planetenbewegingen en de afbuiging van licht door de zon. Een ander
voorbeeld van een goede fysische theorie is het standaardmodel van de
elementaire-deeltjesfysica. Het fundamentele principe is dat
ijksymmetrieën aan de basis liggen van de elektromagnetische en
kernkrachten. Vele voorspellingen van het standaardmodel zijn bevestigd
in experimenten in deeltjesversnellers, soms met een verbazingwekkende
precisie.

We hebben gezien dat de algemene relativiteitstheorie een goede theorie
is voor de gravitationele interactie, terwijl het standaardmodel een
goede beschrijving geeft van de sterke, zwakke en elektromagnetische
interacties. Krijgen we een goede theorie van de vier fundamentele
wisselwerkingen door de algemene relativiteitstheorie en het
standaardmodel te combineren? Het probleem is dat de algemene
relativiteitstheorie een klassieke theorie is, terwijl het
standaardmodel een kwantumtheorie is. Samen geven ze geen consistente
beschrijving van de natuur. Men zou kunnen proberen de algemene
relativiteitstheorie te kwantiseren, maar alle rechtstreekse pogingen om
dat te doen zijn mislukt.

Nochtans bestaat er een consistente kwantumtheorie die gravitatie
beschrijft. Ze was ‘per ongeluk’ ontdekt op het einde van de jaren
zestig en in het begin van de jaren zeventig, toen mensen een theorie
voor de sterke interacties aan het zoeken waren. Pogingen om bepaalde
experimentele waarnemingen over sterk interagerende deeltjes te
begrijpen leidden tot het idee dat de sterke interacties door een
theorie van snaren zouden kunnen worden beschreven. De populariteit van
dit idee daalde toen bleek dat een andere theorie, kwantumchromodynamica
(‘quantum chromodynamics’, QCD), de sterke interacties goed beschreef.
Dit betekende echter niet het einde van snaartheorie: men had ontdekt
dat snaartheorie onder andere een massaloos spin-2 deeltje beschrijft.
Zo’n deeltje verwachtte men als drager van de gravitationele interactie
in een kwantumtheorie van gravitatie!

Geïnspireerd door het feit dat ze gravitatie bevat, opperde men het idee
dat snaartheorie ¹ ¹ 1 We verwijzen naar Hoofdstuk 3 voor een inleiding
tot snaartheorie. alle interacties zou kunnen verenigen. Inderdaad
ontdekte men dat snaartheorie ook de ijksymmetrieën van het
standaardmodel bevat. Bijgevolg verenigt snaartheorie gravitatie en de
ijksymmetrieën van het standaardmodel op consistente wijze! Consistentie
alleen maakt snaartheorie echter nog geen goede fysische theorie.
Daarvoor is het ook nodig dat de theorie vele experimentele waarnemingen
verklaart uitgaande van een klein aantal fundamentele principes.

Wat de experimentele waarnemingen betreft, de eerste vereiste is dat
snaartheorie de voorspellingen van de algemene relativiteitstheorie en
het standaardmodel reproduceert, tenminste wanneer de omstandigheden
zodanig zijn dat men weet dat deze theorieën een goede beschrijving van
de natuur geven. Snaarfenomenologie is de tak van snaartheorie die zich
bezighoudt met het zoeken naar zo’n snaarmodellen. De huidige situatie
is dat het standaardmodel (nog) niet exact gereproduceerd is, maar dat
er wel ‘semi-realistische’ modellen bestaan die aardig in de buurt
komen.

Wat de fundamentele principes van snaartheorie betreft, een aantal
hiervan moet vermoedelijk nog ontdekt worden. Nochtans zijn er
verschillende aanwijzingen over de structuur van de theorie.

Ten eerste is het duidelijk dat de structuur van perturbatieve
snaartheorie veel beperkender is dan die van kwantumveldentheorie:
terwijl men in kwantumveldentheorie veel verschillende interacties kan
bedenken, laat perturbatieve snaartheorie enkel het splitsen en
samenkomen van snaren toe. Een volledige, niet-perturbatieve
beschrijving van snaartheorie ontbreekt echter nog. Wat we weten is dat
snaartheorie niet enkel een theorie van snaren is: ze bevat ook
uitgebreide (d.w.z. meerdimensionale) objecten, ‘branen’ genoemd (de
naam is een veralgemening van ‘membranen’). Het is niet duidelijk of de
volledige theorie kan worden geformuleerd als een theorie van snaren.

Ten tweede speelt supersymmetrie, ² ² 2 Supersymmetrie wordt
geïntroduceerd in Sectie 2.2 . een symmetrie tussen bosonen en
fermionen, een belangrijke rol in snaartheorie. Supersymmetrie zou een
van de organiserende principes van snaartheorie kunnen zijn. Dat neemt
niet weg dat er recent pogingen geweest zijn om betekenis te geven aan
niet-supersymmetrische snaartheorieën.

Ten slotte zijn dualiteiten ³ ³ 3 Zie Sectie 2.1 voor een inleiding tot
dualiteiten. prominent aanwezig in de huidige ontwikkelingen in
snaartheorie. Ze bieden de mogelijkheid aspecten van niet-perturbatieve
snaartheorie te exploreren.

Tot nog toe hebben we snaartheorie besproken als mogelijke Theorie Van
Alles. Snaartheorie kan echter ook op een andere manier een omwenteling
teweegbrengen in ons begrip van de natuur: we kunnen snaartheorie
gebruiken als hulpmiddel om iets te leren over kwantumveldentheorie, in
het bijzonder over de ijktheorieën van het standaardmodel. Er is
bijvoorbeeld hoop dat snaartheorie van nut kan zijn om het berucht
sterke-koppelingsprobleem van QCD op te lossen. Hierop gaan we nu iets
dieper in.

Kwantumchromodynamica (QCD) is een theorie van de sterke interacties. Ze
behoort tot het standaardmodel. Bij hoge energie is de theorie zwak
gekoppeld, zodat storingstheorie ons in staat stelt voorspellingen te
doen voor verstrooiingsamplituden bij hoge energie. Die voorspellingen
komen overeen met de experimentele resultaten. Bij lage energie is de
theorie echter sterk gekoppeld, zodat storingstheorie nutteloos is. Het
is niet bekend hoe berekeningen kunnen worden gedaan in dit regime.
Nochtans zijn zulke berekeningen nodig om fenomenen als de opsluiting
van quarks te begrijpen.

Onlangs is het vermoeden gerezen dat de sterke-koppelingslimiet van
bepaalde veldentheorieën kan worden beschreven door een zwak gekoppelde
duale snaartheorie [ 2 ] . Dit verband heet de AdS/CFT correspondentie.
⁴ ⁴ 4 In Sectie 5.1.1 geven we een korte maar ietwat technischer
inleiding tot de AdS/CFT correspondentie. In zijn huidige vorm is het
vermoeden niet echt van toepassing op QCD, maar het idee dat
gerelateerde theorieën door specifieke snaartheorieën kunnen worden
beschreven vertoont intrigerende gelijkenissen met de oorspronkelijke
sterke-interactie motivatie voor snaartheorie!

### a.2 D-branen

#### a.2.1 Algemeenheden

In de meeste recente ontwikkelingen in snaartheorie spelen D-branen ⁵ ⁵
5 We verwijzen naar Sectie 3.4 voor meer details over D-branen. een
cruciale rol. D-branen maakten hun intrede in snaartheorie als
hypervlakken waarop open strings kunnen eindigen. Het is echter
duidelijk geworden dat ze dynamische objecten zijn: ze kunnen bewegen en
hun vorm veranderen. D-branen vormen een bepaalde klasse van de
uitgebreide objecten die we vermeldden in Sectie A.1 , toen we zeiden
dat snaartheorie niet enkel een theorie van snaren is. Wat D-branen
onderscheidt van andere uitgebreide objecten is dat ze, hoewel ze zelf
geen perturbatieve snaartoestanden zijn, een beschrijving hebben in
perturbatieve snaartheorie: de dynamica van een D-braan wordt beschreven
door de open snaren die erop eindigen. Dankzij deze eigenschap zijn
D-branen veel makkelijker te bestuderen dan andere uitgebreide objecten
in snaartheorie. D-branen zijn om de volgende redenen van belang.

Ten eerste duiken ze op in vele modellen van snaarfenomenologie. De
hoofdreden is dat er ijkvelden op hun wereld-volume leven, in het
bijzonder niet-abelse ijkvelden als verscheidene D-branen samenvallen.
Deze ijkvelden kunnen de rol spelen van de ijkvelden van het
standaardmodel. Van bijzonder belang voor fenomenologische doeleinden is
de observatie dat D-branen kunnen zorgen voor het breken van
supersymmetrie. Bijvoorbeeld zijn systemen met D-branen en anti-D-branen
⁶ ⁶ 6 Zie Sectie 7.1.1 voor enkele elementaire beschouwingen over zulke
braan–anti-braan systemen. onlangs gebruikt om semi-realistische
modellen te construeren [ 3 ] . ⁷ ⁷ 7 We verwijzen naar [ 4 ] en
verwijzingen daarin voor een gerelateerde toepassing van D-branen: ze
kunnen aangewend worden om uit snaartheorie niet-perturbatieve
resultaten af te leiden over supersymmetrische veldentheorieën die
eventueel zwak gekoppeld zijn aan gravitatie.

Ten tweede zijn ze nadrukkelijk aanwezig in snaardualiteiten. Vaak ⁸ ⁸ 8
Zie Secties 3.6.2 , 6.5 and 7.1.2 voor voorbeelden. corresponderen
D-branen in de ene perturbatieve beschrijving van snaartheorie met
fundamentele snaren in een duale beschrijving. In die zin zijn D-branen
even fundamenteel als snaren.

Ten derde zijn D-branen gerelateerd met (meerdimensionale) zwarte gaten.
In feite leveren D-branen en sommige zwarte gaten complementaire
beschrijvingen van hetzelfde object. Welke beschrijving aangewezen is,
hangt af van de koppelingsconstante van de snaartheorie. Deze
correspondentie kan aangewend worden om het aantal toestanden te tellen
van supersymmetrische (BPS) ⁹ ⁹ 9 In Sectie 2.2 leggen we uit wat ‘BPS’
betekent. zwarte gaten. Voor zulke zwarte gaten verandert het aantal
toestanden niet wanneer we de koppelingsconstante wijzigen, zodat hun
toestanden evengoed kunnen worden geteld in het regime waar de
beschrijving als D-braan geldig is. Deze procedure heeft geleid tot een
microscopische verklaring voor de entropie van zwarte gaten, tenminste
voor bepaalde supersymmetrische zwarte gaten.

Ten vierde liggen D-branen aan de basis van de AdS/CFT correspondentie,
zoals blijkt uit Secties 5.1.1 and 6.1 .

#### a.2.2 Aspecten bestudeerd in deze thesis

Nu we het belang van D-branen in snaartheorie aangetoond hebben, gaan we
in op de concrete aspecten die in deze thesis bestudeerd worden.

Het grootste deel van de thesis is gewijd aan D-branen. In het bijzonder
zijn we geïnteresseerd in de D-braan effectieve actie. Dat is een
lage-energie effectieve actie voor de massaloze excitaties van het
D-braan, d.w.z. voor de massaloze modes van de open snaren die de
dynamica van het braan beschrijven. Men kan zich voorstellen dat men
alle massieve modes van de open snaren ‘uitgeïntegreerd’ heeft. Het
hoeft geen betoog dat zo’n effectieve, ‘macroscopische’ beschrijving
handiger is voor berekeningen dan de volledige, ‘microscopische’
beschrijving in termen van open snaren.

Onze werkwijze om termen van de D-braan effectieve actie te berekenen
bestaat erin verstrooiingsamplituden van snaren in de aanwezigheid van
een D-braan te berekenen in de ‘microscopische’ snaartheorie. Dan leggen
we op dat, tenminste bij lage energie, die amplituden gereproduceerd
worden in de effectieve beschrijving. Het formalisme dat we gebruiken om
de meeste van die amplituden te berekenen in snaartheorie is het
randtoestand (‘boundary state’) formalisme. In dat formalisme wordt een
D-braan voorgesteld als een bron van gesloten-snaartoestanden.

De termen in de D-braan actie waarin we vooral geïnteresseerd zijn,
worden anomale koppelingen genoemd. Zij maken deel uit van de D-braan
Wess-Zumino actie. Via het ‘anomalie instroom mechanisme’ zorgen ze
ervoor dat de ijk- en gravitationele anomalieën in bepaalde
configuraties van D-branen gecompenseerd worden. Op die manier zijn ze
belangrijk voor de beroemde consistentie van snaartheorie. Onze
belangrijkste bijdrage in dat kader bestaat in het expliciet nagaan van
de aanwezigheid van de anomale koppelingen in de D-braan actie. Als een
bonus vinden we extra termen in de D-braan actie. Deze extra termen zijn
nieuw.

We breiden het anomalie instroom argument en de
verstrooiingsberekeningen uit naar D-branen in de niet-supersymmetrische
type 0 snaartheorieën. We leiden een Wess-Zumino actie af die
opmerkelijk sterk lijkt op die voor D-branen in de supersymmetrische
type II snaartheorieën. Zulke gelijkenissen tussen supersymmetrische en
niet-supersymmetrische situaties in snaartheorie vormen een belangrijk
thema in deze thesis. De type 0 D-branen zijn gebruikt om de AdS/CFT
correspondentie uit te breiden naar niet-supersymmetrische
veldentheorieën. We zetten onze studie van type 0 snaartheorieën verder
door het spectrum af te leiden van NS-vijfbranen, andere uitgebreide
objecten in die theorieën. We combineren onze kennis van D-branen en
NS-vijfbranen om een recent dualiteitsvoorstel te becommentariëren.

Om een niet-supersymmetrische D-braan veldentheorie te bekomen, hoeft
men niet van een niet-supersymmetrische snaartheorie te vertrekken. Men
kan ook niet-supersymmetrische (niet-BPS) configuraties van D-branen
beschouwen in een supersymmetrische snaartheorie. Zulke configuraties
kunnen bijvoorbeeld bestaan uit BPS D-branen en hun anti-branen. Men kan
ook niet-BPS D-branen beschouwen. Dat zijn onstabiele objecten in type
II snaartheorie. Wij bestuderen die niet-BPS D-branen en leiden er een
Wess-Zumino actie voor af. Die actie legt gedeeltelijk uit dat BPS
D-branen overeenkomen met monopool-achtige configuraties in de
wereld-volume theorie van niet-BPS D-branen.

Ten slotte gebruiken we de effectieve actie van BPS D-branen in type II
snaartheorie om D-branen in de achtergrond van andere D-branen te
bestuderen. Zulke configuraties hebben vele toepassingen. Wij
concentreren ons op een toepassing in de AdS/CFT correspondentie,
namelijk het analogon in snaartheorie van een extern baryon in
veldentheorie.

We hebben ervoor gekozen onze aandacht in deze thesis bijna uitsluitend
toe te spitsen op gesloten-snaartheorieën in tien vlakke, niet-compacte
dimensies. Dat houdt in dat we een aantal gerelateerde onderwerpen
waarover we gepubliceerd hebben, niet behandelen. In het bijzonder
besteden we geen aandacht aan speciale Kählermeetkunde [ 6 ] , anomale
koppelingen van oriëntifold-vlakken [ 7 , 8 ] , de studie van D-branen
in D-braan achtergronden via superalgebra’s [ 9 ] ,
niet-supersymmetrische ijktheorieën afkomstig van type 0 orbifolds [ 10
] en het randtoestand formalisme voor orbifolds [ 10 ] . We verwijzen
geïnteresseerde lezers naar onze artikels over die onderwerpen.

Tot besluit, de voornaamste methoden die we gebruiken om D-branen te
bestuderen, zijn het berekenen van verstrooiingsamplituden en het
gebruik van consistentie-argumenten. We berekenen de meeste van die
verstrooiingsamplituden in het randtoestand formalisme. De
consistentie-argumenten houden verband met de compensatie van ijk- en
gravitationele anomalieën via het mechanisme van anomalie instroom. We
zijn geïnteresseerd in niet-supersymmetrische D-braan configuraties. In
het bijzonder proberen we delen van de mooie structuur van
supersymmetrische snaren en D-branen uit te breiden naar
niet-supersymmetrische situaties.

### a.3 Overzicht en samenvatting van de resultaten

In Sectie A.2.2 hebben we een kort overzicht gegeven van de onderwerpen
die in deze thesis aan bod komen. Daarbij hebben we onze motivatie en
methoden benadrukt. In deze sectie schetsen we de structuur van de
thesis en geven we een iets meer gedetailleerde samenvatting van de
resultaten.

De meeste van de resultaten zijn gepubliceerd in de artikels [ 7 , 8 , 9
, 10 , 11 , 15 ] . Het is onze bedoeling ze in deze thesis op een
coherente manier te presenteren en voldoende achtergrondmateriaal te
voorzien om ze toegankelijk(er) te maken voor niet-specialisten. In het
bijzonder denken we aan mensen die vertrouwd zijn met
kwantumveldentheorie maar geen gedetailleerde kennis bezitten van deze
tak van snaartheorie.

Enerzijds introduceren we in Hoofdstuk 2 een aantal sleutelbegrippen in
een niet-snaartheoretische context, in het bijzonder in
kwantumveldentheorie. Die begrippen zijn dualiteit, supersymmetrie en
anomalie instroom. Anderzijds proberen we in Hoofdstuk 3 en Sectie 4.1
genoeg technische informatie over snaren, D-branen en randtoestanden aan
te reiken opdat gemotiveerde lezers in staat zouden zijn de berekeningen
in Hoofdstuk 4 te begrijpen, in het bijzonder die in Sectie 4.3 , die
meer in detail gegeven worden. Hoofstuk 3 is ook een noodzakelijke
voorbereiding voor Hoofdstukken 5 , 6 en 7 . In wat volgt geven we voor
de verschillende hoofdstukken een overzicht en een samenvatting van de
resultaten.

#### a.3.1 Hoofdstuk 2: Enkele sleutelbegrippen

In Hoofdstuk 2 introduceren we drie sleutelbegrippen, meestal in een
veldentheoretische context. In Sectie 2.1 geven we verscheidene
voorbeelden van dualiteiten. We concentreren ons vooral op
elektromagnetische dualiteit, in het bijzonder op de
dualiteitsconjectuur van Montonen en Olive [ 33 ] en enkele raadsels die
daarmee verbonden waren. In Sectie 2.2 tonen we hoe die raadsels op een
natuurlijke wijze opgelost worden in supersymmetrische veldentheorie. We
introduceren de supersymmetrie-algebra en het begrip ‘BPS toestand’. In
Sectie 2.3 presenteren we enkele resultaten uit de literatuur over
anomalieën en anomalie instroom. We concentreren ons op één voorbeeld [
21 , 22 ] , waar men het instroom mechanisme expliciet aan het werk
ziet. Omdat het anomalie instroom mechanisme een cruciaal begrip is in
deze thesis, gaan we er nu kort op in.

Bij anomalie instroom kan men zich het volgende voorstellen [ 21 , 22 ]
. Beschouw een ijkveld dat op een niet-chirale manier aan fermionen
gekoppeld is, laat ons zeggen in een vier-dimensionale ruimte-tijd. Bij
gebrek aan chirale ijk-koppelingen, zal de ijksymmetrie niet-anomaal
zijn. Veronderstel nu dat de fermionen bovendien op een chirale manier
koppelen aan een scalair veld. Voor bepaalde configuraties van het
scalaire veld is het mogelijk dat bepaalde fermion modes effectief op
een lager-dimensionaal ‘defect’ van de ruimte-tijd leven, bijvoorbeeld
op een twee-dimensionaal oppervlak. Als zulke fermion modes chiraal zijn
in twee dimensies, kunnen ze een ijkanomalie veroorzaken in hun
effectieve twee-dimensionale theorie. Dat kan op het eerste gezicht in
tegenspraak lijken met het feit dat we vertrokken waren van een
vierdimensionale theorie zonder chirale ijk-koppelingen.

De oplossing is dat de anomale variatie van de effectieve
twee-dimensionale actie gecompenseerd wordt door een ijkvariatie
veroorzaakt door de overblijvende fermion modes, die in de ‘bulk’ van de
ruimte-tijd leven. Er is dus ‘anomalie instroom’ van de
vier-dimensionale ruimte-tijd naar het twee-dimensionale ‘defect’. In
meer fysische termen kan met het als volgt stellen. Kijkt men enkel naar
de vrijheidgraden die effectief op het ‘defect’ leven, dan lijkt het
alsof er (voor bepaalde achtergrondconfiguraties) ‘uit het niets’ lading
gecreëerd wordt op het defect. Kijkt men echter ook naar de
vrijheidsgraden in de ‘bulk’, dan merkt men dat die lading in
werkelijkheid gewoon vanuit de ‘bulk’ naar het defect stroomt, en dat
lading in de volledige theorie behouden is.

We zien hier dus dat, wanneer men de chirale vrijheidsgraden op het
‘defect’ kent, men bepaalde voorspellingen kan doen over de ‘bulk’
theorie. In het eenvoudige voorbeeld dat we besproken hebben, kan het
lijken dat we hieruit niets leren wat we nog niet wisten. Het instroom
mechanisme is echter een krachtig hulpmiddel in meer ingewikkelde
situaties, zoals die welke we bespreken in Secties 3.5 , 6.3.1 en 6.4.2
.

#### a.3.2 Hoofdstuk 3: Snaren en branen

In Hoofdstuk 3 voeren we supersnaren en D-branen in. We doen een
inspanning om op een coherente manier de begrippen in te voeren die
relevant zijn voor deze thesis, in het bijzonder voor de berekeningen in
Hoofdstuk 4 .

In Sectie 3.1.1 voeren we snaren in vertrekkend van hun wereld-oppervlak
beschrijving. We bestuderen onder andere het verschil tussen open en
gesloten snaren, de verschillende sectoren (bijvoorbeeld R en NS voor
open snaren), de spectra van snaarexcitaties en de GSO-projectie. We
bespreken ook enkele meer technische aspecten, zoals spoken en
BRST-kwantisatie. Deze technische aspecten zijn uiteraard van belang,
maar om het grootste deel van onze expliciete berekeningen te volgen, is
het niet nodig ze te kennen. De lezer kan er dus voor kiezen alles over
spoken en BRST-operatoren over te slaan. In Sectie 3.1.2 bespreken we de
lage-energie effectieve beschrijving van snaartheorie als een
supergravitatietheorie in een tien-dimensionale ruimte-tijd. De
wisselwerking tussen de wereld-oppervlak- en ruimte-tijd-beschrijvingen
van snaartheorie is een van de hoofdthema’s in deze thesis. Sectie 3.2
gaat over supersnaren in achtergrondvelden.

In Sectie 3.3 verzamelen we een aantal hulpmiddelen om
verstrooiingsamplituden te berekenen in snaartheorie. We introduceren
het belangrijke begrip ‘vertex-operator’. Een groot deel van deze sectie
is gewijd an technische aspecten, zoals (super)spoken, beelden
(‘pictures’) en BRST-invariantie. Deze aspecten kunnen weer overgeslagen
worden door lezers die er niet bijzonder in geïnteresseerd zijn. Ze zijn
vooral nodig om onze latere keuzes van vertex-operatoren te
rechtvaardigen. In Sectie 3.3.6 geven we een aantal van die
vertex-operatoren.

In Sectie 3.4 introduceren we D-branen en hun effectieve actie. In het
bijzonder tonen we een aantal anomale termen van de D-braan Wess-Zumino
actie

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

in detail. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We verwijzen naar Sectie 3.4 voor de notatie. De
inhoud van deze sectie is van cruciaal belang om de thesis te begrijpen.
Sectie 3.5 gaat over het anomalie instroom argument in de context van
D-branen en NS-vijfbranen. We geven weinig technische details, maar de
ideeën nemen een centrale plaats in in de thesis. Bijvoorbeeld zullen we
anomalie instroom argumenten gebruiken in Secties 6.3.1 en 6.4.2 . In
Sectie 3.6 bestuderen we drie dualiteiten in snaartheorie. De discussie
van type IIB S-dualiteit is nuttig als voorbereiding op Sectie 6.5 ,
waar we een veralgemening ervan kritisch bestuderen.

#### a.3.3 Hoofdstuk 4: Anomale koppelingen uit snaarberekeningen

In dit hoofdstuk gaan we de aanwezigheid na van sommige van de anomale
D-braan koppelingen in ( 3.4.9 ). Dat doen we door
verstrooiingsamplituden van gesloten-snaartoestanden in de aanwezigheid
van een D-braan expliciet te berekenen in snaartheorie. Daartoe
gebruiken we het randtoestand formalisme. In Sectie 4.1 voeren we de
randtoestand in en geven we een verzameling preciese regels over hoe hij
moet worden gebruikt in verstrooiingsamplituden met een sfeer als
wereld-oppervlak. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 We doen hier echter geen poging deze regels
echt af te leiden. Deze sectie bevat niet veel origineel werk, al is,
voor zover wij weten, onze verzameling regels niet in de literatuur te
vinden.

In Sectie 4.2 geven we een overzicht van de tests waaraan de Wess-Zumino
actie ( 3.4.9 ) onderworpen is. Het blijkt dat er onrechtstreekse
argumenten zijn voor de aanwezigheid van alle termen in ( 3.4.9 ), maar
dat voor de termen met NS-NS velden alle rechtstreekse tests ontbraken
tot ons artikel [ 7 ] verscheen. De indirecte argumenten gebruiken
expliciet de consistentie van snaartheorie, in het bijzonder de
afwezigheid van ijk- en gravitationele anomalieën. Directe tests van (
3.4.9 ) gaan dus na of snaartheorie met D-branen inderdaad een
consistente theorie is.

In Sectie 4.3 testen we de aanwezigheid van de term

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

in de D-braan Wess-Zumino actie. Dankzij het voorbereidende werk in
Hoofdstuk 3 en Sectie 4.1 kunnen we de berekeningen in detail tonen. We
vinden de gezochte term inderdaad. Sectie 4.3 is een uitgebreide versie
van een hoofdstuk van ons artikel [ 7 ] .

In Sectie 4.4 bevestigen we de aanwezigheid (met de juiste coëfficiënt)
van de termen

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

waarin viervormen geconstrueerd uit krommings-tweevormen een rol spelen.
Deze berekeningen werden eerst uitgevoerd in onze artikels [ 7 , 8 ] .

In Sectie 4.5 , die gebaseerd is op ons artikel [ 8 ] , beschouwen we de
termen

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

Hierin staat een achtvorm opgebouwd uit krommings-tweevormen. Gebruik
makend van de resultaten van [ 12 ] , kunnen we de aanwezigheid van al
deze termen bevestigen, inclusief de coëfficiënten. Bovendien vinden we,
als bonus, extra D-braan koppelingen [ 8 ] . Die extra koppelingen, die
nieuw zijn, zijn niet-anomaal, wat meteen verklaart waarom ze niet
eerder gevonden waren door anomalie instroom argumenten.

#### a.3.4 Hoofdstuk 5: Baryon vertex in AdS/CFT

In dit hoofdstuk bespreken we een toepassing van de effectieve D-braan
actie: we tonen hoe ze gebruikt kan worden om snaren eindigend op
D-branen in D-braan achtergronden te bestuderen. We beschouwen onder
andere een D5-braan gewikkeld rond de vijf-sfeer @xmath van een @xmath
ruimte. @xmath is de structuur van de ruimte-tijd dichtbij de horizon
van D3-branen. We zijn dus een D5-braan in de ‘near-horizon’ meetkunde
van D3-branen aan het bestuderen. Deze configuratie speelt een rol in de
AdS/CFT correspondentie [ 2 ] : een D5-braan gewikkeld rond @xmath is
het analogon in snaartheorie van een baryon in de corresponderende
veldentheorie [ 71 ] .

In Sectie 5.1 geven we een korte inleiding tot de AdS/CFT
correspondentie, de baryon vertex en de methode die we gebruiken om die
baryon vertex te bestuderen: de BPS methode. Het vervolg van Hoofdstuk 5
is gebaseerd op ons artikel [ 9 ] . In Sectie 5.2 leggen we de BPS
methode uit in een iets eenvoudigere situatie dan die welke ons zal
interesseren. In Sectie 5.3 bestuderen we de baryon vertex configuratie
en een gerelateerde configuratie in ons formalisme. We reproduceren de
BPS-vergelijking ( 5.3.27 ) van [ 13 , 14 ] . Een mooi aspect van onze
methode is dat we resultaten kunnen afleiden die nauw verbonden zijn met
supersymmetrie, en dit zonder expliciet fermionen te beschouwen. ¹² ¹²
12 Dit is ook het geval voor de BPS-ongelijkheid voor magnetische
monopolen, zie Secties 2.1 en 2.2 . Een ander voordeel van onze methode
is dat ze de mogelijkheid opent de BPS-vergelijking te herinterpreteren
in termen van superalgebra’s [ 9 ] . In deze thesis bespreken we die
herinterpretatie echter niet.

#### a.3.5 Hoofdstuk 6: Type 0 snaartheorie

Dit hoofdstuk is gewijd aan type 0 snaartheorie. Vergeleken met type II
snaren hebben type 0 snaren een tachyon, dubbel zoveel R-R velden en
geen ruimte-tijd fermionen in hun perturbatieve spectrum. De
tachyonische fluctuatie signaleert dat we rond een onstabiel ‘vacuum’
aan het expanderen zijn. Wegens de problemen die de aanwezigheid van
zo’n tachyonische mode met zich meebrengt, werden type 0 snaartheorieën
pas anderhalf jaar geleden populair. Toen werd opgemerkt [ 83 , 84 ] dat
het tachyon niet noodzakelijk een probleem hoeft te zijn wanneer men,
zoals in de AdS/CFT correspondentie, de effectieve veldentheorieën op
het wereld-volume van D-branen wil bestuderen.

In Sectie 6.1 bespreken we deze motivatie om type 0 snaartheorie te
bestuderen. Type 0 snaren worden geïntroduceerd in Sectie 6.2 . In
Sectie 6.3 voeren we type 0 D-branen in. Zoals kon worden verwacht op
basis van het verdubbelde het R-R spectrum van type 0 snaren ten
opzichte van type II snaren, zijn er ook tweemaal zoveel verschillende
D-branen in type 0. Zoals in ons artikel [ 10 ] leiden we de Wess-Zumino
actie ( 6.3.6 ) af voor type 0 D-branen:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

De @xmath geeft het verschil aan tussen ‘elektrische’ and ‘magnetische’
branen. Om deze actie af te leiden, maken we gebruik van een anomalie
instroom argument. De aanwezigheid van de verschillende termen kan ook
rechtstreeks getest worden zoals we deden voor type II D-branen.

We merken op dat niet alleen de Wess-Zumino actie voor type 0 D-branen
zelf, maar ook de argumenten waarmee ze afgeleid en getest werd, zeer
sterk lijken op wat we kennen van de supersymmetrische type II D-branen.
Hoewel van (ruimte-tijd) supersymmetrie geen sprake is voor type 0
D-branen, lijken ze in sommige opzichten dus sterk op supersymmetrische
type II D-branen.

Sectie 6.4 is gebaseerd op ons artikel [ 15 ] , waar we NS-vijfbranen in
type 0 snaartheorieën bestuderen. We leiden hun massaloze spectra af en
vinden dat die spectra niet-chiraal en puur bosonisch zijn voor zowel
type 0A als type 0B. We stellen een speculatieve interpretatie van de
type 0 NS-vijfbraan spectra voor in termen van ‘type 0 kleine snaren’.

In Sectie 6.4.2 hebben we gezien dat type IIA NS-vijfbranen een chiraal
spectrum hebben. Dit chiraal spectrum geeft aanleiding tot een
gravitationele anomalie, die gecompenseerd wordt door anomalie instroom
van de ‘bulk’ van de ruimte-tijd naar het vijfbraan. We berekenen dat
voor zowel type 0A als type 0B de analoge ‘bulk’ term afwezig is. Er is
dus geen instroom van de bulk naar de vijfbranen, wat consistent is met
onze bevinding dat die vijfbranen een niet-chiraal spectrum hebben en
dus geen gravitationele anomalie [ 15 ] .

In [ 85 ] zijn een aantal dualiteiten van type 0 snaartheorieën
voorgesteld. Een ervan is S-dualiteit van type 0B snaartheorie. In
Sectie 6.5 combineren we onze studies van type 0 D-branen en
NS-vijfbranen om enkele vragen op te werpen over type 0B S-dualiteit.

#### a.3.6 Hoofdstuk 7: Niet-BPS branen

In dit hoofdstuk bestuderen we niet-BPS D-branen. Dat zijn objecten
waarop open snaren kunnen eindigen, maar die geen supersymmetrie
bewaren. In sommige snaartheorieën kunnen zulke objecten stabiel zijn,
maar in tien-dimensionale type II snaartheorie zijn ze het niet. In
Sectie 7.1 geven we aan hoe werk van Sen het onderzoek naar niet-BPS
D-branen op gang bracht. Het belangrijkste resultaat van Hoofdstuk 7
staat in Sectie 7.2 , die gebaseerd is op ons artikel [ 11 ] . Daar
stellen we voor de onstabiele niet-BPS D-branen van type II snaartheorie
de Wess-Zumino actie ( 7.2.2 ) voor [ 11 ] :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

waar @xmath het tachyonveld is dat de instabiliteit van het niet-BPS
D-braan signaleert. Enerzijds argumenteren we [ 11 ] dat die actie
consistent is met de interpretatie [ 100 ] van BPS D-branen als
topologisch niet-triviale tachyon-configuraties op een niet-BPS D-braan.
Anderzijds testen we de aanwezigheid van de verschillende termen door
expliciete berekeningen in snaartheorie [ 11 ] .

#### a.3.7 Besluit

De meest opvallende resultaten in deze thesis zijn waarschijnlijk

-   de bevestiging van de aanwezigheid van verschillende anomale termen
    in de D-braan Wess-Zumino actie door expliciete berekeningen in
    snaartheorie (Hoofdstuk 4 ),

-   het vinden van nieuwe, niet-anomale termen in de D-braan Wess-Zumino
    actie (Sectie 4.5 ),

-   het uitbreiden van de BPS-methode naar D-branen in D-braan
    achtergronden (Hoofdstuk 5 ),

-   de Wess-Zumino actie ( 6.3.6 ) voor type 0 D-branen (Sectie 6.3.1 ),

-   de type 0 NS-vijfbraan spectra (Sectie 6.4 )

-   en de Wess-Zumino actie ( 7.2.2 ) voor niet-BPS D-branen in type II
    snaartheorie (Hoofdstuk 7 ).