extension of the Poisson bracket (resp. Lie bracket) to @xmath (cf.,
e.g., [ 25 ] , [ 26 ] ).

A Poisson structure @xmath is more general than a symplectic one since
@xmath need not be nondegenerate. Locally any Poisson structure @xmath
is characterized only by @xmath , the dimension of the underlying
manifold @xmath , as well as the (local) dimension @xmath of the kernel
of @xmath . An exception to this occurs for ’singular points’ in @xmath
which are not part of any neighborhood with constant @xmath .

Let us expand on this: The insertion of any one-form @xmath not in the
kernel of @xmath provides a vector field; the latter is called (locally)
Hamiltonian, if (locally) @xmath for some function @xmath . As a
consequence of the Jacobi identity ( 2.3 ), the set of locally
Hamiltonian vector fields is in involution. Thus, according to the
Frobenius theorem, locally they generate an integral surface @xmath
through any point @xmath and it is always possible to introduce local
coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath can be
described by @xmath . @xmath span the @xmath -dimensional kernel of
@xmath then and the restriction of @xmath onto @xmath , @xmath , is
nondegenrate. Since the restriction of a Poisson bracket to functions on
a submanifold yields again a Poisson bracket, the inverse of @xmath is a
symplectic (i.e. closed and nondegenrate) two-form @xmath . By means of
an appropriate change of variables @xmath , it is now always possible to
locally bring @xmath into Darboux form (cf., e.g., [ 27 , 28 ] )
simultanously on any of the symplectic leaves @xmath .

In the generic case @xmath spans the kernel of @xmath in a neighborhood
of @xmath so that locally the Poisson tensor takes the form: @xmath .
(Of course @xmath is an even integer as @xmath .) In the following we
shall call any coordinate system in which @xmath takes this simple form
a Casimir-Darboux coordinate system @xmath . The case of a singular
point is included [ 29 ] , [ 25 ] , if one adds to the previous
expression for @xmath the term @xmath , where @xmath depends only on the
coordinates @xmath ; @xmath is a Poisson structure by itself and
vanishes at the considered point @xmath .

Vice versa, it is obvious that any choice of a (generalized) foliation
of a manifold @xmath into symplectic leaves, such that the symplectic
two-form @xmath on each of them can be extended into a smooth two-form
@xmath on @xmath , defines a Poisson structure @xmath on @xmath .

If there is an additional structure defined on @xmath , giving rise to a
referred coordinate system, Poisson strucures identified in the above
considerations may need to be distinguished. For instance the manifold
@xmath could be a linear space such that only linear transformations on
@xmath are admissible. We then find that, the choice of a Poisson
structure @xmath linear in these coordinates, @xmath , is equivalent to
the specification of a Lie algebra (since ( 2.3 ) reduces to the Jacobi
identity for the coefficients @xmath ), whereas a polynomial @xmath
yields a @xmath -algebra. Another instance where some coordinates are
distinguished on @xmath is the case where @xmath is some Lie group
@xmath . A Poisson structure satisfying some specific compatibility
condition with respect to the group multiplication on @xmath is called a
Lie Poisson structure, the current interest in which stems from the fact
that it provides the classical limit of a quantum group [ 30 ] . In the
context of the gravity models considered in chapter 3 @xmath will play
the role of a target space (cf. also the Introduction). In this case the
additional input to the otherwise @xmath -diffeomorphism invariant
theory will stem from the interpretation of specific coordiantes as
gravity variables; e.g. within the Katanaev-Volovich model ( 1.4 ) the
coordinate @xmath will play the role of the curvature scalar on the
underlying world-sheet or space-time manifold @xmath , as an indirect
consequence of the identification ( 1.7 ).

To obtain the most general solution to ( 2.3 ) in terms of explicit
functions on @xmath , we only need to apply a general diffeomorphism
@xmath to the ’Casimir-Darboux form’ of the Poisson structure obtained
above: ¹ ¹ 1 Let us here only be interested in the generic local shape
of @xmath , i.e. in @xmath in the vicinity of nonsingular points.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Any choice of the functions @xmath will lead to a Poisson tensor @xmath
. Note that one traded in the complexity of finding all solutions to the
Jacobi identity ( 2.3 ) in favour to the existence of integral surfaces
of Hamiltonian vector fields as well as the closure of the forms @xmath
on these surfaces, incorporated in ( 2.4 ) through the existence of
Casimir-Darboux coordinates @xmath .

The first @xmath functions @xmath in ( 2.4 ) are a (locally) complete
set of independent Casimir functions of @xmath , i.e. of those functions
which have vanishing Poisson bracket with any other function on @xmath ,
or, equivalently, which are invariant under the flow of any Hamiltonian
vector field @xmath .

Not any choice of the remaining @xmath functions leads to different
functions @xmath . To not end up with an overcomplete parametrization of
@xmath , we have to factor out the canonical transformations on the
symplectic leaves @xmath . This can be most easily done by requiring
that one of the functions @xmath shall be the identity map. The
attainability of this gauge, e.g. in the form @xmath , can be seen by
performing the diffeomorphism leading to ( 2.4 ) within two steps: Let
the original coordinates in which @xmath has Casimir-Darboux form be
@xmath . Firstly we perform a canonical transformation such that the
@xmath -th new coordinate @xmath becomes an arbitrarily prescribed
function of the old coordinates @xmath ; this is always possible as is
seen by inspection of the (infinitesimal) action of a Hamiltonian vector
field on a coordinate function, given that @xmath is in Casimir-Darboux
form. After this we perform a second diffeomorphism @xmath which is the
identity map in the last component ( @xmath ). Both steps together
clearly provide a completely general coordinate transformation @xmath .
However, the first of them does not change the form of @xmath .

Equation ( 2.4 ) is a general local solution, but has the disadvantage
that it involves the inverse of matrices. For practical purposes its
applicability might therefore be restricted to lower dimensions. In the
case that @xmath has at most rank two, there is an alternative form for
@xmath which avoids taking the inverse [ 31 ] . To derive it, let us
first rewrite the expression for the corresponding Poisson brackets in
its Casimir-Darboux form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under a diffeomorphism the volume element @xmath changes only by a
multiplicative function so that after a general coordinate
transformation we find:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions, the latter @xmath ones
being obviously the Casimir functions.

There still is a further reason for the interest in explicit formulas
such as ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.5 ). Although, if no coordinate system is
distinguished in @xmath , all Poisson tensors obtained from the formulas
correspond to the same Poisson structure locally, they can be different
from a global point of view. This happens precisely, when the foliations
of @xmath into symplectic leaves are topologically different. The
symplectic leaves are (at generic points) the level surfaces of the
Casimir functions. So, by approproiately choosing the Casimir functions
within ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.5 ), one can systematically construct Poisson
structures, not related to each other by a ’Poisson diffeomorphism’ [ 25
] .

Let us, as an application of the above formulas, find the most general
Poisson structure in a three-dimensional space @xmath which is rotation
invariant with respect to the @xmath -axis. From ( 2.5 ) we learn

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the alternating symbol. The latter is already invariant
under rotations (connected to the identity). Now, @xmath needs to be
@xmath -invariant, since its level surfaces are the integral surfaces of
@xmath . Thus also @xmath has to be invariant. So the most general
@xmath which is invariant under @xmath resp. @xmath transformations in
any ( @xmath const)–plane @xmath is provided by Eq. ( 2.6 ), in which
the free functions @xmath and @xmath depend only on @xmath and @xmath .

We noted already that for a linear @xmath , @xmath , the coefficients
@xmath are structure constants of some Lie algebra @xmath . Obviously in
this case the vector fields @xmath generate (co)adjoint transformations
on the space @xmath . The @xmath form an overcomplete basis in @xmath
and the symplectic leaves coincide with the coadjoint orbits in @xmath .
The corresponding symplectic form, introduced and studied by Kirillov [
32 ] , Kostant and Souriau [ 33 ] , is determined through

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and plays some role in the representation theory of Lie groups [ 34 ] .

Before closing this section, let us consider the case that one wants to
quantize some symplectic manifold @xmath , not necessarily diffeomorphic
to @xmath ; it could be any symplectic leaf of a given Poisson structure
@xmath in @xmath . Within the framework of geometric quantization [ 28 ]
the wave functions are sections in a Hermitian line bundle over @xmath
with curvature @xmath . Such a line bundle exists, iff @xmath is
’integral’, i.e. iff

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any two-surface @xmath . This is a consequence of the fact that in a
line bundle the parallel transport with respect to @xmath around a
closed curve @xmath , @xmath , where (locally) @xmath , can be
equivalently expressed as @xmath , if @xmath . Different choices of
@xmath then yield the necessity of ( 2.8 ). Since @xmath is closed, this
condition is empty, if the second fundamental group of @xmath , @xmath ,
is trivial. If @xmath is trivial, furthermore, the line bundle is
unique; otherwise there arises some arbitrariness in the quantization,
which can be parametrized by the irreducible representations of this
@xmath [ 28 ] , [ 35 ] .

As an example let us regard the coadjoint orbits @xmath of @xmath . The
coadjoint transformations are rotations about the origin and thus the
symplectic leaves @xmath are two-spheres characterized by their radius
@xmath . Only for @xmath the symplectic leaf shrinks to a point. To
evaluate ( 2.8 ) we first have to determine @xmath . This can be done
most easily by noting that @xmath has to be rotation invariant (as
rotations are generated by Hamiltonian vector-fields) and that it has to
be linear in @xmath , cf. Eq. ( 2.7 ). Thus one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the standard spherical
coordinates. @xmath and @xmath are seen to be possible Darboux
coordinates for @xmath . Here @xmath can be rewritten as @xmath , but,
although suggestive, such an explicit formula for @xmath in terms of
structure constants does not exist for general coadjoint orbits.
Combining ( 2.8 ) with ( 2.9 ) we find that only the spheres of radius
@xmath , @xmath are quantizable symplectic manifolds.

For @xmath the space of sections in the line bundle over @xmath is
infinite dimensional; it is the result of prequantization. The final
quantum theory on a (quantizable) symplectic leaf @xmath is obtained
after choosing a polarization, which is implemented as a horizontality
condition on the sections; for a holomorphic polarization this reads
@xmath . The dimension of the resulting Hilbert space is @xmath ; it is
an irreducible representation of @xmath for spin @xmath .

Note that if instead of geometric quantization we applied a rather
algebraic approach to quantize the Poisson bracket relations @xmath ,
ignoring for a moment the constraint @xmath , we get the quantization
condition @xmath instead. This difference is at the heart of the ongoing
discussions on the different spectra obtained when quantizing @xmath
Yang-Mills theory [ 36 ] .

The quantization condition ( 2.8 ) can be also obtained from a path
integral point of view [ 37 ] . The action for the above @xmath
–invariant point particle systems is of a Wess-Zumino type, which we
want to write as @xmath where @xmath denotes the canonical potential of
the Kirillov form @xmath . However, there is no globally well-defined
@xmath as @xmath (for @xmath ). Being interested in the path integral,
we thus content ourselves with an action @xmath that is well-defined up
to the addition of a multiple of @xmath . The most general @xmath on
@xmath without poles has the form @xmath . The above condition on the
action then leads to @xmath (point particle trajectories close to the
poles) which again yields @xmath . Let me remark here in view of ( 1.9 )
that as an action for a two-dimensional field theory @xmath obviously is
well-defined globally also for @xmath .
