## 2.2 A General Action in Two Dimensions

As will be shown in this section, any Poisson structure @xmath on a
manifold @xmath induces canonically a topological field theory on a
given two-dimensional world sheet manifold @xmath . By means of an
additional volume form @xmath on @xmath and a Casimir function @xmath of
@xmath one can add to this, furthermore, a nontrivial Hamiltonian.

On the bundle @xmath there is a canonical form @xmath . In local
coordinates @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath , respectively, it
can be written as @xmath . Let @xmath be the map from the world sheet
manifold @xmath to @xmath ; if @xmath denotes the projection in the
bundle @xmath on @xmath , then let @xmath be the identity map. The
topological part of the action we postulate has the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the insertion and @xmath is the pull back of the
map @xmath . @xmath is manifestly invariant under separate
diffeomorphisms on @xmath and @xmath . Note, however, that it is not
invariant under (arbitrary) diffeomorphisms on @xmath due to the special
form of the fiber @xmath . Since @xmath is ( @xmath -)diffeomorphism
invariant without the use of a (background) metric on @xmath , and since
this feature holds also on the quantum level, it is ’topological’ [ 13 ]
; below it will be found to be of the Schwarz type.

With the additional input of a (’background’) volume form @xmath and the
choice of a Casimir function @xmath , we can extend this action with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In coordinates the action @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the alternating symbol and we defined @xmath
according to @xmath . Displaying only the @xmath coordinates, @xmath
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we suppressed writing the pull-back.

Let us now turn to the question of local symmetries starting with the
simplest situation @xmath . In this case @xmath and the most general
symmetry of the action up to a total divergence, i.e. up to a local
exact term, is provided by @xmath .

The other extreme case is that @xmath is invertible. In this case we
first try to lift the diffeomorphisms in the @xmath space. We noted
already that @xmath is @xmath -diffeomorphism invariant. However, when
regarding symmetries of the action as functional of the fields @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath (and also @xmath ) are not allowed to transform.
Thus we are left only with the symplectomorphisms of @xmath , i.e. those
transformations of @xmath whose Lie derivative on @xmath vanishes. ² ² 2
All other @xmath -diffeomorphisms, where also @xmath and @xmath are
transformed appropriately, correspond to a different parametrization of
one and the same action; after such a change of coordinates it is a
different functional of, e.g., @xmath . The latter are transformations
generated by (locally) Hamiltonian vector fields and they clearly leave
@xmath (by appropriate transformations of its components) as well as
@xmath invariant. Since an @xmath -dependent diffeomorphism in @xmath
does not respect the one-one splitting of the form @xmath , these
transformations do not directly transfer to symmetries of @xmath .
Rather, under a transformation generated by @xmath the form @xmath on
@xmath picks up also a @xmath part @xmath . However, shifting @xmath
further by @xmath the action ( 2.10 ) becomes obviously invariant up to
a total divergence (note that the insertion of @xmath into @xmath is
zero).

Choosing Casimir-Darboux coordinates as a (local) parametrization of
@xmath , one immediately finds the general situation to be a direct
superposition of the two cases studied above. Thus, in a somewhat formal
manner, one can write for the symmetries of ( 2.10 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . (We used the suffix @xmath for the Poisson brackets on
this space, so as to not get confused with the Poisson brackets of the
field theory in its Hamiltonian formulation introduced below). Under
these transformations the action changes by @xmath . The appearance of
the two-zero form on the righthand side of the second equation ( 2.14 )
is somewhat ugly. In the useful halfway component notation of ( 2.13 )
the symmetries ( 2.14 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Variation of ( 2.13 ) leads to the field equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A simple comparison of these first order differential equations with the
symmetries above establishes that there will be no local degrees of
freedom. (Eq. ( 2.15 ) containes @xmath independent local symmetries, if
@xmath denotes the number of Casimirs, and ( 2.16 ) containes @xmath
further ones). Thus there will be only a finite number of degrees of
freedom and these will be of some global nature.

From these considerations we also see that there are no further local
symmetries of our action. In particular, the diffeomorphism invariance
of ( 2.13 ) for @xmath has to be incorporated already within the
symmetries ( 2.14 ). Indeed, for any given vector field @xmath
generating diffeomorphisms on the world sheet manifold @xmath , the
(field dependent) choice @xmath in ( 2.15 , 2.16 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the Lie derivative along @xmath . Obviously the
additional terms on the righthand side of ( 2.19 ) vanish for any
solution to the field equations ( 2.17 , 2.18 ) exactly for @xmath .

The action @xmath is in first order form, i.e. it is already a
Hamiltonian action. A Hamiltonian formulation for infinite dimensional
systems requires appropriate boundary conditions. Therefore we choose
@xmath to be of the form @xmath , at least locally. More general
topologies of @xmath might then be obtained from an appropriate sewing
procedure (cf. [ 38 ] ). We parametrize @xmath by a @xmath periodic
coordinate @xmath and the ’evolution’ parameter @xmath . Note that this
does in no way restrict @xmath to be ’timelike’ (with respect to
whatsoever a metric). As seen most directly from ( 2.12 ), @xmath is the
conjugate variable to @xmath , i.e., with the convention @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The weak equality sign ’ @xmath ’ indicates that the @xmath are zero
only on-shell [ 39 ] , as enforced by means of the Lagrange multipliers
@xmath , which we may regard as arbitrary external functions on the
phase space. By means of the Poisson brackets ( 2.20 ) the constraints (
2.22 ) can be easily seen to generate the (one-components) of the
symmetry transformations ( 2.15 , 2.16 ). They are first class
constraints, i.e. they close on-shell with respect to the Poisson
bracket ( 2.20 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we suppressed writing arguments. Let me remark that in order to
have the first class property for ( 2.22 ) the Jacobi identity for
@xmath , Eq. ( 2.3 ), is not only sufficient but also necessary (whereas
for @xmath , the requirement to have the Hamiltonian vector fields of
@xmath on @xmath to be in involution does not lead to ( 2.3 )). It is
now straightforward to check that the @xmath -evolution generated by
@xmath reproduces ( 2.18 ) as well as the zero components of ( 2.17 )
(whereas the one-components of Eq. ( 2.17 ) are identical to ( 2.22 )).
Most of the gauge freedom has been separated to the freedom in choosing
@xmath (axial gauge) and the constraints @xmath generate the
corresponding residual gauge freedom.

There is also another way to interpret the symmetries generated by the
first class constraints: Allowing for @xmath -dependent coefficients,
the @xmath can generate all symmetries ( 2.15 , 2.16 ) for @xmath and
@xmath ; the transformation of the Lagrange multiplier fields @xmath can
then be determined — in a closed form for a general constraint algebra —
by requiring that the Hamiltonian action shall be invariant up to a
total derivative [ 26 ] . The net result then coincides with ( 2.15 ,
2.16 ).

Let us briefly discuss the BRS formulation of the model ( 2.10 ). The
main idea of the BRS technique is to enlarge the phase space by
introduction of (in our case) fermionic degrees of freedom (’ghosts’),
destroying the local symmetry of the action, or rather turning it into a
global one generated by the nilpotent BRS charge @xmath . The ’physical’
content of the theory, i.e. the reduced phase space, is reobtained, when
one passes to the cohomology of @xmath . There are some advantages of
the Hamiltonian BRS formulation against the Lagrangian one: the BRS
@xmath does not depend on the chosen gauge, the BRS transformations are
canonical transformations in the enlarged phase space, and there is the
canonical symplectic measure for the definition of the path integral.
Note that also covariant gauge conditions may be introduced in the
Hamiltonian formalism; one only has to trivially enlarge the phase space
by including the Lagrange multiplier fields @xmath together with momenta
for them which are constrained to zero [ 26 ] .

In our case the BRS charge is extremely simple. Despite the appearance
of structure functions in the constraint algebra ( 2.23 ), it still has
the minimal form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are canonically conjugate fermionic ghost variables
associated with @xmath . It is straightforward to verify @xmath as a
consequence of ( 2.3 ). Note that, depending on the chosen gauge fermion
@xmath , there still may appear quartic ghost vertex contribution in the
quantum action; as, e.g., it may happen in the multiplier gauge @xmath ,
if the gauge conditions @xmath do not commute with @xmath .

It would be desirable to extend the formulation of ( 2.10 ) so as to
explicitely include the case of nontrivial fiber bundels over @xmath .
@xmath can then be a one-one form only locally, i.e. only on some @xmath
, @xmath , because one should allow for a nontrivial fibration of @xmath
over @xmath . We do not have a satisfactory answer for this problem yet.
Probably there should be some superior formulation of the model, maybe
including further fields which can be gauged out only locally, or, as in
the case of the WZW-theory, having some three-dimensional closed term in
its action. Then this other action should be strictly invariant under
the symmetry transformations and also the transformation ( 2.14 ) for
@xmath should be replaced by something more perspicuous.

Some remarks might be in place here:

Firstly, the field equations ( 2.17 , 2.18 ) are (strictly) covariant
under the transformations ( 2.15 , 2.16 ) as they stem from a local
variation of the action. It is no problem to explicitely construct
nontrivial bundles over @xmath by means of their solutions, at least if
one can integrate the infinitesimal form of the symmmetry
transformations ( 2.15 , 2.16 ).

Secondly, as a Hamiltonian system, i.e. on the level of the field
equations, the completely gauged WZW theory with compact gauge group
@xmath , defined on the cylinder via a Gauss decomposition, turns out to
be a special case of our theories with @xmath [ 40 ] . A natural
question then arises: What is the ungauged or partially gauged version
of the general model ( 2.10 )?

Thirdly, in the case that we choose a linear Poisson structure, @xmath ,
we regain two-dimensional nonabelian gauge theories: In this linear case
the @xmath -coordinate @xmath is an equally well-behaved object as
@xmath ; @xmath is then commonly spanned on Lie algebra generators
@xmath , @xmath , satisfying @xmath , and similarily @xmath is spanned
on a dual basis. After addition of @xmath to ( 2.13 ) and a partial
integration, @xmath takes the standard form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The standard 2D Yang-Mills theory @xmath for semisimple
groups is obtained, in its first order form, when choosing @xmath and
setting @xmath equal to the metric induced volume form used to define
the Hodge dual @xmath . Thus in this linear case, and only there, the
addition of the surface term @xmath provides an action which is strictly
invariant under the transformations ( 2.15 , 2.16 ); and certainly here
we also know how to (simply) understand nontrivial fiber bundels.

Last but not least, it might be interesting to study the limit @xmath of
the dimension of target space @xmath of the model ( 2.10 ) [ 41 ] . In
this way one may gain topological field theories in higher dimensions.
For instance, an application of such a limit to the completely gauged
WZW model was shown to result in fourdimensional selfdual gravity.

(During the completion of this work my colleague P. Schaller found the
Wess Zumino type formulation of ( 2.10 ). E.g., in the case of the gauge
theories ( 2.25 ) the corresponding boundary term has the form @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the covariant derivative. It obviously reprodues (
2.25 ) due to @xmath , if @xmath .)

### 2.3 The Classical Solutions

There are basically two ways to solve the field equations ( 2.17 , 2.18
). One can either choose gauge conditions or one can work in appropriate
target space coordinates, most referably in Casimir-Darboux coordinates
of @xmath (cf. section 2.1 ). In any case one will have to determine the
Casimir functions of @xmath . So to start with let us suppose one knows
how to cover @xmath by charts @xmath in each of which one has
Casimir-Darboux coordinates @xmath of @xmath . By continuity of all maps
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath , any global solution @xmath satisfying the
field equations can be obtained by an appropriate patching on @xmath .

Let the first Casimir coordinate @xmath coincide with the Hamiltonian
@xmath . The independent field equations then take the simple form (
@xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where taking the pullback is understood implicitly. In the case @xmath
one has @xmath instead of ( 2.27 ). Obviously the general solution to
the above equations can be obtained without any choice of a gauge: The
Casimir fields @xmath have to be constant on @xmath , but otherwise
arbitrary, whereas the @xmath remain completely undetermined by the
equations of motion. Any choice of the latter determines @xmath uniquely
through ( 2.29 ). For @xmath , @xmath , finally, with arbitrary
functions @xmath . For @xmath , there always exists a local solution to
( 2.27 ) because @xmath is closed, and @xmath is again determined only
up to an exact one-form @xmath . (E.g. in coordinates on @xmath such
that @xmath : @xmath ).

Up to now one has not made use of the gauge freedom. As is obvious from
( 2.15 , 2.16 ) any choice of the @xmath is gauge equivalent, and also
@xmath , where the @xmath are arbitrary functions. Thus locally any
solution to the field equations is uniquely determined by the values of
the Casimir functions.

Additional structure evolves, if global apects are taken into account.
In a completely coordinate independent manner the field equations ( 2.17
) take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, Aas before, @xmath denotes the map from @xmath into @xmath , the
projection @xmath of which onto @xmath is trivial. Reformulating the
previous local considerations @xmath -coordinate indepently, we find all
global solutions to ( 2.30 ): ³ ³ 3 In the case of a nontrivial fiber
bundle one merely replaces ’map’ by ’section’.

1) @xmath , where @xmath denotes the projection in @xmath to @xmath ,
may be an arbitrary map from @xmath into any symplectic leaf (or
integral surface) @xmath of @xmath . All smooth deformations of this
embedding of @xmath into @xmath are gauge transformtions.

2) The restriction of @xmath to @xmath , @xmath , (i.e. the pullback of
@xmath with respect to the embedding function of @xmath into @xmath ),
is then uniquely determined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the inverse of @xmath .

The remaining field equations ( 2.18 ) may not that easily be rewritten
in a completely coordinate independent manner. Still we know that in any
local Casimir-Darboux coordinate system on @xmath the only remaining
equations to be solved are ( 2.27 , 2.28 ). Also all the remaining local
symmetries can be integrated easily in this coordinate system yielding
@xmath . In many cases this will suffice to classify solutions globally;
examples for this shall be provided elsewhere.

In some instances it may be favorable to express ( 2.27 , 2.28 ) in a
more general coordinate system. Let the first @xmath coordinates still
be Casimir coordinates @xmath , but the remaining @xmath coordinates
@xmath be arbitrary. Then for @xmath Eq. ( 2.18 ), with, for simplicity,
@xmath , takes the form ⁴ ⁴ 4 As already in ( 2.17 , 2.18 ) we suppress
writing the pullback in the following.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can check further that Eq. ( 2.18 ) with @xmath is already fulfilled
by the solutions 1 and 2 above, i.e. that these equations are already a
consequence of ( 2.17 ). Locally, Eq. ( 2.32 ) can be integrated easily:
Up to gauge transformations one finds @xmath , if @xmath again denotes a
symplectic potential for @xmath .

Before turning to the quantum theory, let me briefly comment on the
option of solving the field equations by first choosing gauge
conditions. Probably the most efficient one is @xmath . Locally this
gauge is always attainable by means of the symmetry transformations (
2.15 , 2.16 ), as is most easily seen in the Hamiltonian formulation of
the theory, where the @xmath are subject to arbitrary shifts. ⁵ ⁵ 5 In
the gravity theories considered in the following chapter the gauge
@xmath corresponds to a degenerate metric, as is obvious from ( 1.7 ).
One of the simplest choices not in conflict with the metric
nondegeneracy is @xmath , @xmath , used, e.g., in [ 22 ] . The
consequences of the fact that the Hamiltonian symmetries connect
degenerate with nondegenerate metric configurations is studied in detail
in Sec. 3.5 . For @xmath , e.g., the field equations state in this gauge
that all fields are @xmath -independent and that they have to satisfy
the constraint equations ( 2.22 ). The general solution to the latter is
then provided by 1 and 2 above, where @xmath is replaced by an open
interval.

### 2.4 All Quantum States

Up to now an exact treatment of standard quantum field theories is
beyond human abilities and one takes recourse to approximative methods
such as perturbation theory. In our case, however, a nonperturbative
treatment is accessible.

The Hamiltonian formulation of our theory has been presented already in
section 2.2 . It corresponds to a worldsheet topology @xmath . Let us
consider the wave functionals in an @xmath -representation. Any quantum
wave function @xmath is then a complex-valued functional of parametrized
smooth loops @xmath in @xmath . However, following Dirac [ 39 ] , only
such quantum states are admissible which satisfy the quantum constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

resulting from ( 2.22 ) by the replacement @xmath , suppressing the
superscript one for the variable @xmath within this section. It is
decisive that the operator ordering within the @xmath is such that
taking commutators between the quantum constraints does not produce
further constraints. ( 2.33 ) still leads to the constraint algebra (
2.23 ).

Maybe less well-known is an additional restriction on the operator
ordering within @xmath , probably present in an analoguous manner in
most diffeomorphism invariant theories. Any gauge invariant phase space
function, such as, e.g., the Casimir functions @xmath , have to be
@xmath -independent on-shell because diffeomorphisms are part of the
symmetry transformations (cf. also Eqs. ( 2.19 )). Therefore @xmath will
be part of the field equations, and, as such, it will result from an
appropriate combination of the constraints. Since, however, @xmath , the
integral over the corresponding combination of the constraints will also
vanish identically; in our case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

This indicates a subtle dependence of the constraints among each other.
It is decisive to maintain the relations ( 2.34 ) also on the quantum
level, and we have done so in ( 2.33 ). This is maybe best illustrated
at the simple example of two classical constraints @xmath , in a phase
space of some arbitrary dimension, which obviously satisfy @xmath ; The
operator ordering @xmath , @xmath does not produce any anomaly in the
(trivial) constraint algebra, but obviously there is no nontrivial
common kernel of the constraint operators as @xmath .

Again the solution to ( 2.33 ) is most easily found in Casimir
coordinates @xmath of @xmath . In a parallel way as we obtained solution
1 of the previous section we find that the support of the wave
functionals has to be on such loops which lie entirely within some
integral surface @xmath of @xmath . Next we have to solve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation can be reinterpreted as a horizontality condition for the
complex-valued functionals on the space @xmath of loops on each @xmath
(but not on @xmath , except for an invertible @xmath resulting in @xmath
):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath -connection is uniquely defined via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

A necessary condition for ( 2.36 ) to have nontrivial solutions is that
@xmath is closed. According to ( 2.37 ) there is a close relationship
between @xmath , which is a connection in a @xmath -bundle over the loop
space @xmath , and the symplectic form @xmath on the underlying space
@xmath . Let us make this relationship more precise, so that finally
@xmath will be a simple consequence of @xmath .

Any two-form @xmath on a manifold @xmath generates a one-form @xmath on
the loop space @xmath on @xmath : Forms are basically the dual objects
to areas of integration. Now, any path @xmath in @xmath , corresponding
to a one-parameter family of loops in @xmath , obviously spans a
two-dimensional surface @xmath . Thus, given @xmath , we can uniquely
define @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

in this equation we assigned a number to any path @xmath , which, by
duality, defines the one-form @xmath . Since, furthermore, any closed
path @xmath corresponds to a closed two-surface @xmath , @xmath is
closed, iff @xmath is closed.

Of course, not every one form on @xmath can be described in this way. In
our case, however, the one form @xmath on @xmath , is indeed generated
by @xmath . To prove this let us choose a path @xmath parametrized by a
parameter @xmath . Any point in @xmath corresponds to a loop @xmath .
Thus @xmath induces a map @xmath , which precisely corresponds to a
parametrization of @xmath introduced above. Denote by @xmath the tangent
vector to @xmath : @xmath , where the dot denotes the drivative with
respect to @xmath . Then, as an obvious consequence of ( 2.37 ),

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (2.39)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

Thus ( 2.33 ) can be integrated locally to yield @xmath for any initial
value @xmath . The integrability extends to a global one, if @xmath is
simply connected, i.e. if @xmath is trivial. For the case that @xmath ,
however, the one-valuedness of a nontrivial @xmath is given, if and only
if @xmath is integral, i.e. iff

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any (noncontractible) closed loop @xmath representing an element of
@xmath . Due to ( 2.39 ) this is equivalent to an integrality condition
for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any (noncontractible) closed two-surface @xmath representing an
element of @xmath .

Let us denote the space of symplectic leaves by @xmath . As this is the
space @xmath modulo the flow of the Hamiltonian vector fields, @xmath in
general is no more a smooth manifold. Nevertheless, at least when
ignoring the symplectic leaves of less than maximal dimension @xmath ,
any atlas @xmath , where again the @xmath are local Casimir coordinates,
can be used to define an atlas of @xmath with local coordinates @xmath .
( @xmath const characterizes then all of the orbit, even if it leaves
the chart @xmath ). Now, if some symplectic leaves @xmath have a
nontrivial second fundamental group, the integrality condition ( 2.41 )
may yield a restriction of the support of @xmath to loops on a (possibly
discrete) subset of @xmath , which we name @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath
is determined up tp a multiplicative constant on any connected component
of @xmath . As the space of connected components of @xmath is in one to
one correspondence with the first homotopy group of @xmath , we may
identify physical states with complex valued functions on @xmath defined
via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , then @xmath . Using the atlas for (the generic parts of)
@xmath introduced above in this case, in local coordinates the physical
wave functions take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes a discrete index labelling the elements of @xmath
and, as a consequence of ( 2.41 ), the choice of the disk @xmath , whose
boundary is the considered loop @xmath of the functional, is arbitrary.
In the case that @xmath is nontrivial for some @xmath , the wave
functions may again be represented by ( 2.43 ) where, however, the range
of the coordinates @xmath has to be restricted such that ( 2.41 ) is
fulfilled; certainly this can have the effect of partially replacing
some of these coordinates by discrete labels.

Note that the phase in ( 2.43 ), which is not invariant under general
classical @xmath -morphisms, basically coincides with the action of the
point particle system on the symplectic leaf studied in Sec. 2.1. The
reason for obtaining the same integrality condition ( 2.33 ) can be
understood by observing that in any case we want the phase factor to be
well-defined; in the case of the point particle system, so as to have a
well defined path integral, and in the case of the topological field
theory, so as to obtain a smooth wave-functional. Note also the
difference between the two quantum theories: The point particle system
is defined inherently on a symplectic leaf and, e.g., for an @xmath
-orbit of radius @xmath , the Hilbert space is of dimension @xmath . The
wave functions of the field theory, on the other hand, basically reduce
to functions on the space @xmath of (quantizable) symplectic leaves; for
@xmath , the number of independent states on any of the (quantizable)
symplectic leaves @xmath is just one in this case, since @xmath .

The Hamiltonian ( 2.21 ), being constant on each of the symplectic
leaves, defines a function on @xmath and thus becomes a multiplicative
operator upon quantization. Considerations on constructing a measure on
@xmath shall be taken up elsewhere, or will be discussed for some of the
models considered below (cf. Sec. 3.1).

In the example of nonabelian gauge theories (cf. also [ 42 ] ) @xmath is
the dual space @xmath of the Lie algebra @xmath of the gauge group. The
symplectic leaves are the coadjoint orbits equipped with the Kirillov
symplectic form @xmath . The integrality condition ( 2.33 ) selects
those symplectic leaves [ 32 ] which are characterized, in the case of a
compact semisimple @xmath , by values of the Casimir constants lying in
the weight lattice; the quantization of these symplectic leaves yields
the unitary irreducible representations of @xmath . This observation
establishes a connection between our representation and the @xmath
-connection representation of quantum mechanics for nonabelian gauge
theories on a cylinder [ 43 ] . Details, including a comparison of the
spectra (cf. also [ 36 ] ), shall be provided elsewhere.

In the noncompact case of, e.g., @xmath , all the level surfaces of the
Casimir @xmath have trivial @xmath . Thus ( 2.33 ) is empty in this
case. For @xmath we have @xmath , furthermore. To display the wave
functions we again choose an atlas in @xmath (inducing an atlas in
@xmath ): Let us choose @xmath for @xmath as one of our charts ( @xmath
const @xmath corresponds to two symplectic leaves, which may be
distinguished by the sign of @xmath ). We then have @xmath , where
@xmath , and @xmath since @xmath is trivial. If one also wants to
display @xmath explicitely, one needs further charts on @xmath ( @xmath
might not be well-defined, e.g., in coordinates @xmath on all of the
chart @xmath ). In the present case of @xmath on any of the symplectic
leaves except for the origin @xmath can be completely described by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas @xmath at the singular orbit @xmath .

Having found the kernel of the quantum constraints corresponds to
dividing out all local symmetries ( 2.15 , 2.16 ) connected to the
identity. Thus the Yang-Mills theories on a cylinder described in this
way are the ones for the universal covering group of the chosen Lie
algebra @xmath . The transition to Yang-Mills theories on a cylinder for
not simply connected gauge groups calls for further steps; one has to
require an appropriate transformation of the wave functions under large
gauge transformations, which may further exclude some wave functions.
For the case of @xmath this has been studied in some detail in [ 10 ] ;
the effect is quite drastic: whereas the Yang-Mills Hamiltonian @xmath
obviously has a continuous spectrum in the case of @xmath
(=univ. cov. of @xmath ), the spectrum becomes discrete for @xmath in
the @xmath theory.

## Chapter 3 Models of Gravity in 1+1 Dimensions

### 3.1 A Universal Gravity Action and Remarks on its Quantization

Let us construct actions for gravitational theories from the action
@xmath introduced in Sec. 2.2 . The starting point shall be the
identification ( 1.7 ), where @xmath and @xmath are the zweibein and
spin connection of the gravity theory, respectively. This requires a
target space @xmath of a minimal dimension three.

Our conventions concerning the gravity theories shall be summarized as
follows: The metric @xmath is obtained through @xmath , where @xmath is
the frame metric with signature @xmath . In the Minkowski case negative
lengths shall be interpreted as spacelike distances. Since the structure
group of the frame bundle is abelian in two dimensions, the spin
connection one-form introduced above has no frame indices and the
curvature is just @xmath . Contact with formulas used in higher
dimensional gravity can be established via @xmath , where @xmath are the
covariant components of the @xmath -tensor @xmath ( @xmath ). ¹ ¹ 1 Note
that in this chapter @xmath denotes the metric induced volume form and,
in contrast to the previous chapter, it is dynamical now. So one finds,
e.g., that the Hodge dual of the curvature two-form, @xmath , equals the
half of the Ricci scalar @xmath . For reasons of completeness we will
discuss gravity theories for both signatures of the metric in this
section, that is Minkowski as well as Euclidean gravity. In the
following section, however, we will deal with the Minkowski type
theories only. In this case then it will prove useful to introduce light
cone coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the frame bundle, which lead to an off-diagonal frame metric @xmath
as well as to @xmath .

The action of a gravity theory has to be invariant against ( @xmath
)–diffeomorphisms and frame-rotations. The first condition leads to
@xmath , i.e. to an on-shell vanishing Hamiltonian (cf. Eq. ( 2.21 )).
The second condition has been solved in generality in the paragraph of
Eq. ( 2.6 ). Thus the gravity action we propose has the form of @xmath ,
i.e. of Eq. ( 2.13 ) with @xmath , where the Poisson structure @xmath is
defined through ( 2.6 ) by specifying @xmath and @xmath as functions of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath .

Let us find the subclass of this family of actions which leads to a
torsion-free gravity theory. This is equivalent to the search for those
actions @xmath with @xmath -dependence @xmath , where @xmath is the
torsion two-form. (One could replace the @xmath also by strictly
monotonic functions of them, but this does not change the resulting
gravity theory). The occurence of such a term in the Lagrangian requires
@xmath . To have it be the only @xmath -dependent term in @xmath , we
find that @xmath has to be of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an arbitrary potential of @xmath . This Lagrangian was
first proposed in [ 44 ] .

If we again release the torsion zero condition, @xmath in ( 3.3 ) may be
chosen as an arbitrary function of @xmath and @xmath in order to
correspond to a rotation invariant Poisson structure; this can be
checked by verifying ( 2.3 ) directly, whereas the determination of the
functions @xmath and @xmath of ( 2.6 ) yielding this Poisson structure
appears to be cumbersome.

All of what follows will be based on the action ( 3.3 ) with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some arbitrary function. The second term in this
potential allows to add a torsion squared term to the most general
torsionless action within our framework (choosing a three dimensional
target space). The Poisson structure yielding ( 3.4 ) results from the
choice

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the Casimir function @xmath and @xmath for the integrating factor
@xmath . It might be worthwhile to investigate in how far the results
found below may be generalized to the case of an arbitrary @xmath
-dependence of @xmath and @xmath .

From ( 3.3 , 3.4 ) one can easily regain other well-known theories of
two-dimensional gravity. For instance, integrating out the Lagrange
multiplier fields @xmath , the choice @xmath yields the
Jackiw-Teitelboim model ( 1.2 ). The most general quadratic potential
@xmath leads upon elimination of the @xmath -coordinates to the
Katanaev-Volovich model ( 1.4 ) (use @xmath ). ² ² 2 Let us remind the
reader that the elimination of fields through their own equations of
motion within an action is always possible, at least on the classical
level, as is clear from the variational principle. For the case that the
eliminated fields appeared at most quadratic within the original
Lagrangian, the same result is obtained when integrating out these
fields within the path integral. In a similar way one obtains the action
@xmath for @xmath -gravity ( 1.3 ) from the potential @xmath . It
coincides with ( 1.4 ) for Minkowski signature, if the torsion squared
term is replaced by a torsion zero condition (limit @xmath ).

Also the model ( 1.5 ) can be included: It may be obtained from ( 3.3 )
with @xmath , if one replaces ( 1.7 ) by @xmath and identifies @xmath
with @xmath [ 45 ] . ³ ³ 3 It turns out that it is always possible to
insure @xmath by means of gauge transformations. Promoting @xmath to a
dynamical field and adding @xmath to the latter action, furthermore,
this action can be brought even into the group theoretical form ( 2.25 )
for the centrally extended Poincaré group [ 46 ] . Allowing for a
dynamical constant @xmath , one also may obtain a to ( 1.5 ) on-shell
equivalent action from the (more straightforward) identification ( 1.7 )
and @xmath : Choose @xmath and add @xmath to ( 3.3 ).

But not only purly two-dimensional models may be incorporated. The
choice @xmath , e.g., yield solutions which are precisely of the
Schwarz-schild form, disregarding the rotation invariant part @xmath ;
moreover, the Casimir constant may be chosen so as to basically coincide
(for one of its signs) with the standard Schwarz-schild mass. In this
way it is possible to come to a quantum description of the
Schwarz-schild soltution (i.e. of the spherically symmetric solutions to
the four dimensional Einstein vacuum equations) on topology @xmath .

Let us conclude this section by discussing the quantization of the
gravity models ( 3.3 , 3.4 ). We analyzed already the prototypes @xmath
(yielding the action of an @xmath resp. @xmath nonabelian gauge theory).
The generalization is quite straightforward. Our first task is to
determine the topology of the symplectic leaves, in particular their
first and second homotopy groups. As we are in a three dimensional
target space @xmath the symplectic leaves @xmath are either two- or
zero-dimensional. The latter occurs whereever @xmath , i.e. at points

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we will call ’critical’ or ’singular’ in the following; the
corresponding value of the Casimir constant ( 3.5 ) is @xmath . At
’noncritical’ values of @xmath the connected components of the level
surfaces @xmath coincide with the symplectic leaves.

To determine the topology of the level surfaces @xmath it is convenient
to consider the function

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (3.7)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

obtained from inverting the Casimir function ( 3.5 ) for constant @xmath
. It is only the number and kind of zeros of @xmath which determines the
topology of @xmath , where the zeros of @xmath are nonsimple only at
critical points @xmath .

For Euclidean signature, resulting from the plus sign in ( 3.2 ), one
only has to rotate the positive parts of the curve @xmath around the
@xmath -axis to obtain the level surfaces @xmath of the Casimir
function. Obviously a positive part of @xmath between two successive
simple zeros at @xmath yields a symplectic leaf isomorphic to a
two-sphere. Such a leaf is subject to the integrality condition ( 2.8 ),
which here takes the simple form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

as can be seen by expressing @xmath in coordinates @xmath , with @xmath
. A positive (part of) @xmath with no (one simple) zero results in a
cylindrical (planar) symplectic leaf; the integrality condition is
trivial then. Changes of the topology of @xmath (along the choice of
@xmath ) occur only at sliding intersections of @xmath with the @xmath
axis, i.e. at critical values of @xmath .

For Minkowski signature the transition from @xmath to @xmath is a bit
more cumbersome. The result is, however, quite simple: If @xmath
contains no points @xmath , @xmath consists of two disconnected
’planes’; if @xmath contains @xmath points of (nonsliding) intersections
with the @xmath axis, it has @xmath fundamental noncontractible loops.
The second fundamental group is, moreover, always trivial. For the
critical values @xmath (sliding intersections) we again have fixed
points of the Hamiltonian vector fields at @xmath ; the set @xmath of
integral surfaces becomes nonHausdorff there, as can be seen already for
the @xmath prototype (in the space of coadjoint orbits, which here
coincides with the space of Lorentz orbits in @xmath , the origin and
the positive and negative light cones have no disjoint neighborhoods).

Let us discuss @xmath -gravitiy, @xmath , to more detail. An analysis of
the function @xmath yields five qualitatively different cases depending
on the parameters @xmath and @xmath (see Fig. 1):

  ------ -------------------------------------------------------------
  R1 :   one single zero of @xmath and thus also of @xmath at @xmath
  R2 :   one triple zero at 0
  R3 :   one single zero at @xmath and one double zero at @xmath
  R4 :   one double zero at @xmath and one single zero at @xmath
  R5 :   three single zeros at @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
  ------ -------------------------------------------------------------

where @xmath and @xmath .

Obviously @xmath and the curve along R2,3,4 in Fig. 1 corresponds to the
critical values @xmath of @xmath . For @xmath the quantum theory is
paritcularily simple: For both signatures the symplectic leaves are
isomorphic to planes, the spectrum of @xmath is , and, up to the phase
factor, the wave functions ( 2.43 ) are functions of one argument @xmath
. For @xmath and @xmath the resulting surfaces are again manifolds with
trivial topology. However, for @xmath and Euclidean signature we get two
disconnected surfaces of the topology of a plane and a sphere,
respectively. Thus the continuous spectrum @xmath has a twofold
degeneracy for some specific values of @xmath within this range @xmath .
For Minkowskian signature and @xmath the level surfaces @xmath are
connected and of trivial second homotopy; however, there are two
fundamental noncontractible loops, the winding numbers of which give
rise to a quantum number @xmath within the wave functions ( 2.43 ).

Concerning the question of the inner product, let us remark here that on
large parts of the phase spaces of any of the models ( 3.3 ) with ( 3.4
) and Minkowski signature, the variable conjugate to @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Pulling through the phase factor of ( 2.43 ), which in local target
space coordinates takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Dirac observable @xmath acts via @xmath on @xmath . Requiring that
it will become a hermitian operator severely restricts the measure of
the inner product, but, in the case that @xmath depends also
nontrivially on quantum numbers @xmath and/or that the level surfaces
@xmath have several disconnected parts, this does not determine the
inner product entirely.

In the case of Minkowskian @xmath -gravity with @xmath there are no such
quantum numbers and the measure becomes the ordinary Lebesgue measure in
@xmath by the above prescription; thus this theory reduces entirely to
the one of an ordinary point particle system on the line.

For Minkowskian @xmath -gravity with @xmath it is not so clear how to
determine the inner product between states of different winding numbers
@xmath . In this context it seems appropriate to mention that the
assignment of winding numbers at the critical values of @xmath is
somewhat ambiguous: On the one hand the critical points @xmath
constitute integral surfaces by themselves and loops in the support of
@xmath may not pass these points. On the other hand the critical points
and the rest of the orbit(s) at this value of @xmath do not have
disjoint neighborhoods in @xmath ; so continuous functions @xmath
identify them. Let us further note that a Faddeev-Popov kind of
prescription for the inner product always will assign measure zero to
the loops on singular points; this seems questionable at least in the
case @xmath , where the Poisson structure vanishes on all of the @xmath
-axis. A clarification of these points seems desirable.

Further remarks and investigations concerning the quantization of the
gravity theories ( 3.3 , 3.4 ) will be made in the course of this
chapter after having explored the classical solutions into some detail.

### 3.2 General Solution to the Field Equations and All Extremals

As pointed out already in Sec. 2.3 , given the present @xmath
-model-like formulation of the gravity models the most straightforward
way to determine the classical solutions is obtained by an appropriate
choice of target space coordinates. In the present case let us choose
coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Casimir coordinate ( 3.5 ); the transition from the
original @xmath to these coordinates is well-defined for @xmath . In
coordinates ( 3.11 ) the symplectic form is given by ( 2.44 ) on any of
the level surfaces @xmath const, except at the critical points described
already in the previous section where it certainly vanishes. The usage
of the coordinates ( 3.11 ) is more favorable than the one of
Casimir-Darboux coordinates since it allows to cover larger parts of
@xmath and the charts with @xmath and @xmath have a common overlap,
constituting an atlas of @xmath except for the line @xmath .

In target space coordinates @xmath the field equations take the simple
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

as collected from ( 2.26 , 2.31 , 2.32 ) and ( 2.44 ). The local
solution is obvious: @xmath const, @xmath , @xmath as above, and @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath are arbitrary functions, subject, however, to
arbitrary gauge transformations (respecting the metric nondegeneracy).
Via ( 1.7 ) we find the relation of the zweibein and the spin connection
to the transformed connection:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From this we now read off the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the function defined in ( 3.7 ) and we suppressed
introducing a symbol for the symmetrized tensor product.

For the torsion-free case @xmath we may now choose the gauge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

respecting @xmath and @xmath . The metric ( 3.14 ) then takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rest of the fields is determined trivially through ( 3.12 , 3.13 )
and, using ( 3.7 ), @xmath .

In the case @xmath it is the gauge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath which again allows to write the metric in the form ( 3.16 );
here we have set somewhat sloppily

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

noting that the degree of the zeros of @xmath is not changed by this
substitution. The rest of the fields can again be read off directly from
( 3.12 , 3.13 ) and ( 3.7 ).

The result above is obtained in an almost equally straightforward manner
when one starts from the field equations in the original coordinates
@xmath and uses Polyakov’s light-cone gauge in the form @xmath ; the
integration of the field equations turns out to be trivial in this gauge
and the above found representatives result from a fixation of the
residual local gauge freedom. Similarily appropriate is the use of the
axial gauge @xmath , @xmath [ 22 ] .

The analogous shape of the solutions in target space coordinates @xmath
, valid on any patch with @xmath , is obtained most easily by applying
the transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

to the above, since ( 3.19 ) reverses only the sign of the action
integral ( 3.3 ) and therefore does not affect the equations of motion.
Clearly the form of the metric remains that of ( 3.16 ) under the
transformation ( 3.19 ). Although ( 3.19 ) is some ’cockscrewed’ Lorentz
transformation (resulting from the parametrization @xmath and the fact
that @xmath is a ’pseudo-tensor’), it may be interpreted also as an
active symmetry transformation mapping different patches of the space
time manifold onto each other; this fact will be useful in order to
extend our local solutions to global ones.

Note also that in both charts @xmath the whole solution is independent
of @xmath . Thus there is a Killing field, @xmath , generating shifts in
the @xmath -direction.

Simple zeros of @xmath (both components) will occur when gluing together
the above solutions. So, although possible in an analogous manner, it is
not necessary to construct such local solutions here. For zeros of
@xmath of a higher degree the @xmath -components of the field equations
( 2.17 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with the fact that the @xmath are linear independent (metric
nondegeneracy) show that the considered point is a singular point of
@xmath (cf. Eq. ( 3.6 )). Since such points in the target space
constitute an integral surface @xmath by themselves and since the image
of the worldsheet lies entirely in a symplectic leaf @xmath (cf. Sec. (
2.3 ) solutions in the neighborhood of zeros of @xmath of degree at
least two have the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

They are, furthermore, solutions of vanishing torsion and constant
curvature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

describing arbitrary deSitter space-time manifolds. The metric for such
a solution can also be brought into the form ( 3.16 ) with @xmath where
@xmath is some meaningful constant of integration. This in turn
determines the zweibein and spin connection up to Lorentz
transformations.

To gain some feeling for gravitational solutions as well as to construct
and analyze Penrose diagrams, it is standard to consider the movement of
point particles within the space-time @xmath determined by the
(unperturbed) gravity solutions. For this purpose we couple @xmath to
our gravitiy action 3.3 . Variation for @xmath leads to the standard
equation for extremals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Christoffel symbols. Disregarding the backreaction
of the point particle on the metric ( @xmath ), we may combine this with
the previously obtained solution for the metric, Eq. ( 3.16 ), to get (
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 3.23 ) yields those curves which maximize the arclength @xmath for
nonnull extremals; the parameter @xmath is, up to linear
transformations, the arclength itself [ 47 ] . (Obviously ( 3.23 ) is
not form-invariant under reparametrizations, as is not @xmath ). In the
torsion-free case these extremals coincide with autoparallels,
satisfying, in the parametrization of ( 3.23 ), @xmath . In the case of
nonvanishing torsion the extremals are autoparallel only with respect to
the Christoffel connection @xmath , where the brackets indicate
symmetrization.

Since @xmath is a metrical connection, any null-line @xmath is a
solution to ( 3.23 , 3.24 ). In the charts of ( 3.16 ) these null
extremals are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Plugging these solutions back into ( 3.24 ), we can decide under which
conditions they are complete (with respect to the affine parameter of (
3.24 )). For ( 3.25 ) and ( 3.26 ) the affine parameter is determined by
@xmath , @xmath , thus these null extremals are complete, iff the
coordinate @xmath extends to infinity into both directions of the charts
in which the metric takes the form ( 3.16 ). For the models under study,
this is the case for @xmath , whereas in the case of nonvanishing
torsion, @xmath , the extremals are incomplete at @xmath . Note,
however, that in the latter case this line is a true singularity as
curvature and torsion blow up there. The extremals ( 3.27 ), on the
other hand, are complete for @xmath (multiple zero of the function
@xmath ), but for @xmath we find @xmath , where @xmath , so that they
are incomplete at @xmath .

It will turn out that in our case the knowledge of the null extremals
already suffices to find all Penrose diagrams. Nevertheless, also all
other extremals can be found: Since @xmath is a Killing field there is a
constant of motion, @xmath ; this holds in the case of nonvanishing
torsion, too, where one can use the Christoffel connection for the proof
(cf., e.g., [ 48 ] ). Furthermore, we know that for nonnull extremals we
may choose the length as affine paramter so that we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The resulting quadratic equation has the solutions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Certainly ( 3.28 ) is valid only when it is meaningful; the condition in
( 3.29 ) can be deduced directly from ( 3.24 ) and the fact the
considered extremal is nonnull. It is straightforward to see that for
the extremals ( 3.28 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the extremals ( 3.29 ) are obviously always complete.

### 3.3 Penrose Diagrams from Gluing

In this section we will provide the general rules of how to find the
Penrose diagrams starting from any given metric of the form ( 3.16 ).
This shall be done by means of a generic example, the function @xmath of
which is drawn in Fig. 2a. Having derived a simple building block
principle, we will apply it to the Jackiw-Teitelboim model (deSitter
gravity) ( 1.2 ), @xmath -gravity ( 1.3 ), and the Katanaev-Volovich
model ( 1.4 ) at the end of this section.

In Fig. 2b we qualitatively depicted representatives of the null
extremals ( 3.26 , 3.27 ) corresponding to the metric of Fig. 2a. Any
other solution ( 3.26 ) is obtained by shifting these curves along the
@xmath -direction, a consequence of the fact that ( @xmath const)–lines
are Killing (isometry) directions within the chart @xmath . The other
type of null lines, ( 3.25 ), are parallels to the @xmath -axis; from
them we have drawn only those two which are the asymptotics to the
representatives plotted of the former kind in the sector on the right.

It is well-known that any metric in two space-time dimensions is
conformally flat, i.e. that by a change of coordinates it can be brought
into the form @xmath ; this can be achieved even on a global level, if
the space-time manifold may be covered by one chart (and has no closed
timelike curves). Within any of the sectors of Fig. 2b the
diffeomorphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

provides such a transformation; it, however, breaks down at @xmath . It
may be difficult to write down explicitly the diffeomorphism that brings
@xmath into conformal form on all of the chart underlying Fig. 2b.

Fortunately, the explicit form of such a diffeomorphism need not be
constructed. Similarly as in ( 3.31 ) it will be possible to choose
@xmath as one of the light cone coordinates. The diffeomorphism will
then have the effect of straightening the null extremals ( 3.26 ),
leaving ( 3.27 ) as well as ( 3.25 , i.e. @xmath , unmodified. Note that
the @xmath -chart cannot be all of @xmath anymore; rather on the
righthand side there will be some boundary because the null lines of
type ( 3.26 ) do not intersect all null lines @xmath const. By means of
a subsequent conformal diffeomorphism @xmath (and a similar one for
@xmath ) the new coordinate chart covers only a finite region in @xmath
; the result is drawn qualitatively in Fig. 2c. As indicated by the
arrows, the boundary on the righthand side can be made straight by a
conformal transformation in @xmath , by means of which one can also
transform all rectangles into squares. The final building block for the
Penrose diagram is obtained by turning the patch 45 degrees
counter-clockwise (given our convention that a positive (negative)
@xmath corresponds to a timelike (spacelike) distance) and is depicted
in Fig. 2d.

In the Figs. 2c,d we also included the lines of constant @xmath (=
Killing directions), which in Fig. 2b have been the straight lines
@xmath const. The function @xmath increases monotonously from the
lefthand side, ⁴ ⁴ 4 For simplicity we assume @xmath here. where it is
@xmath , to the singularity on the righthand or upper side, where it
gets @xmath . In our example Fig. 2a both of these lines @xmath are
complete, as the coordinate @xmath is unbounded in Fig. 2a (cf. the
discussion following Eq. ( 3.25 )); completeness will be indicated by
boldfaced lines, incomplete singularities by thin solid lines (somewhat
thicker than the lines of isometry), and horizons by dashed lines.

The square-shaped or triangular sectors are the regions with @xmath (
@xmath ). As already noted above the triangular shape of the rightmost
sector is due to the fact that any type ( 3.26 ) null extremal
approaches a type ( 3.25 ) extremal assymtotically for @xmath (which
implies that the former kind of null lines does not intersect all of the
latter kind). If we had instead @xmath (e.g., @xmath ), all null
extremals would intersect each other exactly once and the triangular
sector would be replaced by a quadratic one. If, on the other hand, e.g.
@xmath , then, vice versa, we would have to replace the quadratic sector
on the left of Figs. 2c,d by a triangular one, again with a timelike
boundary @xmath . And so forth.

Finally, in Figs. 2b,c we have drawn some of the nonnull extremals (
3.28 ) with c=0, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

as dotted lines. They are the unique extremals running through the
cornerpoints of the @xmath sectors in all nonnull directions. Their
length follows from ( 3.30 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath are the successive zeros of @xmath . Since in the
chart ( 3.16 ) these extremals differ only by a shift in @xmath
-direction, they all have the same length. It is finite only at single
zeros of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the cornerpoints of a sector between two single zeros of @xmath are
conjugate points.

Now any region with @xmath can be found in two charts of the kind ( 3.16
), one with @xmath and one with @xmath , and it must be possible to
establish a diffeomorphism (at least locally) between them. Such a
diffeomorphism has to maintain @xmath and must map type ( 3.25 ) null
extremals onto type ( 3.26 ) null extremals and vice versa. By this it
is already uniquely determined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the function ( 3.32 ) introduced already above, and the
integration constant has been written down explicitly, indicating the
free choice of the origin of the @xmath -coordinate. It is easily seen
that this diffeomorphism maps the whole sector where @xmath . A
subsequent Lorentz transformation is necessary to restore our gauge:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final result of this transformation ( 3.35 , 3.36 ) is exactly that
of ( 3.19 ). In the Penrose-diagrams the sectors are the squares (or the
triangles), the second solution is obtained from the first by taking the
mirror image (around an axis running diagonally through the sector,
transversal to the Killing-direction!) and the gluing diffeomorphism (
3.35 , 3.36 ) amounts to patching the corresponding sectors together.
Fig. 3 illustrates this process. By the above description gluing is
unique, up to the constant, which, as long as only the universal
covering is pursued, does not affect the solution.

We have yet to investigate the case (see Fig. 3) that after surrounding
the point at the vertex of four diagrams the corresponding sectors of
the first and the fourth diagram match. Shall they be identified?

The null extremals running into this vertex point are of the type ( 3.27
). Now, if this zero of @xmath is simple ( @xmath ) then the answer is
yes: The transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath as before, which is on each @xmath sector a diffeomorphism,
brings the metric into Schwarz-schild form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the Kruskal extension (cf. e.g. [ 49 ] ), plus simultaneous Lorentz
transformation, reveals the vertex point as regular interior point (a
saddle point of @xmath , with @xmath ). The four adjacent sectors then
constitute one single sheet.

However, for zeros in @xmath of a higher degree this procedure fails.
And, in fact, not only the null extremals 3.27 but also the general
extremals 3.33 running towards this point are then complete (cf. Eq.
3.34 ). Thus the vertex point has to be taken out of consideration.
Also, to obtain the universal covering we must not identify the diagrams
but continue the gluing indefinitely.

The principle of how to construct the Penrose diagram corresponding to
any function @xmath in ( 3.16 ) should be clear now. The number (and
kind) of zeros of this function determines the number of squares in a
fundamental building block, ⁵ ⁵ 5 The case that @xmath has no zeros at
all will be discussed in the applications below. the end of which is
either a square or a triangle, depending on the asymptotic behavior of
@xmath . The complete Penrose diagram is then obtained by
straightforward (pictorial) gluing.

Let us come to the announced examples, starting with deSitter gravity (
1.2 ). Since all values @xmath yield (basically) equivalent Penrose
diagrams, we will set @xmath in the following. We then get a
one-parameter family of functions @xmath , @xmath , parametrized by the
Casimir constant @xmath (cf. Fig. 4).

For any @xmath this curve @xmath has two simple zeros, leading to one
square within the fundamental building block. Asymptotically we have
@xmath , so that adjacent to the square there will be a triangle at each
side, the boundaries of which, @xmath resp. @xmath , are spacelike and
complete. Gluing leads to the ribbon-like diagram shown in Fig. 5a. (For
the other sign of the cosmological constant, @xmath , we get the same
diagram for @xmath , rotated, however, by 90 degrees, as the infinity is
timelike then).

For @xmath we get no square, but only two triangles. The corresponding
Penrose diagram is plotted in Fig. 5b.

For @xmath the function @xmath has no zeros (Fig. 4). We therefore may
apply directly the diffeomorphism ( 3.31 ) with the function ( 3.32 ),
which in the present case can be written in terms of elementary
functions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting region @xmath is again a ribbon (Fig. 5c); but this time
without any internal structure, as the Killing lines @xmath const become
the parallels @xmath const in the present case.

It is straightforward to see that Fig. 5c depicts the Penrose diagram
for any (negative) function @xmath without zeros which diverges at the
infinity. Clearly there is no conformal diffeomorphism which maps this
ribbon into a finite region. Let us remark also that the Penrose
diagrams for constant curvature in two dimensions are quite different
from the ones in four dimensions (cf., e.g., [ 49 , 48 ] ).

Let us now turn to the second example: @xmath -gravity. We have already
studied the behavior of the corresponding function @xmath when
discussing the quantum theory in Sec. ( 3.1 , cf. Fig. 1. It is
completely straigthforward to construct the Penrose diagrams according
to the above rules. The result is depicted in Fig. 6. For nonnegative
@xmath there are in addition to those diagrams also infinte bands for
the constant curvature solutions @xmath (cf. Eq. ( 3.22 ); in the
diagram Fig. 1 they are located at the curve R2,3,4 .

The third example is the Katanaev-Volovich model ( 1.4 ). Its potential
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

leading to the Casimir function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this and ( 3.7 , 3.17 , 3.18 ) one can determine the function
@xmath . The coordinate transformation @xmath , @xmath , constituting a
residual gauge freedom of ( 3.16 ), combined with the rescaling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

brings it into the simpler form ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

It shows that, up to its sign, @xmath does not influence the causal
structure of the KV-model.

The function @xmath always has a zero at @xmath , which is simple for
@xmath . It corresponds to an incomplete null-infinity. On the other
boundary of the coordinate patch, @xmath , we find @xmath , which shows
that the Penrose diagrams have a complete triangular sector at this end.

To study the number and kind of zeros of the function ( 3.41 ) for
positive values of @xmath , one is well advised to change variables
according to @xmath , being left with the equivalent analysis of the
number and type of zeros of the function @xmath within @xmath .
(Actually @xmath and @xmath ). In any case the analysis yields 11
qualitatively different cases depending on the parameters @xmath and
@xmath : G1,2 : no zeros of @xmath and thus also of @xmath G3 : one
single zero at @xmath G4 : one triple zero at @xmath G5,6 : one double
zero at @xmath G7 : one double zero at @xmath and one single zero at
@xmath G8,9 : two single zeros at @xmath and @xmath G10 : one single
zero at @xmath and one double zero at @xmath G11 : three single zeros at
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . An
overview is provided by Fig. 7.

Via ( 3.6 , 3.4 , 3.38 ) the critical values of @xmath are easily
determined to be @xmath ; the corresponding value of the (rescaled)
Casimir function @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which marks the curve G5,6,10,4,7 of Fig. 7 and simultanously the
deSitter solutions @xmath (cf. Eqs. ( 3.21 , 3.22 )). The cases G1,2 ,
as well as G5,6 and G8,9 , differ by the kind of zero of @xmath at
@xmath ; this has its impact on the completeness of the corner point. It
is now straightforward to draw the Penrose diagrams of the KV-model. The
result is depicted in Fig. 8 for @xmath ; the diagrams for @xmath are
obtained by rotating these by @xmath degrees.

The numbering G1-11 has been chosen as in [ 24 ] , where the Penrose
diagrams Fig. 8 have been constructed first. It should be noted,
however, that our procedure to obtain these diagrams is incomparably
faster than the one of [ 24 ] . The main reason is that the local
solutions used in [ 24 ] (resulting also from ours through the
diffeomorphism ( 3.31 )) are valid only in coordinate patches which are
part of ours (the sectors @xmath ); they had to be glued along their
border, which entailed lengthy considerations of the asymptotic
behavior. In our gauge, instead, the charts overlap and simply have to
be matched together. As a consequence we also could prove that all the
solutions of ( 1.4 ), (and in fact also of ( 3.3 , 3.4 ) with an, e.g.,
analytic potential @xmath ) are analytic. Also, from ( 3.16 ) the
existence of a Killing field is immediate.

Concluding we remark that for many of the Penrose diagrams, such as,
e.g., for G3, G9 , it is possible to find also global coordinates
displaying explicitely the analyticity of @xmath . Examples for this
might be given elsewhere.

### 3.4 All Global Solutions and a Comparison with the Quantum Theory:
The Example of the Katanaev-Volovich-Model

In the following we shall give an account of global solutions obtained
by factoring the universal coverings by a discrete transformation group.
In this way one obtains all global solutions. Among these are the
solutions with cylindrical topology. Keeping track of all diffeomorphism
(and Lorentz) invariant quantities characterizing such solutions, we get
some insight into the reduced phase space (RPS) of the theory as defined
on the cylinder. Note that the Penrose diagrams are labelled only by one
constant, namly the value of the Casimir function @xmath (beside, of
course, the coupling constants fixed in the Lagrangian). Since the
result of a symplectic reduction is again a symplectic space, with some
care we will be able to find a second continuous parameter resulting
from the compactification.

In the sections 2.4 and 3.1 we have studied already the quantum theory
of the space of gauge-inequivalent solutions with cylindrical topology.
Certainly, a comparison of this quantum theory with the classical
space-time manifolds that are subject to this quantization is worth an
investigation. The comparison will be seen to give rise to arguments in
favor of the quantization scheme employed, but there will arise also
arguments questioning it. On the one hand we will find that the topology
of the RPS fits quite perfectly to the arguments of the wave functions (
2.43 ); in particular, the quantum numbers @xmath are in one-to-one
correspondence with the minimal number of building blocks intersecting a
noncontractible loop on the cylinder. On the other hand, a considerable
portion of the solutions in the RPS are incomplete, they have closed
timelike curves, and for some of them it would be more natural to be
reckoned among other space-time topologies than the cylindrical one.

Most of these questions will be analyzed at the example of the
Katanaev-Volovich model ( 1.4 ), but the discussion transfers in an
obvious way to the general model ( 3.3 , 3.4 ).

Let us start with classifying all possible ’compactifications’ of the
Penrose diagrams. They are obtained by factoring out a discrete
transformation group from the universal covering solutions. Any such
transformation must of course preserve the functions @xmath and @xmath .
Hence the sectors with @xmath must be mapped as a whole onto
corresponding ones (i.e., with the same range of @xmath ).

Within such a sector we have already discovered a Killing field ( @xmath
in the coordinates ( 3.16 )). The transformation generated by it is in
local charts ( 3.16 ) a shift of a certain amount in the @xmath
-direction. The gluing diffeomorphism ( 3.35 , 3.36 ) shows that such a
transformation extends uniquely onto the whole universal covering, and
that it is in all charts represented as an @xmath -shift of the same
amount (but on part of them in the opposite direction!). We will call
these transformations simply ’Killing-shifts’. In the Penrose diagram
such a Killing-shift shows as a distortion along the lines of constant
@xmath .

A further transformation of a sector onto itself is exchanging the two
types of null-extremals. This is exactly the gluing diffeomorphism of (
3.35 , 3.36 ). It can also be described as a ’reflection’ at one of the
extremals ( 3.33 ).

Any admissible transformation can thus be separated into a combinatorial
part — a certain permutation of the @xmath sectors and their possible
reflections --- and one real parameter describing the Killing-shift. It
is also true that any transformation of the universal covering is
already fully determined by the image of only one sector. The remaining
investigations shall be performed ad hoc at the example of the
Katanaev-Volovich model now. ⁶ ⁶ 6 The numbering below refers to the
numbering of the Penrose diagrams in the Figs. 7,8.

G1,2: The only transformations are reflections and Killing-shifts. Since
a reflection has fixed points (an extremal of type ( 3.33 ) as
symmetry-axis) it has to be ruled out. The only discrete subgroups of
Killing-shifts are the infinite cyclic groups generated by one shift.
The factor space is then clearly a cylinder. In the coordinates ( 3.16 )
it can be obtained by cutting out a strip parallel to the @xmath -axis
and gluing it together along the frontiers. The width of this strip
(i.e., of the generating shift) is proportional to the length of a
constant curvature path running once around the cylinder. (Remember that
in this model @xmath Ricci scalar, on-shell). Hence for any value @xmath
we get a set of distinct solutions parametrized by their size (any
positive real number).

G3: As before reflections and also the inversion at the central saddle
point must be dropped. We could again try a cylinder-solution, but there
occur some problems, if one adopts a standard gravity point of view: Not
only is there a closed null-extremal ( @xmath ), but other extremals
approach it asymptotically, winding around the cylinder infinitely often
while having only finite length. This situation resembles strongly the
Taub-NUT space or rather its two-dimensional analog as described by
Misner [ 50 ] (cf. also [ 49 ] ). As explained there an extension is
possible, if one abandons the Hausdorff property. The net result can be
described as two concentric cylinders attached to each other at the
(closed) line @xmath ; those extremals which previously had been
incomplete are now continued at the ’other sheet’ previously not
included. In fact, the resulting extended solutions occur naturally as
factor space of the universal covering.

On the other hand, from the purely field theoretic point of view, there
is no notion of geodesic (or extremal) completeness; the solutions on
the cylinder are perfectly analytic everywhere on the cylinder
(cf. Eqs. ( 3.16 , 3.15 ,etc.) taking the @xmath -coordinate as periodic
now), and there also is the metric induced circumference as the variable
’conjugate’ to @xmath . (Changing the length of periodicity of @xmath ,
one can change the length of an ( @xmath const)–line; since such a
circumference is, for any fixed value of @xmath , a gauge-independent
quantity, it may represent the second variable besides @xmath ).

Taking together the cylindrical solutions for G1-G3 , from the field
theoretic point of view we find a perfect coincidence between the
quantum theory of the KV-model with @xmath (cf. Fig. 7) and the
corresponding RPS, which is just a plane (identifying the four possible
cylinders for @xmath by means of the discrete symmetry transformation (
3.19 )). Nevertheless, according to the above considerations, it seems
more natural to regard the cylindrical solutions for @xmath as a part of
the extended nonHausdorff object described above. A possible, somewhat
speculative interpretation of the quantum theory for @xmath could then
be that wave functions with support on @xmath correspond to cylindrical
space-times, their counterparts with @xmath correspond to these
’four-sheet’ space-times, and quantum processes mixing these
vector-subspaces describe topology changes. The other way out might be
to just regard the Hamiltonian methods used so far to be not
sophisticated enough to cope with such problems of quantum gravity as
geodesic completeness and different topologies.

In the following we will continue studying all factorizations possible
in the remaining solutions G4 - G11 . Since Taub-NUT like solutions
exist for all of these cases, we will not mention them any further.

G8,9: Since this solution is an infinite ribbon of equal building
blocks, it is possible to factor out a shift of a number of blocks to
obtain a cylinder. Furthermore, while pure reflections (and inversion at
a saddle point) have to be ruled out, a ’vertical’ reflection plus
’horizontal’ shift will work and it yields a Möbius-strip.

Let us now come to find the second phase space parameter (for the
cylindrical solutions). It was already pointed out that the generating
shift-transformation has an additional real parameter, the Killing-shift
component. We have yet to show that different Killing-shift values yield
inequivalent solutions: In the previous section it was proved that the
saddle points are conjugate points and the extremals running between
them are those of ( 3.33 ). They run through the saddle points in all
directions between the two null-directions. A Killing-shift shifts them
sidewards, altering the angle of their tangent. One can now start from a
saddle point in a certain direction along a spacelike extremal. This
extremal will eventually return to the original point, but due to a
Killing-shift its tangent at the return may be tilted against that at
the start. Since this tilt can be expressed in terms of a shift of the
@xmath -coordinate in the chart ( 3.16 ), it is the same for all such
extremals. Especially, there is one solution without tilt. Thus, besides
the parameter @xmath , the cylindrical solutions are parametrized by a
positive integer (number of copies or ‘building blocks’) and a real
constant parametrizing the tilt. ⁷ ⁷ 7 If we had chosen @xmath the whole
Penrose diagram would have to be rotated by 90 degrees. The above
extremals would then be timelike and the tilt at the return could be
interpreted nicely as acceleration along one journey around the
cylinder.

It may seem that for the Möbius-strip one might also have this
continuous parameter. However, in contrast to the former examples
sectors are occasionally identified with their mirror images. This has
the consequence that on the factor space a Killing-shift cannot be
defined consistently. Furthermore there is exactly one extremal which
has the same tangent even at the first return. A Killing-shift component
of the transformation only results in a different choice of this special
extremal and thus (by a coordinate change) leads to equivalent
solutions. Hence, besides @xmath , the Möbius-strip solution is only
parametrized by a positive integer (number of copies).

G5,6: Again reflections cannot be used. As for G8,9 we get cylinders
parametrized by a positive integer (the number of copies) and a real
number (Killing-shift), but this time no Möbius-strips. In contrast to
G8,9 there is no such nice description of the Killing-shift parameter,
because we have in general no closed extremals. One can, however, take a
series of null extremals, zigzagging around the cylinder between two
values of @xmath (or in this case even an oscillating spacelike
extremal) and interpret the failure to be closed (i.e., the distance
between starting- and endpoint on this @xmath line) as measure for the
Killing-shift.

G4: As before this solution is an infinite ribbon of equal building
blocks (although this time not straight but winding around the central
point). Thus one obtains again cylinders of a certain number of copies.
When passing once around such a cylinder, however, the light cone tilts
upside down @xmath times, where @xmath is the number of copies involved.
Thus we have got an @xmath -kink -solution. Hence the nonTaub-NUT
solutions are cylinders parametrized by a positive integer (the number
of copies = number of kinks) and a real number (Killing-shift).

G7,10,11: These cases are slightly more complicated. Evidently G7 and
G10 give rise among others to a cylinder with hole(s) and G11 to a torus
with hole(s). Furthermore, each hole yields an additional real parameter
(characterizing the re-identification after surrounding this hole) such
that the @xmath -hole cylinder or the @xmath -hole torus has @xmath real
parameters.

But even a series of proper (yet slightly pathological) cylinders can be
obtained: The universal covering covers the cylinder resp. the torus
with hole. The group of cover-transformations is isomorphic to the
fundamental group of the covered space, in this case the free group with
two generators. It contains only admissible (isometric etc.)
transformations but not all of them (e.g. reflections are missing). Any
subgroup yields a factor space, especially a cyclic subgroup yields a
cylinder.

To speak in pictures: The generator of this cyclic subgroup defines a
path in the universal covering. Now the end-sectors of the path (i.e. of
the corresponding ribbon) are identified and at all other junctions the
solution is extended infinitely without further identifications. Thus a
topological cylinder (although with a terribly frazzled frontier) is
obtained.

For reasons of completeness one should treat also the deSitter solutions
( 3.21 , 3.22 )) of the KV-model, corresponding to the Casimir values (
3.42 ). Partially this gap will be closed in the next section, where we
will concentrate on all cylinder-solutions of the Jackiw-Teitelboim
model. Since, however, the momenta are constant all over the space-time
manifold in this case, there might be additional possibilities to
compactify the deSitter solutions of the KV-model as compared to the
ones found in the regular sector of the JT-model. We shall not
investigate this here further.

Note also that from the quantum theory point of view the deSitter
solutions, as well as the cylinder solutions G4,5,6,7 , and G10 , should
be more or less negligible as they correspond to only one value of
@xmath (cf. also Fig. 7). The space of orbits, furthermore, is
nonHausdorff exactly at these solutions.

Again the discrete indices present in ( 2.43 ) fit to the
cylinder-solutions found above. However, at least in the case of G11 I
feel some unease with these ’cylinders’. And now one also cannot
reinterpret the wave functions of this sector in the RPS to actually
describe the natural factor space of a torus with hole, since the latter
is parametrized by three continuous quantities.

### 3.5 Symmetries, Metric-Nondegeneracy, and Kinks: The Example of the
JT-Model

One of the features of the Ashtekar formulation of 4D gravity usually
considered as an advantage is that the formulation is well-defined also
for configurations corresponding to degenerate metrics. In particular,
the field equations and the symmetry transformations are equivalent to
the usual Einstein formulation only for @xmath . It is the purpose of
this section to investigate a similar relationship between two
formulations of the symmetry content of the class of gravity models
considered in this work which are also equivalent for nondegenerate
configurations only.

According to ( 2.19 ) and ( 1.7 ) the gravitational symmetries,
i.e. diffeomorphisms and local Lorentz transformations, can be
identified with the symmetry transformations ( 2.15 , 2.16 ) on-shell,
if and only if @xmath det @xmath ( @xmath ). As is obvious from the
paragraph of Eq. ( 2.23 ) and the one following it, the symmetries (
2.15 , 2.16 ) coincide with the Hamiltonian symmetries; factoring out
the former from the space of solutions to the field equations (for
cylindrical space-time topology) is equivalent to a symplectic reduction
⁸ ⁸ 8 A symplectic reduction is performed by implementing a system of
first class constraints @xmath in a phase space, factoring out the
Hamiltonian flow of the @xmath on this subspace subsequently. yielding
the reduced phase space (RPS) of the theory. The latter was the space
subject to quantization in sections 2.4 and 3.1 .

In this section let us compare the following two moduli spaces:

1) The space of ( @xmath -)solutions to the field equations on the
cylinder modulo the symmetry transformations ( 2.15 , 2.16 ). As noted
above this space is equivalent to the standard RPS.

2) The same space of solutions, but excluding from it all configurations
which correspond to a somewhere degenerate zweibein; only those
solutions are identified which are related by gravitational symmetries.

There are basically two reasons that could give rise to a difference
between these two spaces. Firstly, there could exist gravitationally
inacceptable solutions to the field equations which are not gauge
related to any gravitationally acceptable one. In this case the RPS of
bf 1 contains points not included in 2 . Secondly, symmetry orbits of 1
could be cut into pieces by regions (in the space of solutions) which
have somewhere (in @xmath ) degenerate zweibeins. In this case there are
several points in 2 corresponding just to one point in 1 .

The first of these two mechanisms occurs for the Euclidean formulation
of the gravity theories. Only bundles which have a Chern class that
coincides with the one of the canonical (tangential) bundle on @xmath
will yield nowhere degenerate metrics. E.g. on a sphere the trivial
bundle will in no way yield nondegenerate metrics; one necessarily will
have to introduce at least two charts with a nontrivial gauge
transformation ( 2.15 , 2.16 ) on their overlap.

The second mechanism occurs in the case of Minkowskian gravity on @xmath
and shall be illustrated by means of a simple example: Take on the one
hand the real line ( @xmath space of all solutions) and as the symmetry
transformations translations with generator @xmath ( @xmath symmetries (
2.15 , 2.16 )). Take on the other hand @xmath ( @xmath ) modulo the
transformations generated by @xmath ( @xmath gravitational symmetries).
The degenerate point @xmath is gauge related to @xmath with respect to
@xmath ; thus we do not have a problem of the first kind. However, the
symmetry orbit of @xmath , which reduces to a point, is cut into two
pieces by the fixed point @xmath of the @xmath -transformations. On all
of there are three gauge orbits of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
corresponding to three point in the factor space. Even if the point
@xmath , where the correspondence between the infinitesimal form of the
two symmetry transformations breaks down, is now removed, we end up with
different results.

We will show in the present section that indeed eliminating the
solutions with @xmath , the gauge orbits of ( 2.15 , 2.16 ) split into
components not smoothly connected to each other. Solutions from
different components of the same gauge orbit are not related by
gravitational symmetry transformations (since obviously @xmath is a
fixed point under the latter). They correspond to space-time manifolds
with different kink-number. Although it is possible to parametrize the
gauge orbits of the constraints globally for all models ( 3.3 , 3.4 ),
we will restrict the analysis below to the case @xmath , i.e. to the
Jackiw-Teitelboim model, in which case this parametrization is
particularly simple. As already noted in the introduction for this
@xmath the action ( 3.3 ) can be rewritten identically as ( 2.25 ) with
Lie algebra @xmath [ 6 ] ; thus the gauge orbits are the standard ones
of a nonabelian gauge theory.

The Penrose diagrams of the Jackiw-Teitelboim model, Fig. 5, do not
allow for any complete kink solution. This coincides with the fact that
all the kink solutions we will obtain as representatives of the
different parts of the gauge orbits cannot be geodesically completed.
Nevertheless, from the field theoretic point of view they constitute
perfect @xmath solutions on @xmath (with an everywhere nondegenerate
metric), which cannot be transformed into each other by means of the
gravitational symmetries but are gauge related by @xmath
transformations. The fact that these incomplete kink solutions are
eliminated automatically when using the Hamiltonian constraints @xmath
as symmetry generators could be regarded as an advantage of the
formulation over some other formulation which strictly implements only
gravitational symmetries. On the other hand this coincidence could be
regarded also as purely accidental, two mistakes cancelling each other,
an argumentation that can gain some support from the observations made
in the preceding section.

The investigation below provides also some insight into the topology of
the RPS. In particular it will be seen to be not Hausdorff. We suppose
that this inevitably leads to some ambiguity in the quantization (in
addition to the choice of polarization).

In the following we will determine the Hamiltonian RPS by means of the
equivalent group theoretic formulation, which allows us to use
comparatively simple fiber bundle methods. Since the constraints can
generate only gauge transformations connected to the identity and since
large gauge transformations are in one-to-one correspondence to the
first fundamental group @xmath of the gauge group @xmath , the gauge
group @xmath we have to use is the universal covering group of @xmath ,
denoted by @xmath . The latter, however, has no faithful (finite
dimensional) matrix representation. This technical obstacle is overcome
by first determining the factor space using the gauge group @xmath ,
withdrawing then the additional identification by applying large gauge
transformations to the obtained representatives. In this way we will
obtain representatives of the @xmath gauge theory, which from the group
theoretical point of view describe equivalence classes of paths in
@xmath parametrized by @xmath . All of these will correspond to
solutions with @xmath . Parametrizing the @xmath -orbits through these
representatives, we then will find an infinity of gravitationally
inequivalent ways to ensure @xmath everywhere on the cylinder @xmath .

For reasons of explicitness let us choose a basis @xmath , @xmath , of
the @xmath -algebra which satisfies @xmath , @xmath . A real matrix
representation of this is provided by @xmath , @xmath , where the @xmath
’s are the standard Pauli matrices. In this way we can represent all
fields by matrices through @xmath and @xmath , where the indices shall
be raised and lowered by means of half of the Killing metrik @xmath :
@xmath . With ( 1.7 ) one thus has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the action ( 1.6 ) coincides with ( 3.3 ) for @xmath . The factors
two and @xmath above have been introduced so as to avoid any conflict
with the conventions chosen in the gravity formulation. Note also the
following identity for the Casimir invariant: @xmath .

The group @xmath of the symmetry transformations we consider in the
first stage is the group of smooth mappings from the cylinder into
@xmath : ⁹ ⁹ 9 There are no nontrivial principal @xmath -bundles on a
cylindrical base manifold, iff the chosen structure (gauge) group @xmath
is connected.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equations of motion, which in the matrix notation introduced above
take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

yield the connection to be flat and the field @xmath to be covariantly
constant. Up to gauge transformations a flat connection @xmath on a
cylinder is determined by its monodromy @xmath generating parallel
transport around the cylinder ( @xmath denotes path ordering and the
integration runs over a closed curve @xmath winding around the cylinder
once). As the exponential map is surjective on @xmath , any monodromy
matrix can be generated by a connection of the form @xmath where @xmath
is constant:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Constant gauge transformations act on @xmath via the adjoint action
leaving the determinant @xmath invariant and may be interpreted as
Lorentz transformations in the three dimensional Minkowski space @xmath
. Hyperbolic, elliptic and parabolic elements, respectively, in the Lie
algebra correspond to spacelike, timelike, and lightlike vectors,
respectively, in this Minkowski space. By Lorentz transformations in the
@xmath plane they can be brought into the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and the identification @xmath . Exponentiation yields the
monodromy matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

inducing the further identification @xmath in the elliptic sector
(remember @xmath and @xmath ). The integration of the second Eq. ( 3.45
) gives @xmath . Thus choosing a connection from ( 3.47 ), @xmath has to
commute with the corresponding monodromy matrix and consequently with
the connection itself. Using ( 3.45 ) again, one finds @xmath to be
constant. We obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are arbitrary real parameters. Note, however, that due
to @xmath the hyperbolic sector of the @xmath -RPS is a cone.

In the case @xmath (corresponding to @xmath or @xmath , respectively, in
( 3.47 )) @xmath is constant, too, but it is not restricted by its
commutator with the monodromy matrix. It is, however, subject to
constant gauge transformations, as they leave @xmath invariant.
Considerations similar to those above show that also in this case gauge
representatives of the solutions are given by ( 3.49 ) with @xmath and
the identification @xmath .

( 3.47 , 3.49 ) with @xmath together with the @xmath -sector give a
complete parametrization of the reduced phase space of the @xmath -gauge
theory. As the configuration variable @xmath is compact in the elliptic
sector of the RPS, the corresponding conjugate variable @xmath will have
a discrete spectrum for @xmath in the quantum domain; furthermore, there
will exist some @xmath -angle within this spectrum as the RPS is not
simply connected. ( @xmath will label the irreducible representations of
the fundamental group of the RPS which is @xmath ; thus @xmath ).
Indeed, these expectations have been confirmed in [ 10 ] .

As already indicated above, the group of gauge transformations @xmath is
not connected; rather it consists of an infinite number of components
not smoothly connected to each other: @xmath . A complete set of
representatives for the components of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Parametrizing the phase space as in ( 3.47 ) - ( 3.49 ) we also
implemented these gauge transformations. The action of the group
elements @xmath on the connections ( 3.47 ) gives in the hyperbolic
sector

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

An analogous result is obtained in the parabolic sector. In the elliptic
sector the @xmath generate a transformation @xmath . They are
responsible for the previous identification @xmath , which now is
removed again.

In this way we have found a complete parametrization of the RPS of the
Jackiw-Teitelboim model. It agrees perfectly with the quantum mechanical
system obtained for it: Obviously @xmath are representatives of the
first homotopy of the coadjoint orbit @xmath and the integer @xmath can
be chosen to coincide with the discrete index found in ( 2.43 )
obviously coincides with the integer @xmath present in the
parametrization of the hyperbolic sector ( @xmath ) of the RPS. Note
also that we had to used (at least) two charts to depict the
Jackiw-Teitelboim wave functions in the form ( 2.43 ); they correspond
to the two signs of @xmath in ( 3.49 ) which are swallowed within @xmath
.

At @xmath the RPS is not Hausdorff: the parabolic sector has no disjoint
neighborhood with the ( @xmath , @xmath )–part of the RPS. Thus there
will be no unique way to connect the qualitatively different sectors
@xmath and @xmath of the quantum theory.

As indicated previously the RPS above agrees also with the cylindrical
factor spaces obtained from the Penrose diagrams Fig. 5: @xmath counts
the number of blocks before the identification and the monodromy
matrices are phase space analogues of the ’tilt’ and the ’circumference’
found as the second gauge independent variable beside @xmath in the
hyperbolic and elliptic sector, respectively.

The simplest possibility to bring any of the representatives above into
a form corresponding to a nondegenerate metric is provided by the gauge
transformation @xmath . (This is true except for @xmath where two
transformations are necessary). As a byproduct we find global charts for
the Penrose diagrams Fig. 5 and its cylindrical factor spaces in this
way.

To get some understanding of the @xmath -structure of the orbits, let us
parametrize a general @xmath -element @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are arbitrary, in @xmath periodic
functions of @xmath . That this is a true parametrization can be seen by
noting that the group @xmath could be defined as the group of basis
transformations in a two-dimensional vector space which leaves the area
between two basis vectors invariant; by the first transformation one can
change the angle between the two vectors, the second one rotates them,
and the third one allows to bring one of the two vectors to any given
length. The transition from @xmath to @xmath is performed when we
excluded quasiperiodic functions @xmath .

Now one has to apply the general @xmath –gauge transformation to any of
the representatives of the RPS. Let us do this at the example of the
elliptic sector. We can set @xmath for our purposes, since the third
transformation corresponds to a Lorentz transformation in the gravity
frame bundle and hence it leaves @xmath unchanged. We then obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As noted above the choice @xmath , @xmath yields a nondegenerate
solution (for @xmath ): With ( 3.43 ) we find @xmath . Let us now
analyze the more general transformation provided by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some function of @xmath . We then find that @xmath . So
the resulting metric and zweibein will be nondegenerate on all of the
cylinder, iff @xmath is a strictly monotonic function which, for @xmath
, is bounded by @xmath from below. A possible choice is, e.g., @xmath .

Despite the fact that the gauge transformations ( 3.52 , 3.54 ) with
@xmath and @xmath chosen as above are smoothly connected to the unity
for arbitrary value of @xmath , the solutions @xmath are gravitationally
inequivalent for different values of @xmath . To prove this let us
choose a loop @xmath running around the cylinder once. Under the
restriction @xmath the components of the zweibein @xmath induce a map
@xmath characterized by a winding number (not depending on the choice of
@xmath ). Solutions with different winding numbers cannot be transformed
into each other by gravitational symmetries, since they are separated by
solutions with @xmath . For different values of @xmath the solutions (
3.53 ) have different winding numbers, which proves our assertion.

This result generalizes to the other sectors of the theory: Solutions
which are gauge equivalent in the @xmath gauge theory are not equivalent
in the gravity theory (as defined in item 2 at the beginning of this
section), if they have different winding number. Having found this
inequivalence between the factor spaces 1 and 2 , we will not be
interested in investigating the latter any further. In particular we
will not factor out the large gauge transformations of the gravity
theory; since the group of diffeomorphisms and local Lorentz
transformations consists only of a finite number of components not
smoothly connected to each other, ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 They differ by @xmath - and
@xmath -reflection on the space time manifold and by parity
transformation and time reversal in the Lorentz bundle. the
inequivalence will not be removed by them.

The winding number defined above is related to the kink number as
defined in [ 51 ] by means of ’turn arounds’ of the light cone along
noncontractible loops. More precisely, winding number @xmath corresponds
to kink number @xmath . (Odd kink numbers [ 51 ] characterize solutions
which are not time orientable. Such solutions are not considered here).

All the kink solutions found above are geodesically incomplete. The
prototype is provided by @xmath since the solutions with @xmath are
@xmath -fold coverings of it. For @xmath it is helpful to regard @xmath
and @xmath as polar coordinates for hypothetical cartesian coordinates
@xmath and @xmath . With the observation that @xmath and an analysis of
the null extremals it can be seen that the ( @xmath )–solution ( 3.53 )
is the result of cutting out some piece from the Penrose diagram Fig. 5c
including some part of one boundary; after the cutting procedure the
open ends are identified again. More details shall be provided in [ 16 ]
.

Such a cutting procedure can be performed with any Penrose diagram.
Taking the corresponding @xmath -fold covering will yield a 2 @xmath
-kink solution. Thus such solutions exist not only for the
Jackiw-Teitelboim, but also for the other models considered in this
chapter. By construction their maximal extension is geodesically
incomplete, ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Except for diagrams such as @xmath of Fig. 7.
providing however gravitationally inequivalent nondegenerate @xmath
solutions with cylindrical topology.

It could be regarded as an advantage of the Hamiltonian formulation with
constraints ( 2.22 ) that the geodesically incomplete ( @xmath
)–solutions are automatically identified with the ( @xmath )–solution.
However, since also the latter are not complete for any choice of @xmath
(cf. the discussion in the previous section), this ’advantage’ seems
rather accidental. One of the lessons to be drawn from the analysis of
this section is: Equivalence of symmetry transformations only up to
@xmath in general is of relevance for the factor spaces, and thus for
the quantum theory, even if finally all degenerate solutions are
excluded.

### 3.6 Considerations on the Issue of Time

All the models considered within this work can be reduced to quantum
systems of finitely many topological degrees of freedom. Thus the
question arises: Can such models serve as toy models for a quantum
theory of four dimensional gravity? We hope to have convinced the reader
within the last sections that this is the case with respect to some
technical questions arising in any theory of quantum gravity. It is the
purpose of the present section to show that also an illustrative
treatment of conceptual questions is possible. We will focus on the
so-called ’problem of time’ [ 15 ] of quantum gravity, i.e. the question
of how to find any dynamics within such a theory as the standard
Hamiltonian vanishes on all (physical) quantum states.

For this purpose we study the example of @xmath -gravity with Minkowski
signature coupled to @xmath Yang Mills. The Lagrangian of this system is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Hodge dual operation is performed with the dynamical metric
used to define also the torsionless curvature two-form @xmath , and the
trace is taken in some representation of @xmath . We may, e.g., choose
@xmath and use the metric @xmath to lower and raise Lie algebra indices.
Rewriting @xmath by means of Cartan variables in a Hamiltonian first
order form, it becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have chosen @xmath to denote the ’electric fields’ conjugate to
the @xmath -connection one-components @xmath , and the @xmath ’s are the
conjugates to the spin connection @xmath and the zweibein one-components
@xmath .

@xmath and @xmath together can be interpreted as coordinates @xmath in a
six-dimensional target space @xmath with an appropriate Poisson
structure defined on this space. In the present case it is, however,
simpler to regard @xmath and @xmath as coordinates for two
three-dimensional Poisson structures. @xmath may be seen to be a Casimir
function of the six- as well as of the two three-dimensional Poisson
structures. Thus on-shell it is a constant. @xmath is the sum of an
@xmath - @xmath -theory ( 2.25 ) (up to a factor @xmath ) and an action
( 3.3 ) with @xmath . So one first may solve the unmodified @xmath Gauss
law (on the classical as well as on the quantum level) and then is left
with an ordinary @xmath -gravity theory as studied already before with
an effective cosmological constant @xmath . The coupling between the
gravity and the Yang-Mills system is thus seen to be quite ’minimal’,
but of course not zero.

From the point of view of the field content and the structure of the
action, ( 3.55 ) is an obvious two-dimensional analogue of the
gravity-Yang-Mills system in four dimensions. From the technical point
of view it is incomparably simpler. This is precisely what one expects
from a model to develop and/or test conceptual ideas. Although the
’problem of time’ arises already in a theory of pure gravity as well, we
have chosen to incorporate also the Yang-Mills part in the action. One
of the reasons for doing so is that at any point of the considerations
we can ’turn off’ the gravity curvature by means of the limit @xmath .
We are then basically left with a pure Yang-Mills system. In its
ordinary formulation the latter, however, has a nonvanishing Hamiltonian
and thus a meaningful Schrödinger equation, which should be somehow
reproduced in the gravity flat limit. The coefficients in ( 3.55 ),
where @xmath and @xmath are understood to be real, have been chosen so
as to avoid technical complications as far as possible: In particular
there will be no discrete indices within the wave functions arising from
the gravity sector, since @xmath is effectively negative (cf. Fig. 1 and
the discussion in the previous sections).

In explicit terms the constraints following (naturally) from @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

beside the unmodified @xmath Gauss law @xmath . We will not attempt to
reformulate these constraints so as to possibly cure the global
deficiencies of them with respect to diffeomorphisms noted at the end of
the previous section. Instead we proceed with a straightforward
quantization.

There are two independent Dirac observables as functions of the momenta:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are (the) two Casimir functions of the
target space Poisson structure. The corresponding level surfaces have
topology @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12 Within the
latter level surface the origin is an integral surface by itself. We
will in the following disregard this small complication. This gives rise
to the quantization condition (cf. end of sec. 2.4 ): @xmath . Thus the
physical wave functions take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

having written the phase factor in some local target space coordinates
with @xmath .

Expanding the physical wave functionals in terms of eigenfunctions
@xmath of @xmath , we may write alternatively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

This makes contact with our previous observation: The coefficients in
the above expansion are @xmath -gravity wave functions for the
respective cosmological constant @xmath .

The inner product with respect to @xmath is determined by the
hermiticity requirement on (cf. ( 3.9 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Dirac observable conjugate to @xmath : as noted already previously,
@xmath acts as the usual derivative operator on @xmath , thus leading to
the ordinary Lebesgue measure @xmath . Of course the hermiticity of
@xmath leads to the orthogonality of @xmath for different @xmath .

We end up with the Hilbert space @xmath of an effective two-point
particle system with nontrivial phase space topology (giving rise to the
discrete spectrum of @xmath ). As a basic set of operators acting in
@xmath we could use @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . From the latter one
may construct a ladder operator: @xmath .

All operators acting in @xmath are thus found to be expressible in terms
of @xmath , and the number and ladder operators. However, we do not have
an operator such as @xmath . Following, furthermore, any textbook on
elementary quantum mechanics, the next step in the quantization
procedure would be to introduce an evolution parameter ’time’, which we
will call @xmath , and to require the wave functions to evolve in this
parameter according to the Schrödinger equation. In the present case,
however, the Hamiltonian following from ( 3.56 ) is a combination of the
constraints,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the naive Schrödinger equation becomes meaningless.

Both of these items, the nonexistence of space-time dependent quantum
operators as well as the apparent lack of dynamics, are correlated and
they are not just a feature of the topological theory ( 3.55 ). Also in
four dimensional gravity the quantum observables are some (not
explicitly space-time dependent) holonomy equivalence classes and the
Hamiltonian vanishes when acting on physical wave functions [ 1 ] .
Diffeomorphisms are part of the symmetries of any gravity theory; as a
consequence the Lie derivative into any ’spatial’ direction can be found
to equal the Hamiltonian vector field of some linear combination of the
constraints (in our case @xmath , cf. Eq. ( 2.19 )), whereas, on shell,
@xmath -diffeomorphisms will be generated by the Hamiltonian @xmath .
Thus, although 4D gravity has local degrees of freedom, any of its
(uncountably many) Dirac observables will be also space-time
independent.

To orientate ourselves as of how to introduce quantum dynamics within
such a system, let us have recourse to the simple case of a
nonrelativistic particle (NRP). As is well known, any Hamiltonian system
can be reformulated in time reparametrization invariant terms. In the
case of the NRP,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

the equivalent system has canonical coordinates @xmath and the
’extended’ Hamiltonian is proportional (via a Lagrange multiplier) to
the constraint @xmath . Quantizing this system, e.g., in the coordinate
representation, we observe that the implementation of the constraint
@xmath is equivalent to the Schrödinger equation of the original
formulation, if one reinterpretes the canonical variable @xmath as
evolution parameter @xmath . Therefore, given this formulation of the
NRP or similarly of any other system, the postulate of a Schrödinger
equation within the transition from the classical to the quantum system
becomes superfluous; rather it is already included within the Dirac
quantization procedure in terms of a constraint equation.

The identification @xmath above can be looked upon also as a gauge
condition with gauge parameter @xmath . This interpretation is helpful
for the quantization of the parametrization invariant NRP in the
momentum representation @xmath , in which case the space of physical
wave functions is isomorphic to the space of functions of the Dirac
observable @xmath . The gauge condition @xmath provides a perfect cross
section for the flow of @xmath . Thus it is possible to determine any
phase space variable in terms of the Dirac observables @xmath , @xmath ,
as well as the gauge fixing parameter @xmath . Interpreting @xmath as a
dynamical flow parameter ’time’, the obtained evolution equations for
@xmath and @xmath , transferred to the quantum level as @xmath , @xmath
, become equivalent to the Heisenberg evolution equations of the
parametrized NRP.

The operator @xmath above corresponds to a measuring device that
determines the place of the particle at time @xmath . A measuring device
that determines the time @xmath at which the particle is at a given
point @xmath , on the other hand, corresponds to the alternative gauge
condition @xmath . @xmath provides a good cross section only for @xmath
. Ignoring this subtlety, e.g. by regarding only wave functions with
support at @xmath , the (hermitian) quantum operator for such an
experiment is @xmath . In this second experimental setting Heisenberg’s
’fourth uncertainty relation’ between time @xmath and energy @xmath ,
usually motivated only heuristically, becomes a strict mathematical
equation. We learn that different experimental settings are realized by
means of different gauge conditions, and, at least in principle, vice
versa.

The wave functions of ( 3.56 ) are basically functions of the Dirac
observables, although part of the latter became discretized in the
quantum theory. Transferring the ideas above to the gravity system, we
should find gauge conditions to the constraints ( 3.57 , 3.58 ). (It
will not be necessary to gauge fix also the @xmath Gauss law @xmath ).
As such we will choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is somewhat cumbersome to convince oneself that this is indeed a good
gauge condition. However, for @xmath it provides even a globally
well-defined cross section.

[One possibility to check the obtainability of ( 3.64 ) is to carefully
analyze the corresponding Faddeev matrix, taking into account that the
constraints are not completely independent due to ( 2.34 ). This
(infinite dimensional) matrix turns out to be nondegenerate, iff @xmath
. For @xmath any gauge orbit in the loop space contains a representative
fulfilling this condition, which suffices to prove the assertion since
the space of gauge orbits is connected in the case under study (no
quantum number @xmath ).]

The gauge conditions ( 3.64 ) together with the constraints allow to
express all gravity phase space variables in terms of Dirac observables.
In this way one obtains evolution equations such as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Antisymmetrizing this with respect to @xmath and @xmath , ( 3.65 ) can
be taken as an operator in the Hilbert space @xmath defined above. ¹³ ¹³
13 The elementary procedure above coincides with the use of Dirac
brackets for @xmath -dependent systems (in which case one extends the
symplectic form by @xmath ); this explains also @xmath and @xmath do not
commute anymore. Similarly one finds @xmath , @xmath , which now, up to
operator ambiguities, becomes a well defined operator in our small
quantum gravity theory, too.

Requiring that the @xmath -dependence of ( 3.64 ) is generated by the
Hamiltonian @xmath , the gauge conditions determine also the zero
components of the zweibein and the spin connection. Actually, one zero
mode of these Lagrange multiplier fields @xmath remains arbitrary as a
result of the linear dependence ( 2.34 ) of the constraints @xmath
(cf. also [ 20 ] ). Requiring this zero mode to vanish as a further
gauge condition, one finds @xmath and @xmath . In other gauges the
Lagrange multipliers can become also nontrivial quantum operators.
Furthermore, it is a special feature of the chosen gauge (adapted to the
Killing direction @xmath ) that the obtained operators are @xmath
-independent. Again different choices of gauge conditions are
interpreted as corresponding to different types of questions or
measuring devices.

The alternative procedure to reintroduce time within the quantum theory
of the parametrization invariant NRP was the direct implementation of
the gauge within the wave functions. For this it was decisive that the
initially chosen polarization of the wave functions, @xmath , contained
the phase space variable subject to the gauge. To implement ( 3.64 )
analogously within the gravity theory under consideration, we Fourier
transform ( 3.60 ), multiplied by @xmath , with respect to @xmath . The
result is

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.66)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

in which @xmath is the Fourier transform of the ordinary function @xmath
.

Eq. ( 3.66 ) is in agreement with the general solution of the quantum
constraints in a @xmath representation, if we stick to the operator
ordering resulting from the Fourier transformation of ( 2.33 ). Putting,
on the other hand, all derivative operators in the quantum constraints
to the right to start with, we again find no quantum anomalies in the
constraint algebra. However, the latter operator ordering violates the
conditions ( 2.34 ) and thus leads inevitably to an empty kernel of the
constraints. ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 It would be interesting to see, if a similar
mechanism is responsible for the apparent lack of physical states in
four-dimensional @xmath supergravity [ 52 ] .

In the gauge ( 3.64 ) the quantum wave functions ( 3.60 ) take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have absorbed the divergent factor of ( 3.66 ), being a
function of @xmath , into @xmath .

At this point it is worthwhile to perform the limit @xmath . In some
sense ( 3.55 ) with @xmath is the parametrization (i.e. diffeomorphism)
invariant formulation of the usual Yang Mills theory on the cylinder
(with rigid Minkowski background metric). If we ignore the @xmath
dependence of @xmath for a moment, ( 3.67 ) with @xmath indeed coincides
with the time evolution generated by the (nonvanishing) Yang Mills
Hamiltonian @xmath . This agreement gives support to the method used to
derive ( 3.67 ).

The reason for the @xmath -dependence of @xmath is due to the fact that
in the formulation ( 3.56 ) with @xmath the metric induced circumference
of the cylinder became a dynamical variable (on shell one has @xmath ).
Within ( 3.64 ) one finds @xmath to effectively implement the
Schrödinger equation corresponding to ( 3.67 ). The effective
Hamiltonian acting on @xmath is @xmath . Thus generically the above
procedure yields time dependent Hamiltonians.

In the case of the unparametrized NRP the ’Heisenberg picture’ and the
’Schrödinger picture’ approach to introduce dynamics are obviously
equivalent. Straightforward equivalence of these two approaches was
established also for the gauge @xmath in [ 20 ] . ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 There the
analysis was performed for the KV-model ( 1.4 ), but is valid in an
obvious way also here. It is, however, not quite clear if or in how far
the same is true also for the present incorporation of the gauge
conditions ( 3.64 ). Further investigations into this direction,
analyzing the subject also from a more abstract point of view, are
desirable.

The strategies developed at the example of a NRP to resolve the ’issue
of time’ within a quantum theory of gravity produced, however, quite
sensible results for the toy model ( 3.55 ). But they relied heavily on
either the knowledge of all Dirac observables or on some specifically
chosen polarization. To cope with the considerable technical
difficulties of a quantum theory of four–dimensional gravity, it might
be worthwhile to extend the applicability of the method.

One way to do so within our model is to allow for equivalence classes of
wave functions coinciding at @xmath , the latter condition being
enforced within the inner product [ 20 ] . In this way one can, e.g.,
implement the gauge condition @xmath as an operator condition in the
@xmath –polarization of the wave functions as well. Still, however, a
straightforward implementation of @xmath seems inadmissible also then in
this polarization.

Given the open ends which may be found in this section, we still hope to
have convinced the reader that nontrivial (quantum) dynamics in a theory
of gravity corresponds, in one way or the other, to the choice of gauge
conditions which break the diffeomorphism invariance.