### 2.2. Associated vector bundles

Fundamental to the idea of a global tensor algebra is the notion of an
associated vector bundle, which we will develop here, following [ 29 ,
§3.3] . Say @xmath is a principal fibre bundle, and @xmath is a finite
dimension representation of the group @xmath on a vector space @xmath .
We will write this action of @xmath on @xmath as @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath . We consider the product space @xmath . Define on this an
equivalence relation @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call the set of equivalence classes @xmath the associated vector
bundle for @xmath . The vector bundle is also denoted as @xmath . It is
given the quotient topology, and so in particular if @xmath and @xmath ,
then @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 A smooth structure is determined as follows. Given a
coordinate chart @xmath , and a local section @xmath , define @xmath by
@xmath . The collection of all of these provide an atlas for @xmath .

Such a vector bundle is clearly a fibre bundle, with fibre @xmath , and
locally trivialisable. Since the fibre is the vector space @xmath , we
can perform the usual vector space operations on elements of the vector
bundle lying over the same point of the base manifold. Suppose for
example that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for some @xmath . Then @xmath
.

#### 2.3. General construction of a global tensor algebra

Equipped with this construction, we can describe the global abstract
index tensor algebra associated with a principal fibre bundle and a
particular representation of the structure group. Firstly, we construct
the local abstract index tensor algebra, which is generated by the
representation, as in § 2.1 . The global tensor algebra then arises as a
collection of associated bundles. Conventional developments differ in
that they emphasise the algebraic properties of the global tensor
algebra, and consider it central. On the other hand, we consider the
principal fibre bundle as primary, and the global tensor algebra as
secondary.

For each abstract index tensor representation @xmath , define the
associated vector bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus a typical element of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . These objects are the global tensors , and take
indices from the same labelling set as the local tensor algebra, but
with boldface indices, to distinguish them from the local tensors. Such
a tensor is only defined at a single point, the point @xmath —a tensor
field is a cross section of this associated bundle.

Combining in this fashion the notational convenience of the local
abstract index algebra and the geometric construction of an associated
vector bundle, we obtain an extremely useful description of the tensors
on a manifold. The tensor operations of forming tensor products,
performing index permutations, and taking contractions, all have simple
presentations. Specifically, to perform any of these operations on
elements of the global tensor algebra, we simply perform the operation
on the corresponding element of the local tensor algebra. As we have
seen, the tensor operations in the local tensor algebra all commute with
the group action, ensuring that this prescription for the tensor
operations in the global tensor algebra is well defined.

###### Example.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath . Then there is some @xmath so @xmath , and we
can define @xmath by @xmath , so @xmath . In this case, we give examples
of tensor operations. In each case the expression on the left is defined
by that on the right.

  ----- -------- -------- -- --
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
  and                        
        @xmath   @xmath      
  ----- -------- -------- -- --

#### 2.4. World tensors

We now specialise this machinery to deal with the world tensors—that is,
tensors defined in terms of tangent vectors to a manifold. The tangent
bundle has a direct and geometrical interpretation, and need not be
described as a vector bundle associated to a principal fibre bundle, in
this case the @xmath frame bundle. However, when we later come to define
spinors, there is no analogous direct interpretation. They must be
constructed geometrically as an associated vector bundle. Preempting
this, we show how that tangent bundle, and its related tensor bundles,
are generated from the frame bundle, applying the theory of local tensor
algebras and associated vector bundles.

The relevant Lie group is @xmath , acting on @xmath . As in § 2.1 ,
there is an abstract index local tensor algebra. The index set will
consist of lowercase Roman letters. The relevant principal fibre bundle
is the frame bundle described in § 1.3 .

We can now reobtain the tangent bundle, as an associated vector bundle.
Specifically, @xmath , as follows. If @xmath , and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is well defined, as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equipped with this isomorphism, we henceforth always consider the frame
bundle as primary, and the tangent bundle a derived object.

Producing the world tensor algebra is now simply a matter of stating
that it is the global abstract index algebra associated with the frame
bundle, and the representation of @xmath on @xmath . Thus for example we
have tensor bundles @xmath , etc. Tensor operations all have a simple
appearance in abstract index notation, but we are assured that no
reference is made to local coordinates or components. That is, abstract
index tensor equations are true equations between tensors.

#### 2.5. Product bundles

Later, we will deal with two principal fibre bundles at once, with one
generally the frame bundle. In this case, we can have vectors and
tensors associated with either the frame bundle or the abstract
principal fibre bundle. If we wish to emphasis that tensors are
associated to the frame bundle, we call them world tensors, as above.
Tensors associated to a principal fibre bundle other than the frame
bundle will use special indices, either a gothic script for an abstract
principal fibre bundle, or uppercase Roman characters for an @xmath
spinor structure, defined later. Often, especially when using covariant
derivatives in § 5.3 , we will need tensors with indices associated with
both of the bundles. This can be formalised by considering these tensors
as tensors in a vector bundle associated to the product bundle, which we
mention now.

###### Definition (Product bundle over a base space).

Suppose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are principal fibre bundles defined over the same base manifold. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath by @xmath . The product group @xmath acts on @xmath by @xmath
. Then the principal fibre bundle @xmath is called the product principal
fibre bundle of @xmath and @xmath over @xmath .

Given an associated vector bundle for each of the two principal fibre
bundles, we can form an associated vector bundle for the product bundle,
using the tensor product of the underlying representations. This means
we can use equations with tensors with two types of indices
unambiguously.

### 3. The special orthogonal groups

In order to discuss the special orthogonal group @xmath , we return to
local tensor algebras, and specialise to the representation of @xmath
acting on @xmath . Again, we use lowercase Roman indices for the
abstract index labelling set.

#### 3.1. The indefinite inner product, and @xmath as a subgroup of
@xmath

We introduce an inner product on @xmath , where @xmath . The inner
product is a symmetric valence @xmath tensor, written @xmath , and is
not necessarily positive definite. In fact, if @xmath then it will not
be positive definite, so the term inner product is used only loosely
here. We define @xmath so for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is nondegenerate, it has an inverse as a map from @xmath to
its dual, in the sense that there is a valence @xmath tensor @xmath such
that @xmath .

The orthogonal group is then the subgroup of @xmath preserving @xmath ,
and is denoted @xmath . An element @xmath acts on @xmath by @xmath .
Thus the action of @xmath on the inner product, a valence @xmath tensor,
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is the subgroup of all @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is clear that @xmath does actually form a subgroup, and so
equivalently @xmath is the collection of all @xmath so Equation ( 3.2 )
holds.

#### 3.2. Index manipulations in the tensor algebra

Once we have fixed this inner product, we use it to introduce index
raising and index lowering conventions for the tensors over @xmath .
Specifically, given a tensor @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus given a valence @xmath tensor, we obtain a number of other tensors,
all denoted with the same kernel letter, but with different arrangements
of indices. Within these conventions, it is important to keep track of
the order of superscript and subscript indices, because, for example, if
@xmath is a valence @xmath tensor, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

unless @xmath happens to be symmetric. However, as long as we keep track
of the order of indices, we can repeatedly raise or lower indices
according to this convention, and such raisings and lowerings commute.
Further, if we raise and then lower the same index, or vice versa , we
return to the original tensor, because @xmath has been defined as the
inverse of @xmath . The notation for the inverse of @xmath is consistent
with these conventions, in that @xmath . Finally we point out that the
symmetry of the inner product means that, for example @xmath .

#### 3.3. Connected components

The orthogonal group @xmath is not connected. It has at least two
connected components, since the determinant gives an onto map @xmath .
The special orthogonal group @xmath is the subgroup of @xmath consisting
of the automorphisms of determinant one. When both @xmath and @xmath are
at least @xmath , the special orthogonal group @xmath is not connected
either [ 30 , Proposition 1.124] . We take @xmath to be the connected
component of the identity, which is a closed subgroup of @xmath , and so
itself a Lie group. We will at times simply write @xmath , to indicate
the connected component of an arbitrary orthogonal group.

Throughout this work, we will single out the group @xmath for special
consideration, for two reasons. Firstly, it is the physically relevant
group in general relativity. Secondly, it is fortuitously amenable to
analysis, and much can be said about spinor structures for this group,
in particular because we can give an explicit description of its simply
connected covering space @xmath , in § 11 .

#### 3.4. Lie algebras

The Lie algebras of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all isomorphic, since
the Lie algebra of a Lie group depends only on the identity component.
We denote this Lie algebra as @xmath , or simply as @xmath in the
general case. It consists of all the endomorphisms @xmath of @xmath
which are antisymmetric with respect to @xmath , in the sense that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

See [ 15 , §19.4.3] for details. We will not need to know anything
further about the Lie algebra structure of @xmath for the purpose of
this thesis.

### 4. Orthonormal structures: two viewpoints

In this section we discuss orthonormal structures from two viewpoints.

Firstly, from a classical point of view, an orthonormal structure on a
smooth manifold @xmath consists of a metric tensor with appropriate
properties. The metric tensor is a nondegenerate valence @xmath tensor
defined on all of @xmath , with a certain signature . A manifold
equipped with such a metric tensor is called a Riemannian or
pseudo-Riemannian manifold. Additionally we might specify an orientation
on the manifold.

The more modern second,idea of an orthonormal structure involves
principal fibre bundles. This approach was developed originally by E.
Cartan. ⁶ ⁶ 6 See §20 and particularly §20.7 of Dieudonné [ 15 ] , and
also Cartan [ 9 ] . Starting with the @xmath frame bundle, we can reduce
the structure group in various ways. We will see that the reductions to
principal fibre bundles with structure group @xmath correspond exactly
to choices of metric tensors. A reduction of the structure group to
@xmath , the positive determinant matrices, is equivalent to choosing an
orientation. A further reduction to @xmath or @xmath is equivalent to
choosing both a metric tensor and an orientation.

We begin by giving precise definitions of all these concepts, and then
proceed to show the equivalence between the two descriptions.

#### 4.1. Classical description of a metric tensor

###### Definition 4.1.

A metric tensor on a smooth @xmath dimensional manifold @xmath is a
valence @xmath tensor @xmath such that

1.  it is symmetric, so @xmath ,

2.  it is nondegenerate, so @xmath if and only if @xmath , and

3.  there are positive integers @xmath , so @xmath , and at every point
    of the manifold there are vectors @xmath so that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    or equivalently

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Such a collection of vectors is called an orthonormal frame. Note that
an orthonormal frame is in fact a frame in our previous sense. We say
that such a metric tensor has signature @xmath .

A manifold along with a metric tensor is called a pseudo-Riemannian
manifold. If the signature of the metric tensor is @xmath we say that
the manifold is Riemannian, and if the signature is @xmath we say that
it is Lorentzian. ⁷ ⁷ 7 There is no significant difference here between
the signatures @xmath and @xmath . The physically significant situation,
in general relativity, is a @xmath dimensional Lorentzian manifold with
signature @xmath .

###### Definition.

An orientation on a smooth @xmath dimensional manifold @xmath is an
equivalence class @xmath of nowhere zero antisymmetric valence @xmath
tensors @xmath on @xmath , where two such tensors are equivalent if one
is a positive multiple of the other.

Given an orientation @xmath , we say that a frame @xmath is positively
oriented if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is known from linear algebra that on @xmath the space of local
valence @xmath tensors is one dimensional, and in particular every such
tensor is a multiple of the determinant, which we write @xmath . Here we
think of the determinant as acting on @xmath vectors by evaluating the
determinant of the matrix formed with these vectors as columns. Thus

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now according to Equation ( 1.1 ), @xmath transforms the frame @xmath to
@xmath , and the determinant here gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath acting on @xmath gives @xmath . We will use these facts
presently.

#### 4.2. Reduction to an orthogonal group

Our second description of an orthonormal structure is as a reduction of
the @xmath frame bundle for @xmath to an @xmath bundle over @xmath . As
we will see, this reduction defines a metric, and gives an orientation
to @xmath . If @xmath , it also provides a time orientation.

Suppose @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath , and that @xmath is an @xmath
principal fibre bundle over a base space @xmath , and @xmath is a @xmath
principal fibre bundle over @xmath .

###### Definition.

We say that @xmath is a reduction of @xmath if there is a principal
fibre bundle morphism @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath .

The reduction map @xmath is injective, since @xmath acts transitively on
each fibre of @xmath , and freely on @xmath .

#### 4.3. Equivalence of these descriptions

Showing that a metric defines a reduction of the frame bundle @xmath to
an @xmath bundle is relatively straightforward, and we do this first.
Simply, this bundle @xmath is the collection of all orthonormal frames
in @xmath , and @xmath acts on it as a subgroup of @xmath acting on
@xmath . We need to check that this satisfies the axioms for an @xmath
principal fibre bundle. Almost all the conditions of Definition 1.1 are
satisfied immediately. We need only check that @xmath maps @xmath to
itself, and that it acts transitively on each fibre.

Suppose @xmath is an orthonormal frame, so @xmath for each @xmath .
Then, according to the action defined in Equation ( 1.1 ), @xmath , and
so if @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, as we expect, elements of @xmath map orthonormal frames to
orthonormal frames.

Further, if @xmath is another orthonormal frame at the same point, there
must be some element @xmath that takes @xmath to @xmath . However,
according to the above calculation, this element @xmath preserves the
inner product @xmath , and so is in fact an element of @xmath . This
establishes that @xmath acts transitively on the fibres.

Next, we consider orientations, claiming that an orientation results in
a reduction to a @xmath bundle, by taking the collection of all
positively oriented orthonormal frames. Following exactly the argument
above, and the discussion of determinant above, we see that any element
of @xmath preserves the volume form, and so takes positively oriented
frames to positively oriented frames. Going the other way, given two
positively oriented orthonormal frames, there must be an element of
@xmath taking one to the other, and the same argument shows that this
element must have positive determinant, and so lie in @xmath .

Conversely, suppose @xmath is an @xmath bundle over @xmath , which is a
reduction of the frame bundle @xmath . Suppose @xmath is the reduction
map, a principal bundle morphism @xmath . We will define a metric tensor
on @xmath . Specifically, at each point @xmath of @xmath , chose @xmath
so that @xmath for some @xmath . Define @xmath at that point by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is well defined, since if @xmath is another point in @xmath , then
@xmath for some @xmath , and so @xmath also, and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This tensor field is smooth, since a local smooth cross section of
@xmath gives a local smooth cross section of @xmath via @xmath .
Checking that @xmath satisfies the axioms of a metric tensor in
Definition 4.1 is very straightforward. Symmetry and nondegeneracy
follow from the same properties of @xmath , and the orthonormal basis is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath -th standard basis vector.

Further, if @xmath is an @xmath bundle, then we obtain an orientation as
well. Because elements of @xmath preserve the determinant, we can define
a tensor field @xmath , for all @xmath . This is everywhere nonzero, and
antisymmetric, and so gives an orientation.

This argument is related to those in [ 15 , §20.7] or [ 29 , §3.3] , but
makes use of the associated bundle construction.

Note that if @xmath , then @xmath is not connected. A further reduction
of the structure group to @xmath , the connected component of the
identity, is achieved by choosing a time orientation [ 3 , §2.4] . On
Lorentzian manifolds this is a nowhere zero vector field @xmath so
@xmath everywhere. ⁸ ⁸ 8 To be precise, it is an equivalence class of
these, where @xmath and @xmath are equivalent if @xmath everywhere. We
will not go into the details here, because for general @xmath and @xmath
they are awkward, but henceforth always consider @xmath reductions of
the frame bundle, so that the structure group is connected.

#### 4.4. The world tensor algebra for an orthonormal bundle

At this point we are considering two bundles, the frame bundle, and a
reduction of the frame bundle, the orthonormal bundle. We have
previously constructed the world tensor algebra as a collection of
vector bundles associated to the frame bundle. Similarly we can now
construct vector bundles associated to the orthonormal bundle. However,
we quickly find that they are equivalent. If @xmath is a vector space
carrying a representation @xmath of @xmath , such that @xmath is a
tensor product of copies of the matrix representation and its dual, then
we can extend this representation to a representation of @xmath , simply
because the matrix representation of @xmath extends to the matrix
representation of @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.

The map @xmath given by @xmath is an isomorphism of the vector bundles.

###### Proof.

It is clear that this map is linear. Additionally, it is surjective,
because any @xmath can be written as @xmath for some @xmath , and @xmath
. It is injective, since if @xmath , then there is a @xmath so that
@xmath , and so @xmath , and finally @xmath . ∎

This shows that we can equally well consider world tensors as lying in a
vector bundle associated to @xmath or as lying in one associated to
@xmath . This occurs because of the apparently trivial fact that the
representations of @xmath extend to representations of @xmath . We will
see however that representations of the covering group @xmath need not
extend to representations of @xmath . This has implications for the
construction of a spinor algebra in § 12 .

As we have seen, the metric tensor @xmath has a simple form @xmath , and
so the index manipulation rules for local @xmath tensors, as in § 3.2 ,
carry across immediately to the world tensor algebra. For example, given
a world vector @xmath at a point @xmath , we can always find a @xmath ,
and write the world vector in the form @xmath . In this case the
associated ‘lowered’ tensor, @xmath is defined by @xmath . The @xmath
invariance of @xmath and the fact that @xmath is a reduction map ensures
that this is well defined.

#### 4.5. The orthonormal bundle as a configuration space

At this point we briefly describe a useful way of thinking about
orthonormal bundles. Firstly recall how @xmath can be used to describe
the possible orientations ⁹ ⁹ 9 ‘Orientation’ is intended here in the
everyday sense, not the mathematical sense for manifolds or vector
spaces. of an object @xmath dimensional. If we associate arbitrarily one
orientation with the identity, there is a one to one correspondence
between orientations and elements of @xmath .

Next, suppose we consider an @xmath bundle reduction of the frame bundle
@xmath over a manifold @xmath . The points of this bundle corresponds
exactly to the possible configurations of an @xmath dimensional
‘oriented particle’ on @xmath , that is, an object with a position and
an orientation. The group @xmath acts in the obvious way as rotations.

We can similarly interpret an @xmath bundle, for example, as the
configurations of a relativistic particle.

### 5. Tensor calculus

In the following sections, we will demonstrate, given an orthonormal
structure, the existence of a metric connection on the manifold. This
connection is not unique however. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The standard theory of
pseudo-Riemannian geometry picks out a particular torsion free metric
connection. This is called the Levi–Civita connection. Although it is
possible to understand this connection in the context of frame bundles
and connection forms thereon, this will not be needed for our purposes.
Our construction will be somewhat unconventional, using the principal
fibre bundle approach. Any principal fibre bundle allows a connection,
and we will see that all connections on @xmath , the total space of the
orthonormal bundle, are automatically metric connections with respect to
the metric induced by the bundle. Along the way we will give a
description of the relationship between connections and covariant
derivatives for arbitrary principal fibre bundles. This description is
not absolutely complete—we try to balance checking every detail against
useful explanation. The generality of this section will be vital later
in discussing spinor covariant derivatives in § 9 and the Dirac equation
in § 14 .

The material in the following sections is required to reach our aim in §
5.4 . However, most of Part II may be read only having looked at § 5.1
and the first parts of § 5.2 , introducing connections and parallel
transport. Part III , however, relies more heavily on § 5.3 and § 5.4 .

#### 5.1. Connection forms

We first recall the definition of a connection form (c.f. [ 10 , p. 288]
or [ 29 , §3.5] ). We consider a principal fibre bundle @xmath . At each
point @xmath , there is the vertical subspace of @xmath , given by
@xmath . We describe two maps identifying @xmath with @xmath , defining

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------- -- --

( @xmath is the translation function, described in § 1.2 .) Now @xmath
and @xmath . Also @xmath so @xmath is a constant function for each
@xmath , so @xmath , and thus both @xmath and @xmath are linear
isomorphisms. This map @xmath , taking the vertical subspace at a point
to the Lie algebra, will reappear many times.

###### Definition 5.1.

A connection form on @xmath is a linear map @xmath , that is, a @xmath
-form on @xmath , with values in the Lie algebra of @xmath , such that

1.  @xmath for all @xmath ,

2.  @xmath for all @xmath .

This definition prompts a comment on the notation. We will consistently
use @xmath to mean the derivative of the right action by @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath to mean the pull-back by the right action. It is
important to remember that, regardless of this notation, @xmath acts on
the right!

The first part of this definition determines how the connection form
maps the vertical vectors into the Lie algebra, and the second part is
called the ‘elevator property’.

We now establish the existence of a connection form on any principal
fibre bundle. This connection form is by no means unique. In particular,
the result here shows that there is always a connection available on the
frame bundle, which gives a covariant derivative on the tangent bundle
and the associated tensor bundles. Further, given a reduction of the
frame bundle associated with a metric to the orthonormal bundle, there
is a connection on the orthonormal bundle.

###### Proposition 5.2.

There exists a connection form on any @xmath principal fibre bundle,
@xmath .

###### Proof.

This is an entirely standard argument. However, due to its importance,
both in providing connections as technical tools, and underlying our
interest in connections on spinor structures in § 9 , we give a proof in
§ C.1 . ∎

###### Corollary.

If @xmath is an @xmath dimensional manifold, then there exists a
connection on the frame bundle @xmath .

###### Corollary.

If @xmath is an @xmath dimensional manifold, @xmath is a subgroup of
@xmath , and @xmath is a @xmath -reduction of the frame bundle for
@xmath , then there exists a connection on @xmath . In particular, if
@xmath and @xmath is a bundle of oriented orthonormal frames then there
is a connection.

We will later prove in § 5.4 that a connection on an orthonormal frame
bundle corresponds with the usual idea of a metric covariant derivative.

#### 5.2. Parallel transport

In this section we outline the relationship between connection forms and
parallel transports, and lay the groundwork for covariant derivatives.
From a geometrical point of view, the parallel transport provides a
bridge between the notions of connection form and covariant derivative.
Compare [ 29 , 38 ] .

##### 5.2.1. Horizontal lifting map

Suppose a connection form @xmath is defined on the total space @xmath of
a bundle @xmath . For each point @xmath , we call the kernel of @xmath
the horizontal subspace @xmath of @xmath . Since the image of @xmath is
all of @xmath , via the first property in Definition 5.1 , by counting
dimensions we see that the dimension of the horizontal subspace is
exactly the dimension of the base manifold. Thus @xmath . Further, if
@xmath , and @xmath , then @xmath . The derivative @xmath restricted to
@xmath is thus a linear isomorphism, and we denote the inverse map
@xmath , and call it the horizontal lifting map.

We now prove a lemma about the horizontal lifting map.

###### Lemma 5.3.

The connection form is determined by the horizontal lifting map.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Write @xmath . Now @xmath , since @xmath . Further @xmath , so @xmath ,
proving the result. ∎

##### 5.2.2. Parallel transport

The horizontal lifting map @xmath allows us to define parallel
transport. Given a vector field @xmath on an open set @xmath , we apply
@xmath to lift it to a horizontal vector field defined on @xmath .
Fixing some @xmath gives us an initial point from which to form an
integral curve of the horizontal vector field. This integral curve is
fundamental to parallel transportation.

From a simple path (smooth, with no self-intersections) @xmath in @xmath
we can form the tangent vector field along the curve, and, at least near
@xmath , extend this to a vector field defined on a neighbourhood @xmath
of @xmath . Again, the horizontal lifting map applied to this vector
field gives a horizontal vector field on @xmath . Suppose @xmath . The
integral curve of the horizontal vector field starting at @xmath is
@xmath , for some @xmath , with @xmath , and in fact @xmath . This last
fact follows because @xmath is the inverse of @xmath . We observe that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The curve @xmath is the parallel transport of @xmath along the curve
@xmath .

A stronger version of this idea is established by the following
Proposition, allowing parallel transports along the entire length of an
arbitrary smooth path, and ensuring that the parallel transport depends
continuously upon the initial data.

###### Proposition 5.4.

Given a smooth path @xmath , and @xmath , we can form the parallel
transport of @xmath along @xmath , which is a smooth curve @xmath such
that

1.   the projection down to @xmath is the original curve, @xmath , and

2.   the derivative at any point is given by the horizontal lift of the
    derivative of the original curve, @xmath .

Furthermore, suppose

1.  @xmath is a smooth family of paths, in the sense that @xmath is
    smooth,

2.  @xmath is a smooth curve in @xmath with @xmath , and

3.  @xmath is the parallel transport of @xmath along @xmath .

Then the map @xmath is (at worst) continuous.

###### Proof.

The method of construction is as described above—we simply add here that
the integral curve giving the parallel transport can be extended so as
to be defined over all of the interval @xmath , following the argument
of [ 31 , Proposition 3.1] , or of [ 15 , §18.6] . We omit these details
here.

The second part follows immediately from the fact that solutions of
differential equations depend (at worst) continuously on a smoothly
varying initial value [ 6 , §IV.4] . In more detail, §II.4 of [ 31 ]
proves that @xmath is smooth for each @xmath , and since @xmath is also
smooth for each @xmath , by the first part of this proposition, the map
@xmath is certainly continuous. It is a possible, but not necessary
here, to prove a stronger result. ∎

We will use the second part of this Proposition later, in establishing
the Existence Theorem for spinor structures.

Now that we have a notion of parallel transport for the principal fibre
bundle, parallel transport in any of the associated vector bundles is
straightforward. Simply, a vector @xmath at the point @xmath is parallel
transported as @xmath . We parallel transport the reference element of
@xmath , leaving fixed the vector in the representation space.

##### 5.2.3. Local representatives and Christoffel symbols

A local section of a bundle is a map @xmath from an open set @xmath to
@xmath , such that @xmath . Given a local section, we can form a local
representative of the connection form, @xmath . The local representative
is then a @xmath -form on the base space, with values in the Lie
algebra.

Knowing the local section, this process can in fact be reversed [ 29 ,
§3.5] . That is, the local representatives determine the connection.
First we need to identify the tangent space at any point of a Lie group
@xmath with the Lie algebra, by left translation. Denote the left
translation by @xmath map as @xmath , so @xmath . Thus given @xmath , we
associate the element of the Lie algebra @xmath . Suppose @xmath is a
local section of a principal fibre bundle. Define the related local
trivialisation @xmath by @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.5.

If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

See [ 29 ] . ∎

In the special case of a connection on the frame bundle a coordinate
chart on the base manifold implicitly defines a cross section of the
bundle, via the coordinate basis. The local representative formed using
this cross section may be thought of as ‘the connection form in local
coordinates’. The above proposition makes this precise.

The local representative of a connection form has an unusual appearance
in abstract index notation. For each choice of a representation @xmath
of @xmath on a vector space @xmath , we obtain a representation of the
Lie algebra @xmath on the same vector space. This associates with each
element of the Lie algebra a matrix acting on @xmath . If a typical
element of @xmath is written as @xmath , a kernel letter with a gothic
superscript index, then for each vector in the Lie algebra we obtain a
tensor @xmath . Thus the local representative is denoted by a kernel
letter with three indices, for example as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will see in § 5.3 that local representatives written in this form are
the appropriate generalisation of Christoffel symbols [ 44 , p. 62] [ 53
, §3.1] to general principal fibre bundles and their associated vector
bundles.

##### 5.2.4. Christoffel symbols for tensor product representations.

If the chosen representation is in fact a tensor product of other
representations, then we obtain a representation of the Lie algebra on
the tensor product space.

If @xmath lies in the representation @xmath , then an element @xmath of
@xmath acts by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus if @xmath , and @xmath is a smooth path in @xmath so @xmath and
@xmath , then, using the Leibniz rule, @xmath acts on @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Now @xmath is exactly @xmath . Thus writing @xmath , acting on elements
of this tensor product representation, in abstract index notation, we
have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Here in each term we have omitted a product of factors of the form
@xmath . We do the same in the next equation.

If we are interested in the local representative of a connection as it
acts on a particular tensor product representation, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This fact will be used later in § 5.3 to explain the Leibniz rule for
covariant derivatives, and in § 5.4.2 proving Proposition 5.7 about
metric connections.

##### 5.2.5. The difference between connections is a tensor

The following result is interesting in itself, as it constitutes part of
the ‘structure theory’ of connections. However, our real interest is in
using this eventually to compare different spinor connections, in § 14.1

###### Proposition 5.6.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are connections on @xmath . The difference
between @xmath and @xmath defines a tensor on @xmath according to the
following prescription. Let @xmath and @xmath be local cross sections of
@xmath , and let @xmath be the local representative @xmath in index
notation, and @xmath that of @xmath . Then if @xmath is such that @xmath
for all @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so the prescription

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

gives a well defined global tensor on @xmath .

Remark. Essentially the claim here is that the local representatives
transform appropriately as we change the local cross section, and so
live in the appropriate representation, so that we can define the global
tensor as an element of the associated tensor bundle.

###### Proof.

Define @xmath by @xmath . Thus @xmath , and @xmath . For an arbitrary
@xmath , choose a path @xmath so @xmath , and let @xmath , where @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath , and @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath agree on the second
term of the expression above, and so @xmath . Finally then @xmath , and
this is easily seen to imply the result. ∎

##### 5.2.6. Parallel transport in a local trivialisation

Parallel transportation can be described more explicitly when a local
trivialisation is given. Fix a local cross section @xmath and the
related local trivialisation @xmath defined by @xmath . Let @xmath be a
path, and @xmath , so that in this trivialisation @xmath . The parallel
transport of @xmath along @xmath is the unique curve in @xmath starting
at @xmath which has an everywhere horizontal tangent vector and which
projects down via @xmath to the curve @xmath . Thus in the
trivialisation this curve is of the form @xmath , @xmath , for some
function @xmath with @xmath . The condition that the tangent vector is
horizontal is expressed by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The final step is an application of Proposition 5.5 . We conclude from
this that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further, we can write this in abstract index notation, writing @xmath
for the tangent vector field @xmath , using @xmath and explicitly
applying @xmath , to obtain

  --------------------------- -------- -------- -- -------
                                       @xmath      
  and more simply at @xmath                        
                              @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
  --------------------------- -------- -------- -- -------

We will use these expressions in the next section.

#### 5.3. Covariant derivatives

The chief difficulty in defining the derivative of one vector field with
respect to another is that although the vector spaces at each point of
the base manifold are isomorphic, they are not canonically so, and
therefore we have no intrinsic way of comparing vectors at two different
points of the manifold. More concretely, vectors based at different
points are elements of different vector spaces, and so we have no way to
apply the usual vector space operations to them. Without this, we cannot
form the difference quotient familiar from the usual definition of
derivative. Parallel transportation bridges this difficulty.

Given a local cross section @xmath defined on @xmath of an associated
vector bundle, a connection @xmath on the principal fibre bundle, and a
tangent vector field @xmath also defined on @xmath , we define the
covariant derivative of @xmath in the direction @xmath , written @xmath
, as follows. Fix a point @xmath . Let @xmath , for some @xmath , be the
integral curve of @xmath starting at @xmath . Parallel transportation of
@xmath along @xmath defines a curve @xmath in the associated vector
bundle, such that the vector @xmath is based at the point @xmath .
Notice that we distinguish between @xmath and @xmath . The first is the
parallel transport by @xmath of @xmath , and the second is the value of
@xmath at the point @xmath . We can thus compare @xmath and @xmath
because they are vectors at the same point. We define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that this limit is in the topology on the fibre bundle, as the
vectors @xmath and @xmath do not lie at a fixed point. An alternative
definition of parallel transport is available that uses only the
topology of the fibre at a point, but it is more cumbersome in other
places, and finally makes little difference. Analogously, if @xmath is a
local cross section of a tensor bundle, we define the covariant
derivative in the same way, so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This description is sufficient to define a covariant derivative, but we
will need to develop the details further for the purposes of later
theorems. Although we are about to perform calculations in a specific
local trivialisation, the prescription given here is well defined. The
symbol @xmath itself is not a tensor, but @xmath is, ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 We must
keep in mind that the indices here correspond to two different principal
fibre bundles, one the frame bundle, and so we need to use the idea of a
product bundle in § 2.5 . because it is clear from Equation ( 5.6 ) that
@xmath is a tensor for every vector field @xmath .

In order to evaluate the covariant derivative, we choose a local cross
section of the principal fibre bundle @xmath , with @xmath . As usual,
this gives a local trivialisation @xmath . The vector field @xmath can
be expressed in terms of this trivialisation in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath takes values in the fixed underlying vector space of the
representation. It is important to remember here the notational
distinction between @xmath , which is a section of the vector bundle,
and @xmath , which is a map from @xmath to a fixed vector space.
Parallel transportation of @xmath along the curve @xmath gives the curve
@xmath in @xmath described above in § 5.2.6 . Thus @xmath , and so we
can calculate the derivative defined in Equation ( 5.6 ) as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8)
              @xmath      
                          
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the last line here we have utilised Equation ( 5.5 ). Using the ideas
of § 2.5 we can ‘cancel’ the @xmath . To do this we need to consider not
just a local trivialisation of @xmath , but also a local trivialisation
of the frame bundle @xmath , so that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It becomes clear at this point how the local representatives of the
connection form are related to the more familiar Christoffel symbols of
Riemannian geometry. They specify the difference between covariant
differentiation and partial differentiation in a particular local
trivialisation. Similarly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

using Equation ( 5.4 ) instead of Equation ( 5.2 ). It is clear from
this expression that covariant differentiation satisfies the Leibniz
rule. This follows because the term involving the derivative of the
components, @xmath , satisfies the Leibniz rule, and we can rearrange
the terms involving Christoffel symbols appropriately.

#### 5.4. Metric connections

We now complete the demonstration of the equivalence between the two
viewpoints of orthonormal structures. This section shows that
connections on an orthonormal bundle correspond to metric covariant
derivatives.

Suppose @xmath is a metric of signature @xmath and further that @xmath
is a covariant derivative, associated with a connection form @xmath on
the frame bundle @xmath . Let @xmath be the @xmath principal fibre
bundle of orthonormal frames for @xmath . Since @xmath is a reduction of
@xmath , in a natural sense @xmath can be restricted to a form on @xmath
. This restriction will not generally be a connection form on @xmath ,
since its values lie in the Lie algebra @xmath . We say that @xmath
restricts to a connection form on @xmath if its range lies within the
Lie subalgebra @xmath .

We say that @xmath is metric with respect to @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can also call the connection form @xmath itself metric, if its
associated covariant derivative is metric. This section gives the proof
of the following proposition.

###### Proposition 5.7.

The following two conditions are equivalent:

1.   The covariant derivative @xmath is metric.

2.   The connection form @xmath restricts to a connection form on the
    orthonormal frame bundle @xmath .

This problem will be addressed in two steps, in the following sections.

A corollary of Proposition 5.7 is that the connection forms on the
orthonormal frame bundle @xmath provided by Proposition 5.2 give metric
covariant derivatives. That is, given a metric @xmath , there is always
a compatible covariant derivative @xmath so that @xmath .

This fact prompts a final note on the abstract index notation. The
conventions for raising and lowering indices are compatible with the
metric covariant derivative, in that if we have a valence @xmath tensor
@xmath , and the corresponding @xmath tensor @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we have used the fact that @xmath is a metric covariant derivative,
and the Leibniz rule.

##### 5.4.1. An @xmath connection is metric

To show that any connection on @xmath is metric with respect to the
metric induced by the bundle, we will step back slightly, and describe
how this metric is parallel transported by the connection. Specifically,
if the metric at one point is parallel transported to another point, it
is found to be equal to the metric defined at that point. Using the
definition of the covariant derivative in terms of parallel transports,
this then ensures that the covariant derivative of the metric is zero,
that is, @xmath

We actually prove this result in a more general setting. Suppose @xmath
is a principal fibre bundle, and @xmath is a representation of the group
on @xmath . An invariant vector @xmath in @xmath for this representation
is a vector such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . The metric tensor @xmath is an invariant tensor for the
orthonormal group, since the relevant representation acts as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Any such invariant defines an element of the corresponding vector bundle
@xmath at each point @xmath , by @xmath , for an arbitrary @xmath . This
is well defined, since for some other @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath ,
and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The element @xmath of the vector bundle is also called an invariant
vector, or tensor, if appropriate. Further, defining @xmath in this
fashion at each point gives an invariant vector field.

###### Proposition 5.8.

Suppose @xmath is an invariant vector field for the principal fibre
bundle @xmath . If @xmath is a connection on @xmath , and @xmath is the
associated covariant derivative, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a curve in @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath . Suppose
@xmath , and parallel transport along @xmath carries @xmath to @xmath .
Thus parallel transport carries @xmath to @xmath , which is exactly
@xmath , since @xmath in an invariant vector field.

Thus parallel transport along any curve carries @xmath to itself, and
so, from the definition of the covariant derivative in terms of parallel
transportation in § 5.3 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This general result now specialises easily to prove the desired result.
It will also prove an important result of the @xmath spinor calculus,
Proposition 13.2 .

###### Corollary.

The metric tensor @xmath is the invariant tensor field defined by the
invariant tensor @xmath for the orthonormal group. Thus if @xmath is the
covariant derivative defined by a connection on the orthonormal frame
bundle,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### 5.4.2. Metric connections are @xmath connections

For the converse, we need only show that a metric connection takes
values solely in the Lie algebra @xmath . If this is true, the
properties of the connection on the frame bundle ensure that the
restriction to the orthonormal bundle also satisfies the connection form
axioms of Definition 5.1 .

Since @xmath is an invariant tensor, @xmath in any local cross section.
Thus the derivative is given by Equation ( 5.10 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a certain fixed tensor, the first term, involving its
exterior derivative, vanishes. Further, in the last two terms we use the
index lowering convention for @xmath , to obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since this expression vanishes, we find the simple condition @xmath
governing the local representatives of the connection. This implies that
the connection always takes values in the Lie algebra of @xmath as
described in § 3.4 , since the values in the full @xmath Lie algebra are
always antisymmetric with respect to the invariant tensor @xmath .

## Part II Spinor Structure Classification

We now begin our treatment of spinor structures. The idea is to take a
principal fibre bundle, and replace the structure group with its simply
connected covering group in an appropriate fashion. The precise
definition is given in § 7 . To start, we need to introduce the
fundamentals of covering space theory, which underlie all the results in
this part of the thesis. The necessary material is summarised in § 6 .

In § 7 we state and prove the Existence and Classification Theorems for
spinor structures in a general setting, and compare these results with
previously published work. Further, in § 8 , we analyse the spinor
structures of reduced bundles.

In § 10 we discuss classifying inequivalent spinor structures in terms
of the underlying principal fibre bundle. With the available methods it
is only possible to do this completely in special cases, but we show
that these include the physically significant situation. We also
conjecture an extension of the result presented here.

Finally, in § 9 and § 10.2 we give a thorough discussion of connections
on spinor structures. With the aid of our ‘bundle classification’ of
spinor structures, we show how connections on inequivalent spinor
structures can be compared. This leads naturally into Part III , as it
allows us to explain how the classification of spinor structures is
relevant to the physics of the Dirac equation.

### 6. A preamble on covering spaces

Much of the theory of spinor structures that we develop will rely upon
covering space theory. In fact, the geometric definition of a spinor
structure which we will give relies intimately upon the notion of a
covering space. Thus, in this section, we give the relevant definitions,
as well as a suitable version of the fundamental Covering Space
Classification Theorem. This result forms the basis of the results of §
7 .

#### 6.1. Definitions

The two basic definitions are of continuous covering maps and smooth
covering maps.

###### Definition 6.1.

A continuous covering map @xmath is a continuous map from a connected
topological space @xmath to a connected topological space @xmath such
that each @xmath in @xmath has a neighbourhood @xmath so that @xmath is
a disjoint union of sets @xmath , so that the restriction @xmath is a
homeomorphism for each @xmath . (See Figure 1 .) We call @xmath the
covering space.

Notice that we consider only connected covering spaces.

###### Definition 6.2.

A smooth covering map @xmath is a continuous covering map so that the
restrictions @xmath are all diffeomorphisms.

###### Proposition 6.3.

If @xmath is a continuous covering map, and @xmath is a smooth manifold,
then there is a unique differentiable structure for @xmath so @xmath is
a smooth covering map.

###### Proof.

We construct this smooth structure as follows. Let @xmath be an open
covering of @xmath by sets so that @xmath maps @xmath homeomorphically
onto its image, and @xmath is a chart for @xmath , with coordinate map
@xmath for each @xmath . Such an open covering certainly exists. Define
@xmath by @xmath for each @xmath . This map is a homeomorphism, because
it is a composition of homeomorphisms. Further, the ‘transition maps’
@xmath are all diffeomorphisms, because @xmath . Thus the collection
@xmath defines an atlas for @xmath , and it is clear that @xmath is a
smooth map, and further a smooth covering map, with respect to this
differentiable structure.

Uniqueness is trivial, since for @xmath to be a diffeomorphism, all of
the charts described above must be in the atlas for @xmath . The
differentiable structure is uniquely determined by any atlas,
establishing the result. ∎

Thus there is no essential difference between continuous and smooth
covering maps.

###### Definition 6.4.

We say two continuous (respectively, smooth) covering maps @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent if there is a homeomorphism (resp. diffeomorphism)
@xmath so @xmath .

#### 6.2. Paths and loops

We next introduce the notions of paths and loops in a manifold. A path
is a map @xmath , and a loop is a map @xmath taking @xmath and @xmath to
the same point of @xmath . In this section, we will distinguish between
continuous and smooth paths or loops, but we will also see that for the
purposes of later sections this distinction is not important.

We say that two paths @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are
continuously homotopic if there is a continuous map @xmath so that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Two smooth paths are smoothly homotopic [ 40 , §4] if there is such a
smooth map @xmath . Again, we will see that this distinction is
unimportant for our purposes, and so in later sections we always mean
‘smoothly homotopic’ by ‘homotopic’. Continuous homotopy gives an
equivalence relation. It is clear that the relation is reflexive and
symmetric. Continuous homotopies can be patched together, showing that
continuous homotopy is a transitive relation. We thus denote the
equivalence class of a path @xmath under continuous homotopy by @xmath .

Continuous paths can be concatenated. Given @xmath , such that @xmath ,
the path @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Smooth paths cannot necessarily be concatenated, as the resulting path
may not be smooth at @xmath .

Concatenation is neither commutative nor associative. Up to homotopy,
however, it is associative. That is, @xmath for all paths @xmath such
that these concatenations are defined. This relation is trivially proved
by providing the appropriate homotopy. It is easy to see that @xmath
depends only on the equivalence classes @xmath and @xmath , so we can
use the notation @xmath for @xmath .

The claim that the distinction between the continuous and smooth cases
is unimportant follows from two facts.

###### Proposition 6.5.

Firstly, every continuous path in a smooth manifold is homotopic to a
smooth path. Secondly, if two smooth paths are continuously homotopic,
they are smoothly homotopic.

###### Proof.

See Theorem 7 and the following discussion in Chapter 2 of [ 48 ] , and
Theorem 8 of the same. Related results are given in [ 14 , §16.26] . ∎

Given that henceforth we will work only in the smooth setting, it may
seem redundant to have mentioned the continuous case at all. This
infelicity is forced upon us by the fact that covering space theory is
most natural in the continuous setting, and the theorems that we will
rely on are proved there. On the other hand, much of the work described
here, particularly the proofs in § 7 of the Existence and Classification
Theorems for spinor structures, and § 8 , relies intimately on smooth
connections to provide accessible and geometric arguments. At the price
of dealing here with both the continuous and the smooth case, we may
later combine the power of both covering space theory and the theory of
smooth connections. Additionally, of course, we want to work with smooth
manifolds, so that we can do calculus.

With these results in hand, we can improve upon the theory of smooth
paths and smooth homotopies. Firstly, we can define the equivalence
relation of smooth homotopy. Again, it is clear that the relation is
reflexive and symmetric. Now, if @xmath are three smooth paths so @xmath
is smoothly homotopic to @xmath , and @xmath is smoothly homotopic to
@xmath , then @xmath must be continuously homotopic is @xmath . Using
the result that continuously homotopic smooth paths are smoothly
homotopic, we see that smooth homotopy is also transitive. Again, we
denote the smooth homotopy equivalence class of @xmath by @xmath . This
overlap of notation is consistent. That is, the smooth paths in the
smooth homotopy equivalence class of @xmath are exactly the smooth paths
in the continuous homotopy equivalence class of @xmath .

Secondly, although smooth paths @xmath with @xmath cannot necessarily be
concatenated, up to homotopy they can be. ¹² ¹² 12 This result, and the
previous, that smooth homotopy is a transitive relation, can be proved
more concretely, without the use of Proposition 6.5 . See for example [
40 , §4] . Define

@xmath

where @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath . Then @xmath is smooth
(but not analytic), and @xmath and @xmath . Using this, @xmath is
smoothly homotopic to @xmath , and for any smooth paths @xmath such that
@xmath , @xmath is a smooth path. A similar argument using @xmath shows
that smooth homotopy is transitive. This is because @xmath and @xmath
can be concatenated to form a continuous path @xmath , and this
continuous path is homotopic to a smooth path. Thus we can define @xmath
by @xmath . It is straightforward to see that @xmath depends only on the
equivalence classes @xmath and @xmath . Again, up to homotopy,
concatenation is associative.

Concatenation always has a inverse, up to homotopy. If @xmath is a path,
we will write @xmath for the reverse path, defined by @xmath . Then
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the homotopy class of the constant path at
@xmath .

#### 6.3. Fundamental groups

We now introduce the fundamental group of a manifold. This construction
requires a fixed base point in the manifold. Suppose @xmath is a smooth
manifold, and @xmath is a base point. Define @xmath to be the set of all
smooth paths in @xmath starting at @xmath . Define @xmath to be the set
of all smooth loops @xmath in @xmath based at @xmath so @xmath , and
@xmath to be the set of all continuous loops in @xmath . Define @xmath
to be the set of smooth homotopy equivalence classes in @xmath , and
give it a group structure by concatenation. Similarly define @xmath in
the continuous case. In both cases the identity is given by the constant
path at @xmath . We now reach the result which will allow us for the
most part to dispense with the continuous case.

###### Proposition 6.6.

The map of @xmath into @xmath , taking the smooth homotopy equivalence
class @xmath to the continuous homotopy equivalence class @xmath is an
isomorphism.

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from Proposition 6.5 . Firstly it is
surjective, because any path in a smooth manifold is homotopic to a
smooth path. Secondly, it is injective, since if two smooth paths are
continously homotopic, they are smoothly homotopic. ∎

Henceforth we will not distinguish the continuous and smooth versions of
the fundamental group. In particular, every element of the fundamental
group has a smooth representative, and any two such representatives have
a smooth homotopy between them. This will simplify our proofs, and will
be vital in allowing certain constructions to work at all. With this
knowledge in hand, we exclusively consider smooth paths, loops and
homotopies, unless stated otherwise.

A map @xmath , taking @xmath to @xmath induces a homomorphism of the
fundamental groups, from @xmath to @xmath . This is given by @xmath . A
moment’s consideration confirms this is a homomorphism and well defined
on @xmath .

#### 6.4. Classification of covering spaces

With the definitions of covering spaces and fundamental groups in place,
we now state the main theorem for this section. It will be used in
several places in the ensuing work.

###### Classification of Covering Spaces Theorem.

Let @xmath be a smooth connected manifold, with base point @xmath .

For any covering space @xmath of @xmath , with covering map @xmath and
base point @xmath , the induced map @xmath is injective.

For each subgroup @xmath , there exists a connected smooth covering
space @xmath of @xmath , with smooth covering map @xmath , and a base
point @xmath such that the image of @xmath is exactly @xmath .

Two coverings spaces @xmath and @xmath , with covering maps @xmath and
@xmath and base points @xmath and @xmath respectively, are equivalent as
in Definition 6.4 if and only if @xmath and @xmath are conjugate
subgroups in @xmath .

A preparatory remark. For the most part, smoothness is not particularly
important in this theorem. The hypothesis that @xmath is a smooth
manifold enables us to dispose easily of several of the necessary
conditions for constructing covering spaces which occur in the
continuous setting. The existence of smooth covering spaces follows very
simply from the existence of continuous covering spaces.

###### Proof.

A complete proof of this theorem, as stated, cannot be found in any one
place. Furthermore, for later work we will need some of the details of
the constructions involved. For this reason, we present here an outline
of the proof, citing appropriate references for each intermediate
result, and in places extending standard results to fit the particular
circumstances of this theorem.

The first part of the theorem, that the covering map induces an
injective map of the fundamental groups, is very straightforward, using
the lifting properties of covering maps. A proof is given in [ 19 , §13]
, and [ 14 , §16.28.4] .

Next, we consider the implications of the smoothness of @xmath . Since
@xmath is a manifold, it is locally path connected and locally simply
connected, on account of each point of @xmath having a neighbourhood
homeomorphic to an open ball in @xmath . Further, connectedness implies
that @xmath is path connected. This is because local path connectedness
means that the path connected components of @xmath are open and closed,
and so equal to connected components of @xmath . See also [ 42 , §3-4] .

The second part of the theorem, on existence of coverings, is proved in
the continuous setting in [ 42 , §8-14] . It depends upon @xmath being
path connected, locally path connected, and locally (or semilocally)
simply connected. As we have seen all these conditions are automatically
true for smooth manifolds. To improve that result for this theorem, we
need only show that this covering can be given a smooth structure so
that the covering map becomes a smooth covering map, and this has
already been achieved above, in Proposition 6.3 . The statement about
the fundamental groups remains true in the smooth setting, on account of
Proposition 6.6 .

Finally, the last part, giving conditions for equivalence of covering
spaces, is proved in the continuous case in [ 42 , §8-14] . To improve
this for the current theorem, we need to show that if @xmath and @xmath
are continuously equivalent covering maps, then they are smoothly
equivalent covering maps, with respect to the differentiable structures
defined above. This follows immediately from the definitions, and the
fact that the continuous equivalence is given by a homeomorphism @xmath
such that @xmath , which is then also a diffeomorphism. ∎

A concluding remark. Later results will require some of the details of
the construction of covering spaces. To that end, we describe this
construction, and define the covering map. We will not explicitly
describe the topology on the covering map. This is given in the
references above, but we do not need the details beyond knowing that the
covering map is in fact a covering map.

For a subgroup @xmath , the associated covering space @xmath , as a set,
is the collection of equivalence classes of paths in @xmath , starting
at @xmath , and ending anywhere in @xmath , with two such paths @xmath
and @xmath considered equivalent if @xmath and the homotopy class @xmath
is in @xmath . We will write @xmath for the equivalence class of @xmath
. In particular, if @xmath , then @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath , then
@xmath , so @xmath . The covering map @xmath maps such a element of
@xmath to its endpoint. Thus @xmath . This is clearly well defined.

###### Corollary.

Every smooth connected manifold has a universal covering manifold, that
is, a simply connected smooth covering space. Further, this is
essentially unique.

###### Proof.

Take the trivial subgroup @xmath in @xmath , and form the associated
covering space @xmath . Since the covering map @xmath induces an
injective map @xmath , @xmath is itself trivial, and so @xmath is simply
connected. If @xmath is any other covering map with @xmath simply
connected with base point @xmath , then @xmath has a trivial image, and
so the covering map @xmath is equivalent to the one we have constructed,
@xmath . ∎

#### 6.5. Covering spaces of Lie groups

Given a connected Lie group @xmath we can form its universal covering
manifold @xmath , with covering map @xmath . We always consider the
identity @xmath to be the base point of a group. Fix some @xmath , the
inverse image of the identity in @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.7.

This manifold @xmath has a unique group structure with identity @xmath
so that @xmath becomes a homomorphism.

###### Proof.

This is proved in [ 14 , §16.30] . ¹³ ¹³ 13 An alternative, less
abstract sketch proof is as follows. The fact that @xmath is locally a
diffeomorphism near @xmath ensures that there is a unique group
structure on a neighbourhood of @xmath . By path connectedness, and the
Lebesgue number lemma [ 42 , §3-7] , every element of the group is a
finite product of elements of this neighbourhood. This extends the local
group structure to a group structure for the entire manifold. We then
have to check that it is well defined. For the sake of brevity, we will
not do the details here. ∎

We will henceforth always mean the group when we write @xmath , and call
it the universal covering group .

According to the construction given in the Classification of Covering
Spaces Theorem, the set underlying @xmath is the set of homotopy classes
of paths in @xmath starting at @xmath and ending somewhere in the group
@xmath . The covering map @xmath then takes such a class of paths to the
common endpoint.

###### Example.

Familiar Lie groups with well known covering groups are @xmath , covered
by @xmath , where the covering map is @xmath , and @xmath , covered by
@xmath . In Part III we will be particularly concerned with the double
covering of @xmath by @xmath . This is the physically relevant group in
relativity theory.

### 7. Spinor structures

It is at this point, when we come to define a spinor structure , that
the effort required to reformulate geometrically the ideas of metrics
and compatible covariant derivatives in terms of orthonormal bundles and
connections thereon comes to fruition. The spinor structure will be
explicitly constructed from the orthonormal bundle. The alternative
approach to spinors, which is more common, is interested only in the
algebraic side, and mostly proceeds from the axioms for a spinor algebra
[ 47 ] . (Compare § 12 .) The comparison of constructive and axiomatic
viewpoints in [ 47 , pp. 211–212] is especially worthwhile.

For the following definition, take @xmath to be a connected but not
simply connected Lie group, and @xmath to be its universal covering
group. The covering map will be denoted @xmath .

###### Definition.

Given a @xmath principal fibre bundle @xmath , a spinor structure is a
@xmath principal fibre bundle @xmath , along with a principal fibre
bundle morphism relative to @xmath , that is, a map @xmath , so that
@xmath , for all @xmath and @xmath . We call @xmath the spinor map .

This definition implies in particular that the projection maps are
related according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Accordingly, given a pseudo-Riemannian manifold, and suitable
orientations, we have seen that there is a corresponding @xmath
principal fibre bundle, which we have called the orthonormal bundle. A
spinor structure for such a pseudo-Riemannian manifold is then just a
spinor structure for this bundle. Having recast pseudo-Riemannian
geometry in terms of principal fibre bundles, the theory of spinor
structures for pseudo-Riemannian manifolds can be subsumed into the
general discussion that we give here. We will see also that the
correspondence between covariant derivatives and connections on an
orthonormal bundle fits into this theory. In § 9 we show how to generate
connections on a spinor structure from connections on the original
bundle.

In the special case of a @xmath dimensional Lorentz structure, where
@xmath and @xmath is an orthonormal frame bundle, a spinor structure is
an @xmath principal fibre bundle @xmath , along with a map @xmath , so
@xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath is the two fold covering map
described in detail in § 11 .

We will next state the main results on the existence and uniqueness of
spinor structures. We will later be particularly interested in the case
of Lorentz bundles and @xmath bundles. However the discussion will apply
to the more general situation. Investigating the general case allows us
later to discuss the degree to which the choice of metric on a manifold
affects the existence and classification of the spinor structures, in §
8 .

To begin, we need the following fundamental lemma relating spinor
structures and covering maps.

###### Lemma 7.1.

If @xmath is a spinor structure for the bundle @xmath , the principal
fibre bundle morphism @xmath is a covering map.

###### Proof.

Consider a local cross section of @xmath , defined on an open subset
@xmath , @xmath . The composition @xmath then defines a local cross
section of @xmath . We can use these cross sections to define local
trivialisations of both bundles, by Lemma 1.2 .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Both of these maps are diffeomorphisms, and in fact principal morphisms.
We can compose these maps with @xmath , to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However this map acts very simply, as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath , and as @xmath and @xmath are diffeomorphisms, we can write
the covering map as @xmath . This expresses @xmath locally as a trivial
map in the sense of covering spaces, and so @xmath is a covering map. ∎

This enables us to apply the powerful Classification of Covering Spaces
Theorem to the task at hand. It also indicates the dual appearance of
covering space theory in the description of a spinor structure. To look
for a principal fibre bundle whose structure group has been ‘unwrapped’
to the simply connected covering group, we must ‘unwrap’ the bundle
itself. This is not always possibly, and we will see that the desired
covering bundle is not itself simply connected, and so need not be
unique when one does exist.

An immediate and simple result of Lemma 7.1 and the Classification of
Covering Spaces Theorem is the following.

###### Proposition 7.2.

If the fundamental group of @xmath is trivial then there is no spinor
structure.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is simply connected, every covering space is equivalent to
@xmath itself, and so @xmath has no connected covering spaces larger
than itself, and thus no spinor structure is possible. ∎

Next, we need to say exactly what we mean by ‘classification’ of spinor
structures, by defining what it means to say that two are equivalent .

###### Definition 7.3.

Two spinor structures

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with spinor maps @xmath and @xmath respectively are said to be
equivalent is there is a principal fibre bundle morphism @xmath such
that @xmath .

The main results of this section are summarised by the following
theorems.

We begin by defining the map @xmath by @xmath . This induces a
homomorphism @xmath .

###### Existence Theorem.

A principal fibre bundle @xmath has a spinor structure if and only if
the fundamental group of the bundle @xmath can be written as a direct
product of subgroups @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath and @xmath have trivial intersection, and @xmath maps
@xmath isomorphically to @xmath and @xmath maps @xmath isomorphically to
@xmath . ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 We could state this condition more concisely, but more
abstractly, as ‘there is a short exact sequence

and this sequence is split’. We will not be thinking in these terms
however.

Note that if @xmath is trivial, so @xmath , then there is an obvious
spinor structure, given by @xmath , and @xmath according to @xmath . In
this case the theory of fundamental groups shows that @xmath . We can
think of the existence theorem as the statement that even if @xmath is
not trival, to have a spinor structure ‘its fundamental group must look
as if @xmath is trivial’.

###### Classification Theorem.

In the case that the conditions of the Existence Theorem obtain, the
inequivalent spinor structures are in one to one correspondence with the
homomorphisms from @xmath .

This is a ‘relative’ classification. Given a particular spinor
structure, each of the other spinor structures corresponds to a
particular nontrivial homomorphism @xmath .

To reach these results, we will first establish the necessary conditions
for the existence of a spinor structure. This is achieved in § 7.1 .
That these conditions are sufficient will follow, in § 7.2 , and
subsequently we will describe the classification of spinor structures in
§ 7.3 .

#### 7.1. Necessary conditions

Suppose now that there exists a spinor structure @xmath for @xmath ,
with spinor map @xmath . The four main results that follow from this are
Propositions 7.4 , 7.5 , 7.7 and 7.8 . Together, these establishe the
necessity of the conditions in the Existence Theorem.

###### Proposition 7.4.

The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism.

###### Proof.

For the purposes of this proof, we will fix a connection on @xmath .
Such a connection always exists by the results in § 5.1 .

Proving that @xmath is surjective is relatively easy, so we first do
that.

Suppose @xmath is any smooth loop in @xmath based at @xmath . Define
@xmath to the parallel transport of @xmath along @xmath . This curve
will generally not be a loop. However, @xmath , and since the fibres of
@xmath are path connected, we can find a path @xmath so @xmath and
@xmath . Now consider the path @xmath , which is in fact a loop since
@xmath and @xmath . Further @xmath , and so @xmath . Thus @xmath is
surjective.

We now turn to the more technical problem of demonstrating that @xmath
is injective. The underlying result, however, has already been
established, the idea here being to use a connection to ‘lift’ a
homotopy in @xmath to a map into @xmath , and then using the simply
connectedness of fibres to modify this into the appropriate homotopy.
Suppose @xmath and @xmath are elements of @xmath , and @xmath . Then
there are smooth loops @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , so @xmath and
@xmath , and, further, there are smooth loops @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath so @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath . Thus there is a
smooth homotopy from @xmath to @xmath . Call this homotopy @xmath , so
@xmath , and @xmath . We will write @xmath for the function @xmath .
According to the second part of Proposition 5.4 , we can parallel
transport @xmath along @xmath , to obtain a smooth curve @xmath , so
that @xmath , and the map @xmath is continuous. We will next modify
@xmath to form a homotopy between @xmath and @xmath .

The particular properties of @xmath that we require are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Define @xmath to be the boundary of @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define @xmath according to @xmath for all @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath .
According to this definition, and the above properties of @xmath ,
@xmath on @xmath , and so @xmath , for some function @xmath . Since
@xmath is simply connected, we can extend @xmath to a continuous
function @xmath . Now define @xmath by @xmath . Thus on @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath agree, and so @xmath is a continuous homotopy between @xmath
and @xmath . Finally, this implies that there is a continuous homotopy
between @xmath and @xmath , and so by Proposition 6.5 , there is a
smooth homotopy between @xmath and @xmath . This establishes the
injectivity of @xmath , and so proves that it is an isomorphism. ∎

###### Proposition 7.5.

Let @xmath . Then the restriction of @xmath to @xmath , mapping @xmath
to @xmath , is an isomorphism.

###### Proof.

Firstly, the map @xmath is injective, according to the Covering Space
Classification Theorem. We now consider the following commuting diagram,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the restriction of @xmath to @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath is
injective and @xmath is an isomorphism, by Proposition 7.4 , @xmath is
injective. Further, @xmath , so @xmath must be surjective, and thus
@xmath is an isomorphism. ∎

An important property of the map @xmath is that @xmath maps @xmath into
the centre of @xmath . This is made clear by the following Lemma.

###### Lemma 7.6.

Suppose @xmath , and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath .

###### Proof.

See § C.3 . ∎

It should also be pointed out that @xmath is always itself commutative
when @xmath is a Lie group, as discussed in Lemma A.1 .

###### Proposition 7.7.

The map @xmath is injective, and so if we define @xmath , then @xmath is
an isomorphism.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath , and @xmath . Suppose @xmath is homotopically trivial.
Then, according to the Path Lifting Lemma [ 42 , §8-4] we can lift
@xmath via the covering map @xmath to a path @xmath in @xmath , and
according to the Homotopy Lifting Lemma [ 42 , §8-4] , it is a loop
homotopic to the constant loop. This loop lies within a single fibre,
and, since the fibres are homeomorphic to @xmath , they are simply
connected, and so @xmath is homotopic to the constant loop by a homotopy
that stays within the fibre @xmath . Applying @xmath to this homotopy
gives a homotopy of @xmath to the constant loop by a homotopy that stays
within the fibre @xmath , and thus @xmath is homotopic to the constant
loop in @xmath . Thus @xmath , and so @xmath is injective. ∎

###### Proposition 7.8.

The groups @xmath and @xmath have trivial intersection in @xmath , and
the internal direct product @xmath is exactly @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is in two steps.

Say @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Then, applying @xmath to both sides,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath has a representative lying within a single fibre. Now,
since @xmath restricted to @xmath is an isomorphism, @xmath also, and
since @xmath is injective by Proposition 7.7 , @xmath as well. Thus the
two groups have a trivial intersection.

Next, take any @xmath . We define @xmath as follows. Firstly let @xmath
. Then, as in the discussion of Proposition 7.4 , let @xmath be the
parallel transport of @xmath along @xmath . Further, chose a path @xmath
so @xmath and @xmath is a loop in @xmath . Now @xmath . Define @xmath =
@xmath . We see from this, and Proposition 7.4 , that @xmath , and
moreover that @xmath .

Thus @xmath for some loop @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

applying Lemma 7.6 . Thus the internal direct product @xmath generates
all of @xmath . ∎

#### 7.2. Sufficient conditions

Now we suppose the conditions stated in the Existence Theorem. That is,
suppose that @xmath is the total space of a @xmath principal fibre
bundle over @xmath , and that there is a subgroup @xmath of @xmath
isomorphic to @xmath via @xmath such that @xmath . We will show that
these conditions are sufficient for the existence of a spinor structure
@xmath .

Let @xmath be the covering space of @xmath associated with the subgroup
@xmath , according to the Covering Space Classification Theorem, and
@xmath be the corresponding covering map. There is a base point @xmath
so that @xmath maps @xmath and is injective. Define the projection map
@xmath by @xmath .

We now define a @xmath action on @xmath . We will then show that with
respect to this action @xmath becomes a @xmath principal fibre bundle,
and @xmath a principal morphism relative to @xmath .

Fix @xmath and @xmath . According to the construction of the covering
space, outlined in the remark following the proof of the Covering Space
Classification theorem, @xmath is an equivalence class of paths in
@xmath , written @xmath , for some @xmath , with @xmath . Two such paths
are equivalent, @xmath , if @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is the
universal covering group of @xmath , @xmath can be thought of as a
homotopy class of paths in @xmath starting at the identity, as in § 6.5
. Choose a path from this homotopy class, and denote it @xmath , so
@xmath . The @xmath action on @xmath allows us to define a path @xmath
by @xmath . Define the action of @xmath on @xmath by @xmath . According
to the first part of Lemma 7.6 , @xmath , and so we can alternatively
write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

These paths are illustrated in Figure 2 .

This is clearly independent of the particular path @xmath we have
chosen, because homotopic paths in @xmath are equivalent as points in
@xmath . To check that this definition is also independent of the
representative of @xmath , we suppose @xmath , so @xmath . Then @xmath ,
using Lemma 7.6 , and so @xmath .

We have now defined the projection map @xmath and the @xmath action on
@xmath . Our claim is that these provide a spinor structure for @xmath .
Thus the remainder of the proof of the Existence Theorem is contained in
the following two results. Proposition 7.9 checks the consistency of
@xmath and the @xmath action, in the sense that together they satisfy
the axioms for a principal fibre bundle, in Definition 1.1 . Lemma 7.10
then proves that @xmath , the covering map from @xmath to @xmath , is in
fact a principal morphism relative to @xmath , respecting the principal
fibre bundle structures of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.9.

The above construction of @xmath is in fact a principal fibre bundle.
Specifically, the @xmath action on @xmath must be

  free:  

     in the sense that if @xmath for any @xmath , then @xmath , and,

  transitive on fibres:  

     so if @xmath are such that @xmath , then there is some @xmath so
    that @xmath .

Further, there must be local trivialisations of @xmath compatible with
the @xmath action.

###### Proof.

The proof is in three parts. All are straightforward, but somewhat
involved, especially the second.

The action is free. Suppose @xmath is such that @xmath for some @xmath .
Take a path in @xmath representing @xmath , say @xmath , so @xmath . As
in Equation ( 7.1 ), @xmath . Then @xmath implies

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath , by the hypothesis that @xmath . Thus @xmath is
homotopically trivial, and so @xmath .

The action is transitive. Suppose we have two elements @xmath of @xmath
within the same fibre, such that @xmath and @xmath for two paths @xmath
. Since @xmath and @xmath are in the same fibre, @xmath for some @xmath
. Consider @xmath for some @xmath , and @xmath so @xmath and @xmath .
Such a @xmath exists since @xmath is path connected, and @xmath acts
transitively on the fibres of @xmath . Further, @xmath represents some
@xmath . We calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is any path in @xmath so @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath
denotes the reversed path @xmath , not the inverse path, and we have
used Lemma 7.6 in the last line. Note that by varying @xmath , subject
still to the conditions @xmath and @xmath , we can make @xmath homotopic
to any arbitrary loop @xmath in @xmath . This is achieved by setting
@xmath , so @xmath . Thus the first two paths, @xmath and @xmath can be
chosen to generate any element of @xmath , since @xmath . In particular,
we can chose @xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this choice,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves that the @xmath action is transitive on the fibres, as
required.

There are local trivialisations compatible with the @xmath action. Since
@xmath is a principal fibre bundle, for any point @xmath there is an
open set @xmath with @xmath and a local section @xmath , in accordance
with Lemma 1.2 . Find a simply connected open set @xmath , and restrict
@xmath to @xmath . By the monodromy principle [ 14 , §16.28.8] there is
a lifting of @xmath to a map @xmath via the covering map @xmath . This
is then a local section of @xmath , and applying Lemma 1.2 a second time
we find a local trivialisation. ∎

The final step in establishing that our construction generates a spinor
structure is now easy.

###### Lemma 7.10.

The map @xmath is a principal morphism relative to @xmath .

###### Proof.

In the notation above @xmath acts on @xmath by taking @xmath to @xmath .
Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Following from these results, we obtain the following statement about
the spinor structure equivalence, which will be vital in proving the
classification in § 7.3 .

###### Proposition 7.11.

Two spinor structures @xmath and @xmath are equivalent (in the sense of
Definition 7.3 ) if and only if they are equivalent as covering maps
(Definition 6.4 ).

###### Proof.

If @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as spinor structures then there is a
principal bundle morphism @xmath so @xmath . This @xmath is then a
fortiori a diffeomorphism, and so @xmath and @xmath are immediately seen
to be equivalent as covering maps.

Conversely, suppose @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as covering spaces,
so there is a diffeomorphism @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath are spinor maps, we can easily calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The equality between the first and last expressions then implies that
@xmath , for some @xmath . Further, since @xmath is a covering map, if
we fix @xmath , @xmath depends continuously on @xmath . Since @xmath is
discrete, @xmath is constant, and since if @xmath , @xmath , we must
have @xmath for all @xmath . That is, @xmath is additionally a principal
bundle morphism, and so @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as spinor
structures. ∎

Finally, this result guarantees that every spinor structure (up to
equivalence, of course) is obtained via the construction of this
section. The argument is as follows. Suppose @xmath is a spinor
structure. According to Lemma 7.1 , @xmath is a covering map. Now, up to
equivalence, a covering map @xmath is determined by @xmath , according
to the Classification of Covering Space Theorem. The previous section,
on necessary conditions, ensures that @xmath satisfies the hypotheses
required for the construction of the spinor structure @xmath . Since
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as covering maps, and so, by
this latest result, equivalent as spinor structures. This underpins the
proof of the Classification Theorem, given in the next section.

#### 7.3. Classification of inequivalent spinor structures

The next step of the analysis describes the uniqueness or otherwise of
spinor structures, in the case that one exists at all. Thus in this
section will we give the proof of the Classification Theorem.

The condition for the existence of a spinor structure requires that we
can write @xmath in a particular way, as a direct product of groups
isomorphic to @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, the @xmath factor is
determined by the image of @xmath . We therefore have some freedom in
choosing the first factor, in that we can choose any subgroup of @xmath
isomorphic to @xmath via @xmath , as long as the internal direct product
of this subgroup with the fixed @xmath subgroup is all of @xmath , as in
the statement of the Existence Theorem.

Figure 3 indicates this freedom, with the diagrams a) and b) depicting
two choices of a subgroup isomorphic to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Perhaps an analogy could be made with the choice of horizontal subspace
made in defining a connection. In that case the vertical subspace,
tangent to a fibre, is fixed, just as here the @xmath factor is fixed as
the image of @xmath .

Each such choice results in a spinor structure for @xmath , according to
the above construction. We have seen previously that these choices
exhaust all the possible spinor structures. That these choices all
result in inequivalent structures is straightforward, using the result
furnished by Proposition 7.11 .

###### Proposition 7.12.

Any two different choices of the subgroup isomorphic to @xmath result in
inequivalent spinor structures.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are subgroups of @xmath , each isomorphic to
@xmath via @xmath , such that we can construct spinor structures in
accordance with § 7.2 . Say these are @xmath and @xmath with spinor maps
@xmath and @xmath .

According to Proposition 7.11 , these spinor structures will be
equivalent if the spinor maps @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as
covering maps. The classification of covering maps given in § 6 states
that two such covering maps are equivalent if and only if the groups
@xmath and @xmath are conjugate.

Thus suppose @xmath and @xmath are conjugate, so there is an @xmath so
that @xmath . Now @xmath can be written as the product @xmath , so
@xmath , for some @xmath , and @xmath in the image under @xmath of
@xmath . Moreover, @xmath lies in the centre of @xmath , by Lemma 7.6 .
Thus @xmath . This establishes the desired result. ∎

At this point we have established that the inequivalent spinor
structures are in one to one correspondence with the subgroups @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath is an isomorphism. The following
lemma gives a simplification of this classification, once a particular
subgroup has been singled out.

###### Lemma 7.13.

Suppose @xmath can be written @xmath , where @xmath is isomorphic to
@xmath via @xmath . Subgroups @xmath of @xmath isomorphic to @xmath via
@xmath such that @xmath are in one to one correspondence with
homomorphisms @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is a homomorphism. Define @xmath by @xmath . Now take
@xmath and suppose @xmath also. Now because @xmath gives a unique
decomposition, @xmath , and so @xmath . This establishes that @xmath and
@xmath have a trivial intersection. Next, for any @xmath , there is some
@xmath , @xmath so

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , and @xmath . Thus the internal direct product of @xmath
and @xmath is all of @xmath , as required.

Conversely, define an isomorphism @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we must have @xmath for some maps (not necessarily, at this stage,
homomorphisms) @xmath , and @xmath . Now @xmath , so @xmath , and since
@xmath restricted to @xmath is an isomorphism, @xmath for all @xmath .
Using this simplification, we write @xmath in two ways.

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Thus by the uniqueness of the @xmath decomposition and the injectivity
of @xmath , we conclude that @xmath is a homomorphism. Finally, define
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and note that now @xmath , and so @xmath is exactly the required
homomorphism, relating @xmath and @xmath as in the first part of the
proof. ∎

The above discussion completes the proof of the Classification Theorem.

#### 7.4. Comparison with results in the literature

Spinor structures are described in the literature for @xmath or @xmath
structure groups. The results of § A show that for @xmath , the
fundamental groups of @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic to @xmath . This
implies that the simply connected covering groups are two fold covers.
Most results on existence of spinor structures which have been proved
previously are only relevant in this context, and so do not allow for
structure groups @xmath , with both @xmath and @xmath greater than or
equal to @xmath , where the fundamental group is @xmath . (See § A .)
Moreover these results only treat spinor structures for reductions of a
frame bundle. In this sense our results above generalise these results.

The usual result stated for the existence of spinor structures is as
follows.

###### Proposition 7.14.

Suppose @xmath is a principal fibre bundle which is a reduction of the
frame bundle @xmath of @xmath . Suppose the structure group @xmath is
connected and has a two fold simply connected covering group. Then
@xmath admits a spinor structure if and only if the second
Stiefel–Whitney class @xmath of @xmath is zero.

The second Stiefel–Whitney class is defined in [ 33 , II §1] and in [ 47
, §1.5] . It is related to the tangent bundle of the manifold,
restricting the relevance of this result to the case where @xmath is a
reduction of the frame bundle.

An article by J. Milnor [ 39 ] which gives one of the earlier
definitions of spinor structures (we use a slight generalisation of this
here) also mentions this result for @xmath . In turn, we are referred
for the proof to [ 8 ] , which is fairly impenetrable, and in fact only
gives an outline of the result, saying that the detail is “a standard
argument”. A discussion of this result for @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
compact is given in [ 34 , §10] . The result for @xmath is mentioned in
[ 20 ] and [ 46 , p. 155] , and discussed in [ 47 , §1.5] .

A sketch proof of this theorem is given in [ 33 , II §1] , based on a
Serre spectral sequence argument, for @xmath . The condition stated
here, in terms of the Stiefel–Whitney class, is of quite a different
nature from that in our Existence Theorem, in terms of the fundamental
group of the principal fibre bundle. We will not give a separate proof
that they equivalent, but at this juncture point out that the Existence
Theorem covers the general case for any group @xmath , whereas the
theorem stated here in terms of the second Stiefel--Whitney class does
not have a straightforward generalisation. The Serre spectral sequence
argument can still be performed ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 The argument is very briefly as
follows. (We are generalising the argument in [ 33 , II §1] . Refer
there for details of the notation.) Spinor structures are in one to one
correspondence with elements of @xmath such that the restriction to a
fibre is nonzero. Associated to the fibration @xmath there is an exact
sequence @xmath , which we obtain from the Serre spectral sequence. Thus
existence of a spinor structure is equivalent to @xmath , which is in
turn equivalent to @xmath . This is the generalisation of the condition
that the second Stiefel–Whitney class vanishes. , but the result does
not have such a simple interpretation if @xmath is not a reduction of
the frame bundle or @xmath .

In summary, the result stated above has appeared in several similar
forms widely throughout the literature. Nevertheless, it seems no
thorough proof has been published, whether employing methods as
elementary as appear here, or techniques such as spectral sequence
arguments.

Essentially the same result as we have given, showing existence depends
on the fundamental group of @xmath , is mentioned in [ 20 ] ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16
This article makes a promising mention of [ 54 ] in regards a proof of
this theorem. This reference turns out to be simply an introductory text
explaining no more than the meaning of the terms of the theorem. and [
53 , §13.2] in the case that @xmath . In both cases the result is stated
imprecisely, and no proofs are given. It seems likely that at least in
the general situation described here, the proof has not appeared in the
literature.

A number of other existence results for the @xmath case were given in [
21 ] . These results connect quite varied properties of the manifold
with the existence of a spinor structure. As examples, there is a result
depending on the index of topological @xmath spheres in the manifolds,
¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 See also Proposition 1.12 in §II of [ 33 ] . another result
depending on the algebraic type of the Weyl tensor, and yet another
ensuring that every globally hyperbolic space-time has a spinor
structure. We refer the reader to this article for the definitions of
all these concepts! The author makes a compelling case that all
physically reasonable space-times have a spinor structure.

Our classification result is a simple generalisation of the result given
in the literature, for the same situation as in the theorem above.

###### Proposition 7.15.

The inequivalent spinor structures are in one to one correspondence with
elements of @xmath .

This result is mentioned in [ 39 ] , and a brief discussion given in [
33 , II Theorem 1.7] . In the special case that @xmath is @xmath
dimensional and @xmath there is an incomplete, but reasonably
elementary, proof in [ 28 ] . (We extend the idea behind this proof, and
this proof, in § 10 .) Another proof appears in [ 26 , §4] , and there
is a discussion in [ 53 , §13.2] (with an error, in footnote 11 on p.
369).

The following lemma shows that our result generalises this.

###### Lemma 7.16.

The homomorphisms @xmath correspond naturally to the elements of the
cohomology group @xmath .

###### Proof.

For any topological space @xmath , the first homology group with integer
coefficients is isomorphic to the commutative factor group of the
fundamental group. That is, if @xmath denotes the commutator subgroup of
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This called the Hurewicz isomorphism and is a standard result from
algebraic topology. See [ 25 , II §6] for the proof. In particular,
since @xmath is commutative, by Lemma A.1 , for any homomorphism @xmath
, the commutator subgroup @xmath is contained in the kernel, and so
@xmath descends to a map @xmath . Clearly any such map extends to a
homomorphism @xmath .

This has established that the homomorphisms @xmath correspond naturally
to the homomorphisms @xmath . Finally, because @xmath is commutative we
can use the Universal Coefficient Theorem [ 50 , Ch. 5, §5] , relating
homology and cohomology, to show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is precisely the group of homomorphisms @xmath , and we do
not define in detail @xmath , pointing out that as @xmath by [ 50 , Ch.
5, §5] it is always trivial. Putting this together, we see that the
spinor structures are classified by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the particular case where @xmath is a double cover of @xmath , @xmath
, and the spinor structures correspond to the elements of @xmath .

### 8. Metric independence of spinor structures

To begin this section we will restrict our attention to the Lorentz
group, and spinor structures for Lorentz structures. In this context,
the result of this section will be to prove, in a precise sense, that
the existence and classification of spinor structures is in fact
entirely independent of the particular Lorentz structure we began with!
That is, the Existence Theorem and the Classification Theorem, whose
hypotheses are requirements on the topology of the Lorentz structure,
can be reformulated so that they only refer to the topology of the base
manifold. See also [ 33 , II §5] for a related discussion.

To understand this, we need to consider the bundle of oriented frames
@xmath on the base manifold @xmath . This is a @xmath principal fibre
bundle. The notation @xmath indicates the group of orientation
preserving, or, equivalently, positive determinant, linear automorphisms
of @xmath . This group is connected, and could alternatively be
described as the connected component of the identity in @xmath . Recall
that the definition of an orthonormal structure above is as an @xmath
reduction of this frame bundle. The general linear group @xmath is not
simply connected, and in fact the inclusion of @xmath into @xmath
induces an isomorphism @xmath . (See § B for the details, and a more
general result.) Thus @xmath , and so @xmath has a double covering
group, which we will denote by @xmath . We might refer to it as the
‘metalinear’ group (just as the metaplectic group is a cover of the
symplectic group). This group is not a particularly easy group to work
with, as it is not an algebraic group (that is, it cannot be expressed
as a matrix group). To see this, we can prove that @xmath has no finite
dimensional representations other than those which descend to
representations of @xmath , and so no faithful finite dimensional
representations. See [ 33 , II §5] for details.

In fact the inclusion of @xmath into @xmath also induces an isomorphism
of fundamental groups. We see this by considering the following
commuting diagram of inclusion maps,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the diagram of induced maps between fundamental groups,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The inclusions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath each give an isomorphism of
fundamental groups by § A.1 , § A.2 and § B respectively. Thus we can
conclude that the induced map @xmath must also be an isomorphism.

For the purposes of stating the next results, we will consider a general
case corresponding to this situation. Suppose @xmath is a Lie group,
with covering group @xmath , and @xmath is a Lie subgroup of @xmath ,
such that the inclusion @xmath induces an isomorphism of fundamental
groups @xmath . In particular, one can prove that this is always the
case when the maximal compact subgroup (see § B ) of @xmath is contained
in @xmath .

###### Lemma 8.1.

For any principal fibre bundle @xmath , there is an exact sequence, part
of which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the map induced from the action of @xmath on a fibre, as
above.

###### Proof.

The maps @xmath and @xmath have been considered previously. It is
obvious that the sequence is exact at @xmath . Exactness at @xmath
states simply that @xmath is onto. This is clear, since any path in
@xmath can be lifted arbitrarily to give a path in @xmath , and the lift
of a loop in @xmath can be extended within the initial fibre to form a
closed loop. This loop then maps down via @xmath to give the original
loop in @xmath .

Next we turn to the map @xmath . The construction of this map in a
similar context is mentioned in [ 11 ] . There are theorems proved in a
very general setting giving exact sequences for homotopy groups of
spaces with fibrations [ 25 ] , [ 51 ] . To use such a theorem here we
would have to introduce relative homotopy groups [ 51 ] , which would
take us rather far afield. However, in this particular situation, where
we are content to assume that our spaces are smooth and paracompact, we
can give a simple and geometric argument. Interestingly, the proof here
will introduce a connection, but as it will turn out this particular
choice will not affect the final construction. Providing our own
argument here rather than the general one mentioned above simplifies the
proof of Lemma 8.2 below.

We first give some notation for parallel transportation. For this
purpose we will fix a particular connection on the principal fibre
bundle. Given a path @xmath in @xmath , with initial point @xmath , we
can parallel transport @xmath along @xmath , to obtain a point in the
bundle in the fibre of @xmath . Denote this point by @xmath , so that
@xmath becomes a map @xmath .

Parallel transportation along a loop in @xmath is of interest because it
returns @xmath to the initial fibre. Thus @xmath restricted to loops
becomes a map @xmath . For any @xmath , there is a unique @xmath such
that @xmath . This @xmath is value of the translation function @xmath .
Define a new function @xmath which, given a loop in @xmath , produces
this @xmath . Thus @xmath . Moreover, @xmath acting on the constant loop
gives the identity element of @xmath , and so is base point preserving.
In fact, @xmath is actually a homomorphism, because of the
reparametrisation properties of parallel transport, but we shall not
need this fact. More importantly, @xmath is continuous. Not having
specified the topology for @xmath , we cannot make this precise, but it
is clear that Proposition 5.4 ensures that @xmath is relatively well
behaved.

Since @xmath is a base point preserving map, it induces a map of the
homotopy classes, @xmath . The fundamental group of the loop space of
@xmath is just the second homotopy group of @xmath , @xmath , and so
this @xmath is of the form indicated in the statement of this Lemma. It
is not too hard to prove that @xmath is in fact independent of the
particular choice of connection in the definition of @xmath . However
the argument is lengthy and unnecessary here.

The remaining part of the series is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we want to prove that @xmath .

Suppose @xmath is in @xmath , so @xmath for some @xmath . Thus for each
@xmath , @xmath . Define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath . We now want to prove that @xmath , that is, that @xmath is
homotopic to the constant map in @xmath .

For each @xmath , define @xmath as the path @xmath traversing only the
interval @xmath . Thus @xmath and in particular @xmath , and @xmath . We
now define a homotopy @xmath according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A calculation shows that this is a homotopy from @xmath to the constant
path at @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Also, @xmath is a homotopy fixing endpoints, that is, @xmath . This
follows from the fact that @xmath and @xmath are both the constant path
in @xmath . Thus @xmath , and so @xmath .

Next we want to prove that @xmath , and so we suppose that @xmath , and
@xmath . Now, @xmath , and @xmath . Therefore, from the hypothesis there
must exist some homotopy @xmath so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will next use this homotopy to define an element @xmath of @xmath so
that @xmath . Let @xmath . Thus, for each @xmath , @xmath is a path in
@xmath . Again, define @xmath as the path @xmath restricted to the
interval @xmath . We can use the connection to perform parallel
transportations along these paths, resulting in a map @xmath , given by
@xmath . This is a continuous function, by Proposition 5.4 . However,
there is no reason for @xmath to be equal to @xmath . On the other hand,
it must be in the same fibre as @xmath , since the parallel transport
projects down to the original curve. Thus for each @xmath , there is
some @xmath so @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are continuous, @xmath
is a continuous function also. Now, @xmath . Thus @xmath in fact defines
a homotopy between @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, this homotopy stays
within the fibre of @xmath , and so gives a homotopy of the loop @xmath
and @xmath . This proves that @xmath , and so @xmath maps onto the
kernel of @xmath , completing the result. ∎

Now, suppose we have a reduction of the bundle @xmath to a @xmath
principal fibre bundle @xmath . Thus there is a map @xmath such that
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . As usual, from @xmath we obtain a map
@xmath . Denote the base points as @xmath and @xmath . Suppose also, as
above, that the inclusion @xmath induces an isomorphism of fundamental
groups of the structure groups. We can write two exact sequences as in
Equation ( 8.1 ), and link them together with the maps @xmath and @xmath
. To avoid confusion we will define two maps

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and the induced maps @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, to define the maps
@xmath and @xmath we use a related pair of connections. Choose first an
arbitrary connection on @xmath . As it turns out, there is a unique
extension of this connection to a connection of @xmath . This
(unexciting) argument is given in § C.2 . Use these connections to
define @xmath and @xmath , and thence @xmath and @xmath . Collecting all
these maps, we obtain the following diagram.

Each of the three unlabelled vertical maps in Figure 4 is simply the
identity map.

###### Lemma 8.2.

The diagram in Figure 4 commutes, and the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism.

###### Proof.

To prove that a diagram of this form commutes, we need only check that
each square commutes.

To prove the first square commutes we use the result of § C.2 that the
two parallel transports are the same, and so @xmath for every @xmath .
Thus @xmath .

The second and third squares commute, using the identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The fourth square commutes trivially.

Now that we have established that the diagram commutes, we can apply a
powerful technique from homological algebra, the five lemma. (For a
proof, see [ 17 , Ch. I, §4] .) The five lemma states that if we have
two exact sequences, linked by four isomorphisms in a commuting diagram
as above, then the central vertical map is also an isomorphism. Thus
@xmath is an isomorphism. ∎

Using the above argument in this context was suggested by [ 11 ] , but a
proof has not previously appeared.

We can now begin reformulating the existence and classification results
for spinor structures for the @xmath bundle in terms of the topology of
the @xmath bundle. Since @xmath is an isomorphism @xmath , @xmath can be
written in product form @xmath if and only if @xmath can be written in
the form @xmath . However, this itself is not sufficient to prove that
@xmath has a spinor structure if and only if @xmath has a spinor
structure. For this we need to consider a subdiagram of the commuting
diagram in Figure 4 , namely

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From this we easily obtain the following result.

###### Proposition 8.3.

If @xmath is such that

1.  @xmath is an isomorphism,

2.  @xmath , and

3.  @xmath

then @xmath is such that

1.  @xmath is an isomorphism,

2.  @xmath , and

3.  @xmath

and conversely. Thus, by the Existence Theorem, @xmath has a spinor
structure if and only if @xmath has a spinor structure.

We will next continue this line of analysis, showing that the
classification of spinor structures is similarly unaffected by such a
reduction of the structure group. Again, suppose @xmath is a @xmath
bundle, @xmath an @xmath bundle which is a reduction of @xmath via the
map @xmath , and the inclusion @xmath induces an isomorphism of the
fundamental groups.

###### Proposition 8.4.

There is a one to one correspondence between spinor structures for
@xmath and for @xmath . If @xmath is a spinor structure for @xmath , and
@xmath is the corresponding spinor structure for @xmath , then @xmath is
a reduction of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We have seen in the proof of the Classification Theorem that the spinor
structures are in one to one correspondence with subgroups of the
fundamental group of the bundle with satisfy the hypotheses of the
Existence Theorem. Proposition 8.3 shows that such subgroups for @xmath
and @xmath are in one to one correspondence via @xmath . Thus, fix
@xmath and @xmath , and form the associated spinor structures @xmath and
@xmath .

To construct the reduction map @xmath , recall that in the construction
of the spinor structures, each point of @xmath is an equivalence class
of paths in @xmath , and each point of @xmath is an equivalence class of
paths in @xmath . Thus the typical point of @xmath is @xmath where
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath .
Similarly, the typical point of @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath . Define @xmath in the
natural way, as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is well defined, since if @xmath , @xmath .

Further, it is a reduction map. If @xmath , then @xmath is an
equivalence class of homotopic paths in @xmath . Say @xmath is a
representative, so @xmath . Define @xmath by @xmath . This is well
defined, since if @xmath , then @xmath , and the elements of @xmath are
homotopy classes of paths in @xmath . Now,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as required. ∎

With these two results in hand we have a complete description of the
spinor structures of a reduced bundle, as long as the reduced structure
group is ‘large enough’, in the sense that the inclusion map induces an
isomorphism of the fundamental groups. In this case, we see that there
is essentially no interplay between the reduction and the process of
forming a spinor structure.

In the specific case of a reduction of the frame bundle, we have seen
that the inclusion of @xmath into @xmath induces an isomorphism of the
fundamental groups, and so we have the following.

###### Corollary.

A spinor structure exists for the Lorentz structure if and only if the
oriented frame bundle @xmath has a @xmath spinor structure. In this
case, every such spinor structure is a reduction of a spinor structure
for @xmath .

An important implication of this result is that the existence of a
spinor structure for a Lorentz structure is determined solely by the
orientation and topology of the base manifold. This is because the
oriented frame bundle is defined without reference to the metric. We can
easily extend this corollary to the case @xmath or @xmath for any @xmath
via the results on § A .

In the light of this result, one might wonder why spinor structures for
@xmath reductions of the frame bundle are interesting, given that they
are all reductions of a @xmath spinor structure. This is because while
@xmath is not algebraic, and has no finite dimensional representations
which do not descend to representations of @xmath , the group @xmath
does have additional finite dimensional representations relative to
@xmath , as we shall see. Thus only once we have made a particular
choice of reduction can we use this representation theory to construct
the ‘spinor algebra’, as in § 12 , which is used to give a new
formulation of the Dirac equation in § 14 .

### 9. Lifting a connection to the spinor structure

We now prove that a connection @xmath on a bundle @xmath can always be
lifted to a connection on a spinor structure @xmath . It might seem
unlikely that this could be possible – after all, @xmath takes values in
the Lie algebra of @xmath , whereas a connection on @xmath must take
values in the Lie algebra of @xmath . However, the covering map @xmath
provides an isomorphism of these Lie algebras, since it is locally a
diffeomorphism, by its derivative at the identity of @xmath , denoted
@xmath .

We define the connection on the spinor bundle by @xmath . That is, we
simply pull-back the connection form via the spinor map, and identify
the Lie algebras. We next prove a proposition to the effect that this
defines a valid connection form on the spinor bundle. In fact, the
following proposition gives a stronger result. If we consider arbitrary
Lie algebra valued forms on @xmath , then this construction only results
in a valid connection form if the form on @xmath is actually a
connection form.

###### Proposition 9.1.

Suppose @xmath is a @xmath valued @xmath -form on @xmath . Define @xmath
. Then @xmath is a connection on @xmath if and only if @xmath is a
connection on @xmath .

Remark. One half of this proposition, that if @xmath is a connection
then @xmath , as defined, is a connection, is essentially equivalent to
Proposition 6.1 in §6 of Chapter II in [ 31 ] . The other half will be
used to prove Proposition 9.3 .

###### Proof.

The proof is relatively straightforward, although requiring several
technical calculations. It will be useful to define a partial inverse
function to @xmath for this proof. Since @xmath is a covering map, there
is a neighbourhood of the identity in @xmath , say @xmath , so that
@xmath is one to one. We will abbreviate @xmath to simply @xmath .
Notice @xmath .

Firstly we need to check that vertical vectors are mapped appropriately
into the Lie algebra. Firstly define functions @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, in accordance with Definition 5.1 , the condition on vertical
vectors is that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will show that these conditions are equivalent.

We easily see that for @xmath , @xmath if and only if @xmath , since
@xmath . Moreover, every @xmath such that @xmath is of the form @xmath ,
with @xmath such that @xmath . (That is, @xmath maps @xmath onto @xmath
.)

Next since @xmath , we can apply @xmath to both sides and use the fact
that @xmath is a principal bundle morphism to obtain @xmath , and so
@xmath . When @xmath , we have @xmath . Thus @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equivalently,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now suppose that @xmath for all vertical vectors @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

applying Equation ( 9.1 ). This holds for every vertical vector @xmath .
Conversely, suppose that @xmath for all vertical vectors @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Applying Equation ( 9.2 ), we obtain

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  and so                                 
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --

This completes this section of the proof.

Secondly, to confirm that the ‘elevator properties’,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are equivalent, we need to prove the following simple commutation
relations.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.3b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.3c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.3d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 9.3a ) and ( 9.3b ) are obvious, because the adjoint map and
@xmath act on values in a Lie algebra. Similarly Equation ( 9.3c )
follows from the fact that @xmath is a principal fibre bundle morphism.
Finally, to establish Equation ( 9.3d ), we calculate, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus for @xmath , using @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We finish the proof as follows. Suppose firstly that the elevator
property holds for @xmath . Then for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Thus the elevator property holds for @xmath . Conversely, suppose the
elevator property holds for @xmath . Then for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Next, expressing the @xmath on the left hand side in terms of @xmath ,
and applying @xmath to both sides, we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Thus for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now every @xmath can be written as @xmath for some @xmath , and every
@xmath can be written as @xmath for some @xmath , and so we reach our
desired result

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof of the proposition. ∎

In particular, when we consider the case of a spinor structure for an
orthonormal frame bundle, this proposition can be used to pick out a
special connection on the spinor bundle. In particular the Levi–Civita
connection, the unique torsion free connection on the orthonormal
bundle, can be lifted by this procedure. In the @xmath dimensional
Lorentzian case, the spinor connection is thus an @xmath valued @xmath
-form on the spinor bundle.

Conversely, we can prove that every spinor connection is obtained in
precisely this way. This appears to be a new result. Having already
established the relevant necessary and sufficient condition for a form
being a connection form in Proposition 9.1 , the proof is not too
difficult. The idea is to use the fact that the spinor map is a covering
map, and hence locally invertible, and push the spinor connection form
down from the @xmath bundle to the @xmath bundle. There is a potential
obstacle in that the spinor map is many to one, and so does not
necessarily give a well defined form on the @xmath bundle. This is
overcome by means of the following proposition.

###### Proposition 9.2.

Let @xmath be the covering homomorphism from a simply connected Lie
group @xmath to a Lie group @xmath . Then the subgroup @xmath is
contained in the centre of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 14 , §16.30.2.1] . ∎

###### Corollary.

The subgroup @xmath is contained in the kernel of the adjoint
representation of @xmath .

###### Proposition 9.3.

Any connection @xmath on the spinor bundle @xmath defines a unique form
@xmath on @xmath . The connections are related by @xmath as in the
construction of Proposition 9.1 , and so @xmath is a connection on
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We propose to define @xmath by @xmath . The problem with this is that
@xmath is not uniquely defined, so we must check that regardless of
which inverse we use the same answer is reached. For this purpose, say
@xmath , and @xmath is an inverse image, so @xmath . Now all the inverse
images are of the form @xmath , where @xmath . Suppose further that
@xmath , and the inverse of @xmath taking @xmath to @xmath takes @xmath
to @xmath . Then the inverse taking @xmath to @xmath acts as @xmath .
Now

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This has established that @xmath is independent of the inverse used in
the calculation, and so the proposed definition is well defined.
Finally, it is clear that @xmath , so Proposition 9.1 applies. This
proves that @xmath is a connection. ∎

Finally, we describe the relationship between the parallel transports
using @xmath and @xmath . This is particularly straightforward.

###### Proposition 9.4.

Let @xmath be a path in @xmath . Let @xmath , and let @xmath . Then the
parallel transport paths @xmath and @xmath , obtained using @xmath and
@xmath respectively, are related by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Clearly @xmath . Further,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, according to the definition of parallel transport as an integral
curve of a horizontal vector field, in § 5.2.2 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Finally, rearranging the result of Lemma 5.3 shows that a vector @xmath
is determined by @xmath and @xmath , and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the integral curves @xmath and @xmath are equal. ∎

### 10. Classifying spinor structures as bundles

We next consider the problem of classifying spinor structures as
bundles. As we will discover, inequivalent spinor structures may or may
not be equivalent as bundles. There is a rich classification theory of
principal fibre bundles which we can bring to bear on the spinor
structures problem.

###### Definition.

Two @xmath principal fibre bundles @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as
bundles if there is a principal fibre bundle morphism @xmath so @xmath .

Clearly if two spinor structures are equivalent as in Definition 7.3 ,
they are equivalent as bundles. The converse is not true.

The classification of principal fibre bundles is achieved by the
following proposition. (Here the higher homotopy groups @xmath are
defined inductively, so @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath is the loop
space of @xmath , discussed earlier, with an appropriate topology.)

###### Proposition 10.1.

Let @xmath be a smooth manifold, and @xmath be a principal fibre bundle
such that @xmath for @xmath . There is a bijection between @xmath , the
collection of homotopy classes of maps @xmath , and @xmath , the
collection of equivalence classes of principal @xmath -bundles over
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We say that @xmath is @xmath -universal. The bijection is given by
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the ‘pull-back’ bundle, defined in [ 27 ,
2.5.3] or [ 29 , §3.1] . A simple proof that this map is well defined,
that is, that homotopic maps give isomorphic bundles, appears in [ 41 ]
. The proposition itself is a deep result of the algebraic topology of
bundles, and is discussed in [ 7 , Ch. 5] and [ 29 , §3.1] and proved in
[ 27 , 4.13.1] . ∎

We also have

###### Proposition 10.2.

Let @xmath be a paracompact manifold and let @xmath be a Lie group, and
@xmath a closed subgroup, so that @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath for
some @xmath . Then the equivalence classes of principal @xmath -bundles
over @xmath are in one to one correspondence with the equivalence
classes of principal @xmath -bundles over @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is paracompact in particular it has a countable basis for
its topology. With this fact, this Proposition is a slight weakening of
a theorem proved in [ 51 , §12.8] . Another result which implies this
theorem, but less obviously, is given in [ 27 , §6.2.3 and §6.3.2] . ∎

#### 10.1. Classifying spinor bundles in general relativity

With these results in hand, we can now deal with what proves to be a
relatively simply case. We will see that all spinor structures for the
structure group @xmath over a noncompact @xmath -manifold @xmath are
trivial as bundles. This is not a new result. The difference between the
available spinor structures is solely in the spinor map itself. We will
see that in this situation each of the different spinor structures can
be obtained from any one spinor structure by modifying the spinor map.
Essentially, if we consider the classification of spinor structures in
terms of homomorphisms @xmath , we will see that each such map can be
realised by a smooth map @xmath , and the spinor structure corresponding
to this homomorphism is constructed by ‘multiplying’ the spinor map by
this realisation. This argument appears to be an improvement over
previous results along these lines, and the details appear later. This
very direct construction of the spinor structures prompts the
question—‘what can we do when not all the spinor structures are
trivial?’ We will suggest a possible resolution of this problem.

We first tackle the problem of classifying all spinor structures over a
noncompact @xmath -manifold @xmath , when @xmath . The interest in
noncompact manifolds is justified by [ 22 , Proposition 6.4.2] , which
shows that all compact Lorentz manifolds have closed timelike curves,
which are generally rejected on the physical grounds of violating
causality. The argument here is adapted from that given in [ 28 ] . The
group @xmath has maximal compact subgroup @xmath , and the quotient
@xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath , by Proposition B.1 . Thus by
Proposition 10.2

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, we find a universal bundle for @xmath . This is furnished by the
Hopf bundle, @xmath . See [ 25 , III. §5] or [ 51 , §20] for a detailed
description. Since @xmath for @xmath , this bundle is @xmath -universal,
and so @xmath . The last equality here is given by the Hopf theorem [ 25
, II. §8] .

Finally, we claim that @xmath for any noncompact @xmath -manifold. This
is not a trivial claim. All previous analyses of this problem, for
example [ 20 ] and [ 28 ] , gloss over this point, stating that it is
obvious. While it is obvious that @xmath follows from the
noncompactness, because every @xmath -chain is finite and so must have a
boundary in a noncompact manifold, this does not immediately imply that
@xmath . To obtain this result, we need a version of Poincaré duality
suited to orientable noncompact manifolds. This is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath are the locally finite singular homology groups. See [ 36 ,
37 ] . It is easy to see that @xmath , and so @xmath as required. ¹⁸ ¹⁸
18 A locally finite @xmath -cycle is a discrete set of points in @xmath
, counted with multiplicities. For each such @xmath we may choose a ray
from @xmath to @xmath , so that these rays are all disjoint. Thus a
locally finite @xmath -cycle is the boundary of a locally finite @xmath
-chain. Thanks to Dr. J. Hillman for this argument, and the suggestion
to use this species of Poincaré duality.

We now find that all @xmath bundles over @xmath are equivalent, and so
all @xmath bundles are equivalent. In particular, the trivial bundle
@xmath always exists, and so all @xmath bundles must be trivial bundles.
This result has also been proved in [ 20 ] . The proof given here simply
fills in some of the gaps of the discussions in [ 20 ] and [ 28 ] .

This has an important corollary, due to Geroch [ 20 ] .

###### Corollary.

If a @xmath principal fibre bundle @xmath over a noncompact @xmath
-manifold has a spinor structure, then the spinor structure is trivial,
as a bundle, and moreover the @xmath bundle itself is trivial,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus an orthonormal @xmath structure has a spinor structure if and only
if the orthonormal bundle is parallelisable, that is, there is a global
orthonormal frame field.

###### Proof.

Say @xmath is any spinor structure for @xmath . Then @xmath , as a
bundle, is trivial, so @xmath . The spinor map @xmath is a principal
fibre bundle morphism, and so gives a trivialisation of the bundle
@xmath . Since @xmath is trivial, it has a global cross section, which
is exactly the global orthonormal frame field. Conversely, if @xmath is
a trivial bundle, then the condition of the Existence Theorem is
automatically satisfied, and so @xmath has a spinor structure. ∎

Thus in the case that @xmath , the ‘weak triviality’ condition of the
Existence Theorem, roughly that @xmath , is equivalent to the triviality
of @xmath , that is, @xmath .

Given that all the spinor structures for such an orthonormal structure
are the same, namely trivial, as bundles, how is it that they differ as
spinor structures? The spinor maps differ, and we can construct each of
them directly from the corresponding homomorphism.

###### Definition.

A homomorphism @xmath is realisable if there is a smooth map @xmath so
@xmath . That is, the map between the fundamental groups induced by
@xmath is exactly @xmath .

A possibility at this point is that all such homomorphisms are
realisable. A counterexample is provided by @xmath , @xmath . Here
@xmath , and the isomorphism is not realisable. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 To see this, we
need some algebraic topology. Suppose @xmath induces an isomorphism of
the fundamental groups. Then, via the natural Hurewicz isomorphism [ 25
, II §6] (see also the proof of Lemma 7.16 ), the homomorphism between
the first homology groups induced by @xmath is an isomorphism. Next the
evaluation homomorphism @xmath to @xmath is also natural, and for @xmath
it is an isomorphism, by the Universal Coefficient Theorem [ 50 , Ch. 5,
§5] , and so @xmath induces an isomorphism of the first cohomology
groups. Since @xmath is continuous, it actually induces a ring
homomorphism of the cohomology rings equipped with the cup product [ 50
, Ch. 5, §6] , @xmath . Finally, if @xmath is the generator of @xmath ,
then @xmath , but @xmath is the generator of @xmath , and @xmath is
nontrivial in @xmath [ 50 , Ch. 5, §8] . This is a contradiction, and so
the isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath is not realisable. I would
like to thank Dr. J. Hillman for suggesting this argument.

###### Proposition 10.3.

Suppose @xmath . There is always a trivial spinor structure, @xmath ,
with @xmath defined by @xmath . Suppose @xmath is a homomorphism, and
@xmath is the corresponding spinor structure relative to the trivial
spinor structure, according to the Classification Theorem.

Then

1.   the homomorphism @xmath is realisable if and only if @xmath is
    trivial, and

2.   in this case, if @xmath induces the homomorphism @xmath , then
    there is a bundle equivalence @xmath so that @xmath defined by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

To begin, we see from Lemma 7.6 that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Firstly suppose @xmath is trivial as a bundle. Thus there is a bundle
equivalence @xmath . Define @xmath . Since @xmath , there is some
function @xmath so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and thus @xmath Define @xmath by @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

Now, as @xmath is a diffeomorphism it induces an isomorphism of
fundamental groups, and so the image of @xmath is the same as the image
of @xmath . Thus as a spinor structure @xmath is equivalent to @xmath .

We now need to prove that @xmath . To see this, note that the general
element of @xmath is @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is the constant path
at @xmath . The map @xmath acts on this as @xmath , and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Comparing this with Equation ( 10.1 ) demonstrates the @xmath ,
completing this half of the proof.

Conversely, suppose @xmath is realisable as the map @xmath . Define
@xmath as above, and, following the same argument, we still have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath is equivalent to @xmath as a spinor structure, and thus the
bundles @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as bundles, and so @xmath is
trivial.

Finally, we briefly describe the freedom available in choosing @xmath .
Suppose @xmath and @xmath both induce the homomorphism @xmath . It is
easy to prove, using Lemma A.1 , that @xmath , defined via the group
product, induces the trivial homomorphism @xmath . Such maps are exactly
the smooth maps of the form @xmath , where @xmath [ 50 , §2.4] . That
is, @xmath and @xmath differ by a map which lifts to a map into @xmath .
It is easily seen that, in the above argument, if @xmath and @xmath are
derived from two bundle equivalence @xmath , then these bundle
equivalences differ by a map @xmath , and @xmath . ∎

This result is restricted to the special situation in which the spinor
structures are trivial as bundles. A generalisation would be a
desirable, and one is suggested by this last result. We have seen that
all the spinor structures being trivial is equivalent to all the
homomorphisms @xmath being realisable. The basis of the last proof was
that a bundle equivalence showed that the spinor maps ‘differed’ by
exactly the realisation of the homomorphism, and, conversely, that a
realisation of a homomorphism enabled us to define a spinor structure on
the first bundle which was equivalent to the second spinor structure.
Perhaps the bundle type of a spinor structure is determined by whether
the corresponding homomorphism is realisable? This idea is formalised as
the following.

###### Conjecture.

Suppose @xmath is a spinor structure, @xmath is a homomorphism, and
@xmath is the corresponding spinor structure. Then @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent as bundles if and only if @xmath is realisable.

I suspect this conjecture is in fact correct, but the tools developed
here appear to be insufficient. ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 See also Remark 1.14 in §II of
[ 33 ] . An argument closely related to this conjecture is given there.
If @xmath , and @xmath , then it is easy to prove that every
homomorphism is realisable. It is proved in [ 33 ] that in this case
this implies that all the spinor structures are equivalent as bundles.
If @xmath is realisable as a map into the centre of @xmath , @xmath ,
then it is relatively easy to show that @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent.

It turns out that the homomorphisms @xmath form a commutative group
@xmath , and the realisable homomorphisms form a subgroup @xmath . If
this conjecture is true, the various bundles appearing as spinor
structures would be in one to one correspondence with the factor group
@xmath . It would be interesting in this case to find a way of
constructing the bundles directly from this factor group. ²¹ ²¹ 21 We
could of course construct them indirectly, by actually constructing the
spinor structure, according to § 7.2 , associated with an element of a
coset in @xmath , and then forgetting about the spinor map and looking
only at the underlying bundle. (This prompts a joke, paraphrasing S.
Eilenberg. Q: ‘How does a mathematician eat Chinese with 3 chopsticks?’
A: ‘They put one down and eat Chinese with 2 chopsticks.’) We will leave
these questions open, however.

Finally, why is it interesting in the first place to be able to classify
the various spinor structures according to the type of bundle?
Fundamentally, it is because bundle equivalences allow us to compare
inequivalent spinor structures. This idea will be used in Proposition
10.4 to compare the connections associated with different spinor
structures. We will see later in § 12 that bundle equivalences are to
‘spinor fields’ what diffeomorphisms are to vector fields.

#### 10.2. Inequivalent spinor connections

At this stage we have a complete classification of the spinor
structures, and a rule for generating a connection associated with each
spinor structure. A natural question to ask is whether we can compare
the resulting connections, and, in that case, whether they are genuinely
different. It turns out that for two spinor structures with the same
underlying principal fibre bundle the bundle equivalences are maps which
might potentially identify two spinor connections as being the same.
When two spinor structures are trivial as bundles, we can carrying out
this comparison, using the explicit relation between the spinor
structures given by the realisation of the classifying homomorphism.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are two spinor structures. Suppose @xmath is a
connection on @xmath , and @xmath is the connection on @xmath described
by the above construction, and @xmath is the connection on @xmath . Now,
if @xmath and @xmath are different as bundles, then there is no obvious
sense in which we can compare the spinor connections @xmath and @xmath .
On the other hand, suppose there is a bundle equivalence (but not a
spinor structure equivalence) @xmath , so @xmath , as in Figure 5 . This
map gives us a way of comparing the two spinor connections, because we
can pull-back the connection form @xmath on @xmath via @xmath to a form
on @xmath . It is trivial to check that @xmath is in fact a connection
on @xmath , because @xmath is a principal bundle morphism. This suggests
the possibility that for a cleverly chosen bundle equivalence @xmath ,
we might have @xmath , in which case we could say that the spinor
connections, although defined via different spinor structures, are ‘the
same’.

We now restrict ourselves to the circumstance of two spinor structures
which are trivial as bundles. Proposition 10.3 shows that the most
general situation consists of a trivial spinor structure, @xmath , where
@xmath , and a related spinor structure @xmath given by @xmath . If the
two spinor structures are inequivalent, then @xmath induces the
corresponding homomorphism classifying @xmath relative to @xmath , and
so @xmath is a nontrivial homomorphism.

Suppose @xmath is a connection on @xmath . By the elevator property,
@xmath is determined by its values at the points @xmath . If @xmath ,
and @xmath , we can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

The last line follows because @xmath , so @xmath is the identity on the
Lie algebra.

Next, we consider the two connection forms on @xmath obtained as @xmath
and @xmath . The first of these has a very simple form in the
trivialisation, namely

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath . Finding a corresponding expression for @xmath is
slightly more work.

###### Proposition 10.4.

The connection form on @xmath obtained via @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Remark. Note that in this equation @xmath denotes the derivative of
@xmath , not the induced homomorphism between fundamental groups!

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is a path, with @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath is a path,
with @xmath , and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In this last line here by @xmath we really mean ‘the derivative of left
multiplication by @xmath acting on @xmath ’. Thus while @xmath , @xmath
. Next, we calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

While @xmath , we have @xmath , as is appropriate. ∎

It is impossible to claim, on the basis of these calculations, that for
every allowed choice of @xmath we have @xmath . However, it seems likely
that this is the case, and certainly in the case that @xmath is ‘flat’
with respect to the trivialisation this is easy to prove. With such an
@xmath , @xmath reduces to @xmath , and this cannot be zero everywhere
if @xmath is to induce a nontrivial homomorphism. We will continue this
example, giving a calculation in a concrete case in the discussion of
spinor classification and the Dirac equation, in § 14.1 .

Recall that the freedom in choosing @xmath is exactly a function @xmath
, as described at the end of the proof of Proposition 10.3 . Thus if
there is no @xmath so @xmath then we can say that the connections
obtained from the two spinor structures are always inequivalent , where
the natural notion of equivalence is that two connections on a @xmath
bundle are equivalent if one is the pull-back of the other by a function
@xmath .

## Part III Implications for the Dirac Equation and Physics

We now restrict ourselves entirely to the situation of an @xmath
reduction of the frame bundle of a noncompact @xmath -dimensional
manifold, that is, to the situation of general relativity.

To begin, therefore, we give an explicit description of the covering
group of @xmath , that, is @xmath , and of the covering map. We discuss
some of the finite dimensional representation theory of @xmath , and
show that the @xmath tensors can be embedded in an appropriate way into
the @xmath tensors. This embedding extends to an embedding of the world
tensors of a @xmath bundle into the ‘spin tensors’ of an @xmath spinor
structure. Further, if we have a connection on the @xmath bundle, we
obtain a spinor connection on the @xmath bundle, and so covariant
derivatives for both types of tensors. As we would hope, the two
covariant derivatives agree on the embedded world tensors.

Thus, in this particular case, we arrive at a powerful ‘spinor algebra’,
which includes as a subset the normal world tensor algebra. These ideas
have had applications in mathematical physics, particularly in [ 47 ]
and Witten’s proof of the Positive Energy Theorem in general relativity
(see [ 45 , 55 ] ). We use the spinor algebra solely to demonstrate a
simple formulation of the Dirac equation, usually presented somewhat
mysteriously. This formulation, based as it is on spinor structures,
immediately carries across to curved space-times.

However, as we have seen, on nontrivial manifolds there is a choice of
spinor structures, and in order to talk about the Dirac equation we must
make such a choice. Further, we have seen that for @xmath bundles, the
spinor structures are particularly simple, and classified easily,
precisely because all spinor structures are trivial as bundles. We give
an example of how the Dirac equation can depend on the choice of spinor
structure.

### 11. The covering homomorphism @xmath

In this section we give the formulas for the double covering map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following description is well known and can be found in many places,
and we follow the conventions of [ 26 ] and [ 46 ] . However the details
are presented here because in § 12.1 they give the relationship between
the tensor and spinor algebras for @xmath . Further, this covering map
allows us to calculate the fundamental groups of @xmath and @xmath in §
A.1 and § A.3 respectively. These results then guarantee that @xmath is
the simply connected covering group of @xmath .

###### Proposition 11.1.

There is a @xmath to @xmath covering homomorphism @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the vector space of self-adjoint @xmath by @xmath complex
matrices. We let the group @xmath act on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath . This is a well defined map of @xmath to itself,
since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, the action of @xmath preserves the self-adjointness of @xmath .
This group action is a representation of @xmath on @xmath .

We next make an identification of @xmath with @xmath , via the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This map is clearly a linear isomorphism. Further, the usual Lorentzian
metric on @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath for all @xmath . Additionally, the @xmath component is
recovered easily, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this identification, we define a map @xmath from @xmath to @xmath
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, @xmath . Thus the image of @xmath is contained in @xmath , the
group of isometries of @xmath . Finally, since @xmath is connected, and
@xmath is clearly continuous, the image of @xmath must be connected, and
so lies within @xmath . That is, @xmath .

It is straightforward to see that @xmath is a group homomorphism, since

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using this, we can think of @xmath as defining a representation of
@xmath on @xmath .

The map @xmath is not just a linear isomorphism. It intertwines the
representation of @xmath on @xmath and the representation via @xmath on
@xmath . This follows trivially from the definition of @xmath in
Equation ( 11.3 ), but it is nevertheless important.

Next we prove that @xmath is surjective, by exhibiting elements of
@xmath which are mapped to arbitrary rotations about the three
coordinate axes, and elements of @xmath which are mapped to arbitrary
boosts in the @xmath direction. Firstly, the rotations are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.4b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.4c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Any rotation can be expressed as a product of rotations of these forms.
Notice that each of these matrices actually lies within @xmath . The
boosts in the @xmath direction are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further, a boost along any axis can be written as the product of a
rotation taking that axis to the @xmath axis, a boost along the @xmath
axis, and the inverse rotation. Since any element of @xmath can be
written as a product of rotations and boosts [ 47 , §1.2] , the map
@xmath is surjective.

Finally, to establish that @xmath is @xmath to @xmath , we find the
kernel. Assume @xmath . In particular @xmath must preserve the @xmath
component of any vector in @xmath , and so using Equation ( 11.2 ) we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting the following matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in
@xmath for @xmath in Equation ( 11.5 ) we obtain the following
conditions on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This simply states that @xmath , and so @xmath is a unitary matrix,
@xmath . Thus there are @xmath such that @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We next calculate @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath , and so either @xmath or @xmath is zero. If
@xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath , which is impossible. Thus @xmath , and @xmath . Next, we
calculate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the condition @xmath implies that @xmath . Both of these
possibilities are clearly in the kernel of @xmath , since @xmath , and
so the kernel is exactly @xmath .

Any such surjective homomorphism with a discrete kernel is always a
covering map. In fact, strictly speaking, since both @xmath and @xmath
are @xmath dimensional, and connected, it is not necessary to explicitly
demonstrate that @xmath is surjective, given the other results. For the
purpose of understanding the geometry, however, it is useful to have
exhibited the matrices for the rotations and boost above. ∎

### 12. Spinor algebra

For the purpose of this section, and the next, we consider a certain
fixed @xmath reduction, @xmath , of the frame bundle of a manifold
@xmath such that a spinor structure exists. If there is not a unique
spinor structure, we choose one in particular, so @xmath is an @xmath
principal fibre bundle, and @xmath is the spinor map.

We define the spinor algebra in terms of vector bundles associated with
a spinor structure, and the matrix representation of @xmath . This is
analogous to the construction of the world tensor algebra described in §
2.4 using the associated vector bundles of the frame bundle. It may be
useful while reading this section to refer occasionally to § 2 . Now the
construction of the global tensor algebra via the principal fibre bundle
proves its worth. In the earlier discussion of the world tensor algebra,
we could have made a more direct route by avoiding discussion of the
frame bundle, and building up the world tensor algebra from the tangent
bundle, which has an intrinsic geometric meaning. We have preferred to
emphasise the less direct route, making the frame bundle central, and
the tangent bundle secondary, as discussed in § 2 . This is because
there is no analogous direct route now. That is, the vector bundles
associated to the spinor structure must be generated by the associated
bundle construction. It is in part for this reason that the theory of
spinor structures as principal fibres bundles is worth
developing—because it provides an effective approach to the global
@xmath tensor algebras.

Further, recall from § 4.4 that we could construct the world tensor
algebra as vector bundles associated to either the frame bundle or a
reduction to an orthonormal bundle. This is not the case here, precisely
because the matrix representation of @xmath does not extend to a
representation of @xmath . This is because the matrix representation of
@xmath does not descend to a representation of @xmath , being faithful,
whereas every finite dimensional representation of @xmath descends to a
representation of @xmath , as we saw in § 8 . That is, in order to
discuss the spinor algebra, we must first choose a particular reduction
of the frame bundle. There is no such thing as a spinor algebra for a
@xmath spinor structure of the @xmath oriented frame bundle.

The @xmath spinor algebra is well known. ²² ²² 22 Related spinor
algebras for other groups, in particular the double coverings @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath (see Theorem 8.4 of [ 33 , §I.8] , which also
mistakenly claims that @xmath is a double cover of @xmath ) can be
described using the same approach as we take here. Clifford algebras [ 1
, 33 , 52 ] are closely related to these of constructions. The theory of
Clifford algebras provides a representation of a double cover of each of
the orthogonal groups. It does not, however, treat the four fold simply
connected covers of @xmath for @xmath . Finally, we point out that there
are ‘pinors’ associated with the disconnected covers of @xmath . This
joke, such as it is, can be blamed on J.–P. Serre [ 1 ] . In particular
an accessible summary of the material is [ 26 ] , and it is discussed
extremely thoroughly in [ 47 , §2.5] . We follow the conventions of
these two books. The novelty in this section is using the associated
vector bundle construction to pass from the local to the global tensor
algebra. This enables us to discuss most of the algebra in the simple,
local, setting, guaranteeing that this work then carries across to the
global setting.

We begin, as before, by describing a local tensor algebra. This time
there is an additional complication—as well as the dual representation,
we need the complex conjugate representation. The group @xmath acts on
@xmath by matrix multiplication. If we wish to refer to components in
@xmath we will use numerical indices @xmath and @xmath . We will write
@xmath for the vector space @xmath carrying the matrix representation
@xmath of @xmath . As before, @xmath denotes @xmath carrying the dual
representation @xmath . We introduce @xmath carrying the complex
conjugate representation @xmath , given by the complex conjugate of a
matrix in @xmath acting on @xmath , and @xmath carrying the dual complex
conjugation representation, @xmath . The dual complex conjugate
representation is exactly the same as the complex conjugate dual
representation, and so there are no further basic representations.

Developing the geometric tensor algebra based upon these representations
is straightforward, and only a slight generalisation of previous work.
Specifically, the general tensor representation @xmath has valence
@xmath , and the elements are multilinear maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These objects are called spinors . The action of @xmath on spinors is
defined as in the general setting in § 2.1 . It has been proved [ 43 ]
that every irreducible representation appears as a subrepresentation of
these, in particular as a space of completely symmetric spinors.

We next introduce the local abstract index tensor algebra, by specifying
the labelling sets. We use uppercase Roman letters for spinor arguments
requiring an element of @xmath or @xmath , and uppercase primed Roman
letters for those requiring an element of @xmath or @xmath . Again, we
write, for example, @xmath for those abstract index spinors with labels
@xmath and whose underlying geometric spinor is in @xmath .

The four representations can be written out in abstract index notation,
using the idea that for @xmath , @xmath , and so @xmath can be
considered as a map @xmath , and so an element of @xmath . We write it
as @xmath , and thus @xmath appears as @xmath in abstract index
notation. Similarly @xmath appears as @xmath , @xmath appears as @xmath
and @xmath as @xmath . The higher valence spinor representations in
abstract index notation then have the obvious forms suggested by these.

The usual tensor operations carry across, mutatis mutandis . We can take
tensor products of spinors, permute indices, but only within each of the
four types, and perform contractions. Contractions must be between a
superscript and subscript pair of unprimed indices, or such a pair of
primed indices. Attempting to apply these operations to invalid pairs of
indices has no geometrical meaning in the underlying tensor algebra.

Because none of these operations on spinors interchange unprimed and
unprimed indices, we can freely rearrange them relative to each other,
as long as the ordering of unprimed indices and the ordering of primed
indices is preserved. Thus the spinor @xmath denotes exactly the same
object as @xmath .

We can also take complex conjugates of spinors. Complex conjugation
interchanges @xmath and @xmath , and also @xmath and @xmath . To take
the complex conjugate of a spinor, we take the complex conjugate of its
arguments, and of the resulting complex number. For example, if @xmath ,
and @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . Thus the operation of complex
conjugation maps spinors in @xmath to spinors in @xmath . For example,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Complex conjugation intertwines the relevant representations, as, for
example, @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath , complex conjugation becomes an
involution of @xmath , and so we can pick out the real spinors, ²³ ²³ 23
As Penrose points out [ 47 , §3.1] , we can call these spinors real
rather than self-adjoint, because the abstract index tensor product is
commutative. which are invariant under complex conjugation.

With the local spinor algebra and its operations thus set out, we invoke
the associated vector bundle construction to provide the global abstract
index spinor algebra. Spinor operations have a convenient notation, but
the appearance of indices does not imply use of specific local
components. Thus a global spin vector, for example, is an object of the
form @xmath where @xmath , and @xmath .

It is worth pointing out here an important respect in which spinors
differ from world tensors. Given a smooth map @xmath between manifolds
@xmath and @xmath , we can push forward a tangent vector on @xmath to a
tangent vector on @xmath . From our viewpoint, this is because such a
smooth map, by its derivative, induces a principal bundle morphism
between the frame bundles @xmath and @xmath . This is not the case for
orthonormal bundles and spinor bundles, unless @xmath is an isometry. ²⁴
²⁴ 24 Compare [ 53 , §13.1] and [ 26 , §5] . Thus we cannot push forward
or pull back a spinor by a diffeomorphism. A bundle equivalence between
spinor structures, as in § 10 , however, can effect this operation.

Just as in the analysis of the group @xmath in § 3 there was an
important invariant tensor @xmath , there is a similar tensor for @xmath
. This is the ‘volume form’ @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . The right hand side refers to the components of @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath . In fact, up to a complex scalar multiple, there
is only one such antisymmetric valence @xmath tensor. It is easy to see
@xmath is an invariant tensor for @xmath , since it transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is also a valence @xmath spinor @xmath obtained by complex
conjugation.

Using the volume form, we define index raising and lowering conventions
for the spinor algebra, as in § 3.2 . We make the identifications

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and see from the definition of @xmath in Equation ( 12.1 ) that this is
invertible, so there is a @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Later we will need the component form of these relations, for elements
of @xmath . These are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

That @xmath is the inverse can be written alternatively as @xmath or
@xmath . This notation for the inverse is itself compatible with the
index raising and lowering convention. We must be careful in applying
these operations, because @xmath is antisymmetric, that is, @xmath and
@xmath . This has the effect that, for example, @xmath . The mnemonic
for correct index manipulation is ‘adjacent indices - descending to the
right’ [ 26 , p. 14] . As with raising and lowering the indices of world
tensors, we now have to keep track of the relative ordering of
superscript and subscript indices, so that they may be unambiguously
raised and lowered. The complex conjugate @xmath allows analogous index
raising and lowering conventions for primed indices.

Now, since @xmath is @xmath invariant, it defines a natural valence
@xmath global spinor, by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath . Thus the raising and lowering conventions carrying
immediately across to the global spinor algebra, just as for the world
tensors.

#### 12.1. Embedding of the world tensors in the spin tensors

The world tensors can be embedded as the real spin tensors in the spinor
algebra. ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 This is discussed in [ 26 , §3] , [ 47 , §3.1] and [
53 , §13.1] with varying levels of detail, from a strictly algebraic
viewpoint. To see this, we first look at the representation of @xmath on
tensors in @xmath . An element @xmath transforms @xmath to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is real, so that @xmath , then @xmath acting on @xmath is also
real, since

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus this representation is reducible, and in particular has a
subrepresentation defined on the real subspace of @xmath .

We first make an identification of @xmath , as defined in § 11 as the
vector space of self-adjoint @xmath by @xmath matrices, with @xmath .
This identification is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clear that the reality condition on @xmath is the same as the
conditions on the components @xmath and @xmath . The map @xmath simply
relates the two presentations of the vector space, as matrices in @xmath
, and as tensors in @xmath . Next we check that this identification
intertwines the representations of @xmath on @xmath and on @xmath . This
is seen easily, translating the matrix form of Equation ( 11.1 ) to the
component notation of Equation ( 12.4 ). Thus for @xmath , and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the matrix associated with @xmath , with components

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the matrix with components as in Equation ( 12.5 ).

Combining this with our earlier result about @xmath intertwining the
representations @xmath on @xmath and the representation of Equation (
11.1 ) on @xmath , we obtain the result

###### Proposition 12.1.

The composition @xmath is a linear isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath
, intertwining the representations, so that for @xmath in @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For notational convenience, we will often omit this map, writing instead

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Although we have introduced this map abstractly, in terms of components
it is quite simple. If the components of @xmath in @xmath are @xmath ,
and the components of @xmath are @xmath , then the components are
related according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This linear isomorphism induces a linear isomorphism of all the tensor
products, which again intertwines the representations. Since @xmath ,
this identifies all of the local tensors over @xmath with all of the
real spinors. Again, we will often not explicitly write this map, and
understand that if @xmath is a tensor, then @xmath is the corresponding
real spinor. Again, the components are related according to the obvious
extension of Equation ( 12.6 ).

From this, we easily obtain the desired embedding on the tangent bundle
into the spinors.

###### Proposition 12.2.

Let @xmath be an element of the @xmath orthonormal frame bundle, @xmath
be an element of @xmath , and @xmath be the spinor map. Then the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an associated bundle isomorphism @xmath from @xmath , the tangent
bundle, to the bundle of real valence @xmath spin tensors.

###### Proof.

We need to check that the map is well defined. This requires two steps.
Firstly, an element of the frame bundle @xmath will have two inverse
images under @xmath . However these will differ by the generator of the
kernel of the covering map @xmath , so the two inverse images are of the
form @xmath and @xmath . Now,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so this ambiguity is removed.

Secondly, if @xmath , then @xmath . We need to check that @xmath .
Choose @xmath so that @xmath , and apply Proposition 12.1 . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

as required.

That the map is a linear isomorphism between the bundles follows
immediately from the fact that @xmath is a linear isomorphism between
the underlying vector spaces. ∎

Rather than giving this map an explicit name, we identify the objects
@xmath and @xmath , keeping the same kernel letter and substituting the
pair of spinor indices @xmath , @xmath for the world vector index @xmath
. When we write equations with mixed indices, that is, both lowercase
and uppercase indices, it is best to consider this as notation for an
equation with solely uppercase indices, that is, an equation solely in
terms of spinors associated with the @xmath bundle. ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 In this
case it is not appropriate to use the product bundle defined in § 2.5 .

Again, this map extends in an obvious way to identify tensor products,
embedding the world tensors into global spinor algebra. Because the
underlying linear isomorphism intertwines the representations, all the
tensor operations are compatible with these identifications. Thus for
example we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so forth.

#### 12.2. Relationship between @xmath and @xmath

Notice that at this stage there are two independent conventions for
raising and lowering indices. We can manipulate tensor indices using
@xmath , and spinor indices using @xmath or @xmath . Since we have now
proposed an embedding of the world tensors into the spinors, we must
check that these conventions are equivalent—that is, that raising a
lowercase index using @xmath is the same as raising separately the two
corresponding uppercase indices using @xmath and @xmath . This is
confirmed in the following.

###### Proposition 12.3.

The volume form and inner product are related as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We simply calculate in components, using Equation ( 12.6 ).

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath . ∎

It follows straight from this that the index manipulation conventions
agree on the embedded tensors over @xmath , and also that the
corresponding result holds for the global tensors,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 13. The @xmath spinor connection

An @xmath connection on the orthonormal frame bundle @xmath lifts as in
§ 9 to an @xmath connection on the spinor bundle @xmath . We will show
that the connection obtained in this way is compatible with the
embedding of the world tensors into the spin tensors described in § 12 .
In particular, we have the following.

###### Proposition 13.1.

Suppose @xmath is a tangent vector field on @xmath , and @xmath is the
corresponding real spinor, according to Proposition 12.2 . Let @xmath
denote a connection on the orthonormal bundle @xmath , and @xmath be the
connection on the spinor bundle @xmath described in Proposition 9.1 .
Further, let @xmath and @xmath be the corresponding covariant
derivatives. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We choose adapted local trivialisations of @xmath and @xmath . Let
@xmath be a local trivialisation, and let @xmath be defined by @xmath .
Fix @xmath , and say @xmath , and @xmath .

Let @xmath be a vector field defined on @xmath , and let @xmath be the
integral curve of @xmath starting at @xmath . We can form two parallel
transports of the path @xmath , via @xmath and @xmath , to obtain @xmath
and @xmath . In the local trivialisation these parallel transports are
@xmath and @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath . Now, in accordance with
Proposition 9.4 , @xmath , and so

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath .

Finally now we calculate the covariant derivative, using Equation ( 5.8
).

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It is clear that this argument extends to show that the two covariant
derivatives agree on any of the embedded world tensors. Following this
result, we use the same notation @xmath to denote both covariant
derivatives, because they agree on the embedded world tensors. Further,
we can easily apply early results to obtain the following important
proposition.

###### Proposition 13.2.

Let @xmath be a covariant derivative associated to a connection form
@xmath on the spinor bundle. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The tensor @xmath is an invariant tensor for @xmath , according to
Equation ( 12.2 ), and so its associated tensor field is covariantly
parallel, by Proposition 5.8 . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this we can unambiguously raise and lower the spinor indices of
the covariant derivative operator. Thus @xmath , and @xmath . Further,
the covariant derivative is consistent with our raising and lowering
conventions, as we proved in § 5.4 for the world tensors, in the sense
that if @xmath is a valence @xmath spinor, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we have used the Leibniz rule and the above Proposition. This will
be important in our next and final topic.

### 14. The Dirac Equation

Introducing his eponymous equations in 1928 Dirac [ 16 ] made a
significant step forward in physics. The Dirac theory of electrons
described the quantum mechanical behaviour of massive spin @xmath
particles, in a relativistic setting. In fact, the Dirac equation
constituted the very first physical theory incorporating both special
relativity and quantum mechanics. Dirac introduced his equation in a
series of two papers, based on physical reasoning, yet with a strong
appreciation of the mathematical form. In fact, Dirac once said
‘physical laws should have mathematical beauty’ [ 12 ] . The natural
setting of the Dirac equation is in special relativity, on Minkowskian
space-time.

The Dirac equation as it usually appears in the physics literature [ 16
, 49 ] is a partial differential equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath component complex vector, and each of the
@xmath is a @xmath by @xmath matrix. Dirac also specified rules for the
transformation of @xmath under @xmath . Under such a transformation of
@xmath , while at the same time transforming @xmath according to the
corresponding element of @xmath , it is possible to show that the Dirac
equation is invariant. Using this presentation of the Dirac equation
this is a very cumbersome process. Soon, this invariance will be
transparent. The gamma matrices are chosen to satisfy the Clifford–Dirac
equations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are no ‘standard’ gamma matrices—depending on the context and
application some set of four matrices satisfying the Clifford–Dirac
equations are used. For the purpose of this work, we will consider the
Dirac equation written using the following gamma matrices.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If we write the components of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the Dirac equation written out in full reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Dirac equation can be written in the language of the @xmath spinor
algebra we have developed [ 4 , 47 ] . Its appearance becomes very
simple, and the gamma matrices and the Clifford–Dirac identities
disappear entirely.

###### Proposition 14.1.

In flat Minkowski space, @xmath , the gamma matrix Dirac equation is
equivalent to the following pair of spinor equations,

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------
                             
     @xmath   @xmath         (14.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath         (14.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------

###### Proof.

Since we work in Minkowskian coordinates, the covariant derivative is
just a partial derivative. Equations ( 14.4a ) and ( 14.4b ) are
equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have used Equation ( 12.3 ). Next, we fulfill the summation of
@xmath or @xmath , and write these equations in matrix form.

  ------------------ -------- -------- -- --
                     @xmath   @xmath      
  or, equivalently                        
                     @xmath   @xmath      
  ------------------ -------- -------- -- --

Using Equation ( 12.6 ) to rewrite the partial derivative operators with
tensor indices, we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (14.5)
  -- -- -- --------

Finally, using @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , we see that this agrees
with the explicitly written Dirac equation above. ∎

This result indicates that the spinor equations ( 14.4 ) are an
appropriate generalisation of the Dirac equation. Using the framework of
spinor structures for pseudo-Riemannian manifolds, these spinor
differential equations describe the behaviour of Dirac particles on any
@xmath dimensional Lorentzian manifold. That is, assuming a spinor
structure exists and a particular spinor structure has been chosen, we
have a natural extension of the Dirac equation to the setting of general
relativity.

With the formalism of the @xmath spinor algebra available, the somewhat
arbitrary gamma matrices are replaced by a very simple set of
differential equations. Similarly, the awkward transformation laws of
the original Dirac equation are avoided entirely—the expressions in
Equation ( 14.4 ) consist solely of intrinsic geometric objects.

#### 14.1. Implications of the choice of spinor structure

The results of § 10 are all available in the current context, and so any
spinor structure is defined on the trivial bundle @xmath . We have seen
previously that the choice of spinor structure is reflected in the
spinor connection, and this section discusses the ‘physical
implications’ of the choice of spinor structure. Physicists have
previously investigated this idea in various ways [ 2 , 18 , 28 ] , with
various degrees of rigour!

For simplicity, we will consider a particularly straightforward example.
The example will demonstrate many of the theoretical ideas discussed
throughout the length of this thesis. Let @xmath , and give this the
obvious metric tensor such that the ‘ @xmath direction’ is spacelike.
The orthonormal structure is @xmath , and a simple connection form is
defined by @xmath , for @xmath , and @xmath .

We can easily calculate the fundamental group of @xmath , as @xmath ,
and so spinor structures exist. More precisely, there are two,
corresponding to the two homomorphisms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
These spinor structures can both be constructed on the trivial bundle
@xmath , as in Proposition 10.3 . Define @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is any smooth function @xmath which induces the nontrivial
homomorphism @xmath , for example

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, we consider the resulting connections on @xmath . Firstly,
according to Proposition 10.4 , the connection obtained via @xmath is
simply @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath . The connection obtained via
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is immediately clear that if @xmath induces a nontrivial
homomorphism, then @xmath , and so there is no possible choice of @xmath
so that these connections are the same. Consider in particular the
@xmath defined above. If @xmath , @xmath , then

  ----- -------- -------- -- --
        @xmath   @xmath      
  and                        
        @xmath   @xmath      
                 @xmath      
  ----- -------- -------- -- --

Further, using the derivative of Equation ( 11.4a ) to calculate @xmath
, we see

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, we want to compare the Dirac equations corresponding to these two
connections. To do this, chose the obvious cross section of @xmath ,
@xmath . Then @xmath , and @xmath . According to § 5.2.3 , these local
representatives have the forms @xmath and @xmath in index notation.
However, from the above calculations we see that @xmath , and the only
nonzero components of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The difference between the two connections @xmath then defines a tensor,
according to the prescription of § 5.2.5 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further, if @xmath is the covariant derivative associated with @xmath ,
and @xmath is the covariant derivative associated with @xmath , then
according to the expression for the covariant derivative in Equation (
5.9 ) the difference between these covariant derivatives acting on, say,
@xmath is given by exactly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, if we write the Dirac equation associated with the connection
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

we can re-express this as

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

This calculation shows that, in general, choosing a different spinor
structure modifies the Dirac equation by the addition of a tensor term.
In the particular example we are calculating with, we can simplify this
tensor. Using Equation ( 12.6 ), the only nonzero components of @xmath
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

and so applying Equation ( 12.3 ) and contracting, @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this tensor, the Dirac equation for the connection @xmath reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

This represents only the very start of an analysis of the Dirac equation
for different spinor structures. One could for example write down the
‘plane wave solutions’ on the manifold @xmath for the two different
spinor connections. At the very least, we have shown that one can not
unambiguously ignore the choice of spinor structures available when
setting up the mathematical framework for the Dirac equation on
topologically nontrivial manifolds.

## Conclusion

We have discussed how Riemannian geometry, including the theory of
covariant derivatives and tensor calculus, fits into the general setting
of principal fibre bundles. As it turns out, the theory of spinor
structures for Riemannian geometry extends naturally to the general
setting, and a large part of the work here has been in establishing the
appropriate classifications for abstract spinor structures. With a
constructive classification in hand, we have investigated several
questions about spinor structures:

-   What happens if we reduce or enlarge the structure group?

-   Are the underlying principal fibre bundles all the same?

-   How many different spinor connections are there?

We have also given an explicit description of an important physical
application of spinor structures—describing the behaviour of
relativistic particles in quantum mechanics using the Dirac equation.
The questions above, and their answers, shed light on the interaction of
topology and the physics of the Dirac equation.

On several topics in this thesis we have certainly not said the last
word. One avenue for further work would be to prove or refute the
conjecture in § 10 , classifying the principal fibre bundles underlying
the various spinor structures. If it were true, then it would be
interesting to find a direct construction of the class of possible
bundles. The other obvious direction is in continuing the analysis of
the Dirac equation for different spinor structures. In particular, it
may be possible to prove quite generally that the spinor connections are
always inequivalent. Building on the mathematical foundation provided
here, a detailed physical picture describing the differences between the
solutions of the Dirac equation for each of the inequivalent spinor
connection needs to be developed. The results here suggest that in
giving a mathematical description of the physical universe, to begin we
must describe the topology and metric structure, and also make a choice
between the available spinor structures , because this global
topological choice has physical implications.

@xmath

### Appendix A The fundamental group of @xmath

Firstly, if @xmath is any Lie group, then @xmath is commutative.

###### Lemma A.1.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are loops in a Lie group @xmath . Then @xmath
, where @xmath is the loop @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider the homotopy @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This proves @xmath . A similar homotopy establishes the other half. ∎

Note the resemblance of this result to Lemma 7.6 , which is essentially
a generalisation.

We now give a list of the fundamental groups for all the special
orthogonal groups in each dimension. The argument uses the explicit
description of the covering map @xmath from § 11 . The discussion will
rely on knowledge of covering space theory and the long exact sequence
of homotopy groups for fibrations.

#### a.1. The fundamental group of @xmath

We begin with the trivial cases. When @xmath , the special orthogonal
group is trivial. When @xmath , it is just the circle group, so @xmath .

Next, we deal with @xmath using two corollaries of Proposition 11.1 .

###### Corollary.

The restriction of the covering map @xmath in Proposition 11.1 to @xmath
is a @xmath to @xmath covering homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from the argument given in the proof of
Proposition 11.1 . As seen there, elements of @xmath are ‘trace
preserving’, and so fix the @xmath component. Thus @xmath maps @xmath
into @xmath , and this restriction is clearly onto, because the
pre-images of the rotations, as exhibited, all lie in @xmath . Finally,
the kernel of @xmath lies in @xmath , and so the restricted map is also
@xmath to @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary.

The fundamental group of @xmath is @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is topologically @xmath it is simply connected. Thus it is
the universal covering space for @xmath . Covering space theory for Lie
groups [ 14 , §16.30.2] (and see § 6.5 ) states that the fundamental
group of the base space is the kernel of the universal covering map.
Thus @xmath . ∎

The explicit formulas given in § 11 show that the homotopy class of any
@xmath rotation is the generator of the fundamental group of @xmath .

We will now offer an inductive argument that @xmath for any @xmath , and
that the inclusion of @xmath into @xmath , acting on the first @xmath
coordinates, induces an isomorphism @xmath . Thus the generator is a
@xmath rotation.

The group @xmath acts transitively on the sphere @xmath . The stabiliser
of the point @xmath is @xmath , acting on the first @xmath coordinates
of @xmath . We write @xmath for this inclusion. The group @xmath is a
closed subgroup of the Lie group @xmath , and so a Lie subgroup. We can
thus apply the result of [ 51 , §7.5] to see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a principal fibre bundle. Here @xmath can be thought of as either the
action of @xmath on the point @xmath , or the quotient map of @xmath
acting on @xmath .

Next, we write down the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for a
principal fibre bundle [ 51 , II §17] , which in part reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, if @xmath , @xmath , and so the section of the exact sequence above
becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is an isomorphism, and in particular for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, by induction, @xmath for all @xmath .

#### a.2. The fundamental group of @xmath

We refer to [ 30 , Proposition 1.122] , which proves that there is a
homeomorphism @xmath , where @xmath denotes the subgroup of @xmath of
matrices with unit determinant, and @xmath is the linear space of
Hermitian matrices in @xmath . Restricting this map to the connected
components of the identities, we obtain a homeomorphism @xmath . Since
@xmath is necessarily homotopically trivial, we obtain a homotopy
equivalence between @xmath and @xmath . In turn this gives an
isomorphism of the fundamental groups, and so using the results of § A.1
we find

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

#### a.3. The universal cover of @xmath is @xmath

We have established in the previous section that @xmath , and so to
describe the universal covering group we need only find some two fold
covering group. This is of course given by the covering map @xmath of §
11 .

### Appendix B Maximal compact subgroups

###### Proposition B.1.

Let @xmath be the real vector space of Hermitian matrices in @xmath and
@xmath be the vector space of symmetric matrices in @xmath . There is

1.   a homeomorphism @xmath and

2.   a homeomorphism @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Proposition 1.122 in [ 30 ] . Related results can be achieved
directly by methods of linear algebra, as in [ 24 , §8.4] , or quite
generally by means of the global Iwasawa decomposition [ 23 , VI §3] . ∎

Thus @xmath is homotopy equivalent to @xmath , and @xmath is homotopy
equivalent to @xmath . We say that @xmath and @xmath are the respective
maximal compact subgroups . Further, @xmath , and so also @xmath is
homotopy equivalent to @xmath . This equivalence is given by the
inclusion @xmath . In particular, this inclusion induces an isomorphism
of the fundamental groups, @xmath .

Using the result of § A.1 , we have now proved that @xmath , for all
@xmath .

### Appendix C Technical results

#### c.1. Proof of Proposition 5.2

We now give the proof that every principal fibre bundle allows a
connection.

It is for the purposes of this construction that we require the base
manifold to be paracompact. This is not too burdensome, and is nearly
always included in the definition of a smooth manifold.

###### Definition.

A manifold is said to be paracompact if every open covering of the
manifold has a locally finite refinement [ 10 , p. 16] .

Thus if @xmath is an open covering of @xmath , there is a covering
@xmath so @xmath for each @xmath , and each point on @xmath is contained
in only finitely many @xmath .

If the manifold is connected this is equivalent to there being a
countable basis for the topology [ 31 , Appendix 2] . On such manifolds
we can construct partitions of unity.

###### Definition.

Given an open covering @xmath of @xmath , a partition of unity
subordinate to this covering is a collection of smooth functions @xmath
on @xmath so

1.  @xmath for each @xmath ,

2.  the support of @xmath , that is, the closure of @xmath , is
    contained in @xmath for each @xmath , and

3.  @xmath .

###### Lemma C.1.

Let @xmath be a locally finite open covering of @xmath so that each
@xmath is relatively compact. Then there exists a partition of unity
@xmath subordinate to this covering.

###### Proof.

See [ 31 , Appendix 3] . ∎

###### Lemma C.2.

Given a @xmath bundle @xmath on a paracompact manifold @xmath , there
exists a locally finite open covering @xmath of @xmath by local
trivialisations @xmath so that each @xmath is relatively compact. (Thus
for each @xmath , @xmath is a diffeomorphism, and @xmath is compact.)

###### Proof.

Firstly, associate with each point @xmath an open set @xmath such that
@xmath is trivial over @xmath . Next, choose for each point @xmath an
coordinate chart @xmath , with @xmath . Since @xmath is an open set in
@xmath , there is an @xmath so @xmath , the open ball of radius @xmath
about @xmath , is contained in @xmath . Next, let @xmath , and @xmath .
Since @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath , it is relatively compact. Thus
the collection @xmath is a covering of @xmath by relatively compact
coordinate charts.

Let @xmath . The bundle is locally trivial over these sets, which are
also relatively compact and coordinate charts. Any open subset of such a
set also satisfies these properties. These sets form a covering of
@xmath , and so applying our assumption of paracompactness, we obtain a
locally finite open covering @xmath which is a refinement of the
covering @xmath , and so consists of relatively compact local
trivialisations. ∎

###### Proof of the Proposition.

The proof here follows that in [ 10 ] . A similar proof appears in [ 15
] . Let @xmath be an open covering of @xmath as described in Lemma C.2 ,
and let @xmath be a partition of unity subordinate to this open
covering. We will define a connection on @xmath using the Lie algebra
valued form description, defining a connection on @xmath for each @xmath
and patching these together using the partition of unity.

We now define a connection form on the each of the sub-bundles @xmath .
Put simply, we choose the obvious flat connection relative to the local
trivialisation @xmath . Given @xmath , @xmath , say. If @xmath , then
@xmath . This tangent space splits, since @xmath . Thus we can always
write @xmath as @xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath . Moreover, given
this decomposition, @xmath , and this represents a similar
decomposition, since the action of @xmath commutes with the
trivialisation. We then define @xmath . The map @xmath is defined as
before in § 5.1 , by @xmath . The first property we require of a
connection form, that it maps vertical vectors into the Lie algebra
according to @xmath , is satisfied since the vertical vectors @xmath are
those such that @xmath , and so this definition gives @xmath . Next, we
calculate

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath is in fact a connection form on @xmath .

Finally, we obtain a connection form on the entire bundle simply by
writing @xmath . ∎

#### c.2. Extending a connection on a reduced bundle

In this section we show that if @xmath is a reduction of @xmath , with
reduction map @xmath , and @xmath is a connection form on @xmath , there
is a straightforward prescription for extending @xmath to a connection
form @xmath on @xmath . The proof is very straightforward—after giving a
prescription for the extension, we check that it is well defined, and
gives a form satisfying the connection axioms of § 5.1 . First, we need
a preliminary result.

###### Lemma C.3.

The horizontal lifting map has a related ‘elevator property’,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

Firstly, @xmath , by the elevator property for @xmath , and so @xmath .
Next, since @xmath , we have @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath and if
@xmath then @xmath . Certainly @xmath , and @xmath , so @xmath , as
required. ∎

We now define @xmath on @xmath . This definition relies on the
horizontal lifting map for @xmath , defined in § 5.2.1 . Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The motivation for this definition comes from Lemma 5.3 .

To extend @xmath to all of @xmath , we note that any @xmath can be
written in the form @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . We then define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proposition C.4.

This prescription for @xmath is well defined, and gives a connection for
on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is written in two ways, as @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath
and @xmath for some @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         
              @xmath         
              @xmath         
              @xmath         
              @xmath         
              @xmath         
              @xmath         (C.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

Now @xmath , and so @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This holds also for any @xmath . Applying this to Equation ( C.4 ), we
obtain that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus the value of @xmath is independent of the particular presentation
@xmath chosen. The definition of @xmath in Equation ( C.3 ) guarantees
that the elevator property is satisfied.

Finally, we to check that vertical vectors are mapped into the Lie
algebra according to Definition 5.1 . If @xmath is vertical, so @xmath ,
then @xmath for every @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

as required. ∎

Using Lemma 5.3 and the definition of @xmath at points @xmath we see
that @xmath . This means that the parallel transports for the two
connections agree, in the sense that the parallel transport of the point
@xmath along @xmath is exactly @xmath composed with the parallel
transport of @xmath along @xmath .

For example, we can use this fact, that connections on reduced bundles
can be extended, to extend a connection on an orthonormal bundle to a
connection on the full frame bundle.

#### c.3. Proof of Lemma 7.6

###### Proof.

We define two homotopies, @xmath , as indicated in Figure 6 . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that these piecewise definitions give continuous maps.
Further,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath establishes the first homotopy, and in the case @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath so @xmath and @xmath give the required homotopies for
the second part. ∎