### 3.1.3 The Solar Neutrino Code

We perform a dedicated analysis of the global solar neutrino data on the
total observed rate and the SK day-night recoil electron energy
spectrum. This takes into account all available independent experimental
features of the solar neutrino data. We take the rates from the Cl, Ga
(SAGE and GALLEX+GNO combined), SK and SNO CC experiments. The SNO ES
data is not incorporated as it has large error. We also leave out the
SNO CC spectrum for the same reason. We do not incorporate the
Kamiokande rate as discussed before. We use the @xmath minimization
technique to determine the best-fit parameters and draw the C.L.
contours. For the statistical analysis for the total rates we define the
@xmath function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the theoretical prediction of the event rate for the
@xmath experiment and @xmath is the corresponding observed value shown
in Table 3.2 . The error matrix @xmath contains the experimental errors,
the theoretical errors and their correlations. For the evaluation of the
error matrix @xmath we have followed the procedure given in [ 33 ] .

The expected event rate for the radiochemical experiments Cl and Ga in
presence of oscillations is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the capture cross section for the @xmath detector,
@xmath is the detector threshold, @xmath is the neutrino survival
probability averaged over the distribution of the neutrino production
region inside the Sun, @xmath is the neutrino spectrum from the @xmath
source inside the Sun and the sum is over all the eight sources. For the
SK experiment the corresponding event rate is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the normalized @xmath neutrino spectrum, @xmath is the
true and @xmath the apparent(measured) kinetic energy of the recoil
electrons, @xmath is the detector threshold energy which is 5.0 MeV and
R( @xmath , @xmath ) is the energy resolution function which is taken as
[ 34 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In eq. ( 3.20 ) @xmath is the time averaged @xmath survival probability,
@xmath is the time averaged transition probability from @xmath to @xmath
, where @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath , @xmath is the differential
cross section for ( @xmath ) scattering while @xmath is the
corresponding cross section for ( @xmath ) scattering. Note that if one
has @xmath transitions involved the second term will be absent and only
the @xmath contribution to the scattering rate will survive.

For the @xmath CC event rate in SNO we use

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For SNO @xmath MeV, where @xmath is the mass of the electron and d
@xmath /dE @xmath is the differential cross section of the @xmath
interaction. One of the major uncertainties in the SNO CC measurement
stems from the uncertainty in the @xmath cross-section. We use the
cross-sections from [ 35 ] which are in agreement with [ 36 ] . Both
calculations give an uncertainty of 3% which is also the value quoted in
[ 11 ] ⁵ ⁵ 5 It was recently pointed out in [ 37 ] that the calculation
of both [ 35 ] and [ 36 ] underestimate the total @xmath cross-section
by 6%. We have not included this effect in our calculation. . @xmath for
SNO is given by the same functional form ( 3.21 ) with the @xmath given
as [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the analysis of the day-night effect and the energy behavior of the
suppression rate we define a @xmath function for the SK 1258 day
day-night recoil electron energy spectra as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the theoretically calculated predictions for the @xmath
energy bin, normalized to BPB00, @xmath are the corresponding observed
values and the sum is over 19 day + 19 night energy bins provided by SK.
The error matrix for the spectrum analysis is defined as in [ 38 ] . In
eq. ( 3.26 ) @xmath is an overall normalization constant which is
allowed to vary freely in the analysis. The SK provides information
about three aspects of the solar neutrino flux suppression, (i) the
overall suppression rate, (ii) the energy dependence of the suppression
and (iii) the effect of Earth matter on the suppression rate. The
information about the overall @xmath flux observed by SK is embodied
both in the total rate and in the spectrum data. Since we have already
accounted for this piece of information in the @xmath we avoid the
double counting of the total suppression rate in @xmath by introducing
this floating normalization @xmath . Thus the SK day-night spectrum data
provides information on only the presence of energy distortion, if any.
It gives information on the the day-night asymmetry as well.

For the global analysis we take into account the data on total rates as
well the SK day-night spectrum data and define our total @xmath as
@xmath . If we assume no new property for the neutrino and use the flux
predictions from BPB00, then the value of @xmath which is definitely
unacceptable. Even if the constraints on the solar models is relaxed, so
that one allows the fluxes to take on any arbitrary value subject to the
solar luminosity constraint, the fit is extremely poor if all the three
experiments are considered together. The data cannot be explained by
this approach, even if one takes only two experiments at a time. In fact
as discussed in the introduction, all such fits predict “missing @xmath
neutrinos”. This happens because the Ga observed flux can be almost
accounted for by the @xmath and @xmath fluxes alone, given the
luminosity constraint. If simultaneously the observations of the water
@xmath erenkov experiments are to be accounted for, then there is an
extra contribution from the @xmath flux in Ga leaving no room for the
@xmath flux. If on the other hand one considers Cl and SK together, then
the expected @xmath flux in the former from the observation of the
@xmath flux in the latter, more than compensates the observed rate in
Cl, again demanding complete suppression of @xmath [ 39 ] . With the
advent of the SNO CC result the astrophysical solution gets
comprehensively ruled out [ 13 ] . Thus one has to invoke some new
property for the neutrinos beyond the standard model of particle physics
in order to solve the solar neutrino problem. We probe the viability of
neutrino mass and flavor mixing as a possible explanation of this
discrepancy.

We first find the best-fit solution to the data on only the total rates
by minimizing @xmath . Next we take into account the global data on
rates as well as the SK day-night spectrum data so that our total @xmath
is @xmath . We minimize this @xmath for @xmath oscillations keeping the
@xmath flux normalization in the total rates fixed at the SSM
prediction. We repeat the entire analysis for @xmath oscillations. For
both these neutrino flavor mixing analyses we adopt a unified approach
to which we turn our attention next.

#### 3.1.4 Unified Formalism for Analysis of Solar Data

The general expression for the probability amplitude of survival for an
electron neutrino produced in the deep interior of the Sun, for two
neutrino flavors, is given by [ 40 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath gives the probability amplitude of @xmath transition at the
solar surface, @xmath is the survival amplitude from the solar surface
to the surface of the Earth and @xmath denotes the @xmath transition
amplitudes inside the Earth. We can express

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the phase picked up by the neutrinos on their way from
the production point in the central regions to the surface of the Sun
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mixing angle at the production point of the neutrino
and is given by eq. ( 2.34 ) for transitions to active and by eq. ( 2.51
) for transitions to sterile neutrinos, @xmath is the non-adiabatic jump
probability given by eq. ( 2.47 ) which for the exponential density
profile of the Sun can be conveniently expressed as [ 41 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The survival amplitude @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy of the state @xmath , @xmath is the distance
between the center of the Sun and Earth and @xmath is the solar radius.
For a two-slab model of the Earth — a mantle and core with constant
densities of 4.5 and 11.5 gm cm @xmath respectively, the expression for
@xmath can be written as (assuming the flavor states to be continuous
across the boundaries) [ 42 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where ( @xmath ) denotes mass eigenstates and ( @xmath ) denotes flavor
eigenstates, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the mixing matrices in
vacuum, in the mantle and the core respectively and @xmath and @xmath
are the corresponding phases picked up by the neutrinos as they travel
through the mantle and the core of the Earth. The @xmath survival
probability is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Identifying @xmath and @xmath eq. ( 3.34 ) can be expressed as [ 40 , 43
, 44 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have combined all the phases involved in the Sun, vacuum and
inside Earth in @xmath . This is the most general expression for
survival probability for the unified analysis of solar neutrino data.
Depending on the value of @xmath one recovers the well known
Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein (MSW) [ 16 , 17 ] and vacuum oscillation
(VO) [ 1 ] limits:

@xmath In the regime @xmath eV @xmath /MeV matter effects inside the Sun
suppress flavor transitions and @xmath . Therefore, from ( 3.29 ), we
obtain @xmath as the propagation of neutrinos is extremely non-adiabatic
and likewise, @xmath to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath For @xmath eV @xmath /MeV, the total oscillation phase becomes
very large and the @xmath term in eq. ( 3.35 ) averages out to zero. One
then recovers the usual MSW survival probability

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath In between the pure vacuum oscillation regime where the matter
effects can be safely neglected, and the pure MSW zone where the
coherence effects due to the phase @xmath can be conveniently
disregarded, is a region where both effects can contribute. For @xmath
eV @xmath /MeV @xmath eV @xmath /MeV, both matter effects inside the Sun
and coherent oscillation effects in the vacuum become important. This is
the quasi vacuum oscillation (QVO) regime [ 40 , 45 ] . In this region,
@xmath and @xmath and the survival probability is given by [ 43 , 46 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We calculate @xmath in this region using the prescription given in [ 46
] .

##### Day-Night Effect

For the the range of @xmath for which matter effects inside the Earth
are important (the pure MSW regime), one expects a significant day-night
asymmetry. During day time the neutrinos do not cross the Earth and
@xmath is simply the projection of the @xmath state onto the @xmath
state. Hence the @xmath survival probability during day is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The probability during night is given by the full expression ( 3.37 ).
If one factors out @xmath in the complete expression ( 3.37 ) which
includes the Earth matter effects then ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that for the purpose
of simplicity of presentation we show the expressions where the phases
have been averaged out to zero. However for the actual calculation of
the probabilities we use the unified expression ( 3.35 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . From eq. ( 3.39 ) and ( 3.40 ) we see that the extra
contribution coming due to the matter effects inside the Earth is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the total regeneration of @xmath inside the Earth which we shall
call @xmath . For convenience we shall define the regeneration factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the absence of any Earth matter effects, @xmath and so @xmath and we
get back @xmath from eq. ( 3.40 ). We also note that (with @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.43)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In other words the above factor quantifies the amount of level crossing
due to loss of adiabaticity at resonance. The Earth regeneration now can
be conveniently expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence from eq. ( 3.44 ) and ( 3.45 ) we see that the @xmath regeneration
inside the Earth depends on

1.   The adiabatic factor @xmath : @xmath is maximum for @xmath ,
    decreases with increasing @xmath , hits the minimum ( @xmath ) for
    @xmath and changes sign for @xmath . Which means that for @xmath we
    have further depletion of @xmath as they pass through the Earth.

2.   The value of @xmath : We can see from eq. ( 2.34 ) that @xmath if
    the resonance density is more than the density at which the
    neutrinos are produced, @xmath if the neutrinos are produced at the
    position of resonance and @xmath if the resonance density becomes
    less than the production density. As the resonance density decreases
    @xmath decreases and reaches the value @xmath . As the value of
    @xmath decreases the position of resonance for the solar neutrinos
    shifts further outward and the value of @xmath approaches @xmath .
    Thus for the LOW solution @xmath for almost all neutrinos energies
    and one gets maximum regeneration for the LOW solution.

3.   The regeneration factor: The net regeneration due to Earth matter
    effects depends crucially on the value of @xmath which determines
    quantitatively the actual effect of Earth matter.

In fig 3.4 we show the Earth regeneration @xmath as a function of @xmath
for three values of the mixing angle in the range @xmath . We note that
the Earth matter effects are important only for @xmath eV @xmath eV
@xmath which is the “pure” MSW regime and peaks at @xmath eV @xmath .
Since around @xmath MeV the SK day-night data allows for very small
day-night asymmetry, most of regions around @xmath eV @xmath for large
mixing angles are disfavored. In fig 3.5 we show the regeneration factor
@xmath and the total Earth regeneration @xmath vs energy at the SK
latitude for typical values of the parameters in the SMA, LMA and
LOW-QVO regimes. Since the latitude of the other detectors are not very
different we do not expect @xmath and @xmath to be very different for
them. Noteworthy point is that while the regeneration factor @xmath is
positive for all the three cases considered, @xmath turns out to be
negative for the SMA case. This is because for the SMA solution @xmath ,
or in other words @xmath , signifying large level crossing from the
@xmath to the @xmath state in the solar matter at resonance. On the
other hand for the LMA and LOW solutions the neutrino moves
adiabatically inside the Sun, the @xmath produced in the @xmath state
remains in a @xmath state throughout and @xmath , so that @xmath . Thus
for both LMA and LOW solutions one has positive regeneration of @xmath
inside the Earth, the effect being more for the latter since for low
@xmath all the neutrinos resonate far away from the production zone and
@xmath is closer to -1. Also note that for the LOW solution the
regeneration is important at low energies while LMA has more
regeneration for higher energy neutrinos.

We finally present in fig 3.6 the actual survival probability @xmath vs
energy during day (shown by dotted lines), during night (shown by dashed
lines) and the day-night average (shown by solid lines) for SMA, LMA and
LOW case. In order to understand the nature of the probabilities we call
@xmath and note that:

@xmath For the SMA region @xmath and from fig. 3.5 we observe that
@xmath is very small excepting for two peaks at E @xmath 6 MeV and E
@xmath 15 MeV corresponding to strong enhancement of the earth
regeneration effect for the neutrinos passing through the core [ 47 , 42
] . Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this region for low energy ( @xmath ) neutrinos, resonance is not
encountered (resonance density @xmath maximum solar density) and hence
@xmath and @xmath giving @xmath . For intermediate energy ( @xmath )
neutrinos @xmath (resonance density @xmath production density) and
@xmath for these energies. For high energy ( @xmath ) neutrinos also,
@xmath and @xmath , with @xmath rising with energy.

@xmath For the LMA solution the motion of the neutrino in the solar
matter is adiabatic for almost all neutrino energies and @xmath . For
low energy neutrinos the matter effects are weak both inside the Sun and
in Earth giving @xmath and @xmath so that for Ga energies [ 48 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

At SK and SNO energies matter effects result in @xmath while @xmath is
small but non-zero ( @xmath 0.03 at 10 MeV as seen from fig. 3.5 )
giving

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath In the LOW region @xmath for all neutrino energies and @xmath
(except for very high energy neutrinos) and thus for all neutrino
energies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is small for high energy neutrinos and large for low energy
neutrinos (cf. fig. 3.5 ).

#### 3.1.5 Results and Discussions

We present in Table 3.3 the results of the @xmath analysis for @xmath
oscillations, using data from the Cl, Ga, SK and SNO ⁷ ⁷ 7 We
incorporate only the SNO CC rate as the SNO ES rate and the SNO CC
spectrum still have large errors. experiments. We use the total rates
given in Table 3.2 and the 1258 day SK recoil electron energy spectrum
at day and night. We show the best-fit values of the parameters @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath and the goodness of fit (GOF) for the SMA, LMA,
LOW-QVO, VO and Just So @xmath [ 49 ] solutions.

The best-fit for the only rates analysis comes in the VO region which is
favored at 28.79%. Prior to SNO the SMA solution could explain the
nonmonotonic energy dependence of the survival probability from the Cl,
Ga and SK experiments well and was the best-fit solution. But with the
advent of SNO it falls into disfavor and is allowed at only 6.59%. For
the LMA solution on the other hand the survival probability is given by
eqs. ( 3.47 ) and ( 3.48 ) at Ga and SK/SNO energies respectively and
for the values of @xmath from Table 3.3 and @xmath given in fig. 3.5 ,
it approximately reproduces the rates of Table 3.2 . LMA is allowed at
18.27% while LOW-QVO is barely allowed at 1.55%. In fact the LOW
solution gets allowed only due to the strong Earth regeneration effects
at low energies which helps the LOW solution to explain the Ga data
better. In addition to these four solutions we have a fifth solution
called the Just So @xmath solution [ 49 ] at @xmath eV @xmath . For
these @xmath one gets a very small survival probability for the @xmath
neutrinos while for the @xmath neutrinos the survival probability is
close to 1.0 [ 50 ] . Therefore it cannot explain the total rates data.

We next perform a complete global analysis of the solar neutrino data
taking the four total rates and the 1258 day SK day-night recoil
electron spectrum data. We present in Table 3.3 the results obtained by
minimizing @xmath . We get five allowed solutions LMA, VO, LOW, SMA and
Just So @xmath in order of decreasing GOF. The LMA solution can
approximately reproduce the rates as discussed above and since the
survival probability ( 3.48 ) for SK is approximately energy independent
it can account for the flat recoil electron energy spectrum. LMA thus
gives the best-fit being allowed at 72.18%. The LOW solution with
best-fit @xmath and @xmath for Ga and @xmath for SK energies (cf. fig.
3.5 ) can just about reconcile the Ga and SK rates. However it provides
a very good description of the flat SK spectrum and is allowed at
46.99%. The VO solution at @xmath eV @xmath gives a very low @xmath for
the spectrum data and hence the overall fit for VO is very good. However
for the SMA solution there is a mismatch between the parameters that
give the minimum @xmath for the rates data and the spectrum data. The
spectrum data prefers value of @xmath which are one order of magnitude
lower than those preferred by the rates data. Thus the overall fit in
the SMA region suffers and it is allowed at only 9.22%. The Just So
@xmath solution is very bad for the rates but since it gives a flat
probability for the @xmath neutrinos the spectrum shape can be accounted
for and the global analysis gives a GOF of 8.1%.

In fig. 3.7 we show the 90%, 95%, 99% and 99.73% C.L. allowed areas from
the analysis of the data on total rates (shown in the left hand panel)
and the combined data on rates and the SK spectrum (shown in the right
hand panel). For the only rates case we have allowed areas in the SMA,
LMA, LOW-QVO and VO regions. For the global analysis we get allowed
zones in the LMA and the LOW-QVO zones. In the VO region we get just two
small areas which are allowed. But the most significant feature is the
disappearance of the SMA solution from the global fit even at 99.73%
C.L. ( @xmath ).

We have repeated the entire analysis for the @xmath case and have
reported the results of the fit in Table 3.4 . We find that after the
inclusion of the SNO data, all the solutions are disfavored with a
probability of more than 99% from the total rates analysis while for the
global analysis the GOF of these become much worse.

### 3.2 The Atmospheric Neutrino Anomaly

The atmospheric neutrinos are produced due to the collision of cosmic
rays ( @xmath ) with the nuclei in the atmosphere ( @xmath ) resulting
in a chain of reactions which culminates in the production of neutrinos
and antineutrinos with expected flavor ratio of roughly @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first pioneering measurement of events induced by these neutrinos
were made in the Kolar Gold Fields in India [ 51 ] and almost
simultaneously in South Africa [ 52 ] . But the interpretation of the
results from these experiments remained ambiguous due to both
theoretical as well as experimental uncertainties. It was only since
late eighties that people earnestly started pursuing this problem [ 53 ,
54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 ] and around 1988 Kamiokande, which was
originally designed to detect proton decay, declared its results on
atmospheric neutrino measurements which showed a marked deficit of
observed to expected @xmath ratio [ 53 ] . This embodies the Atmospheric
Neutrino Anomaly . This was the second evidence of missing neutrinos
after the solar neutrino problem and again called for the existence of
neutrino mass and mixing for the correct interpretation of the
experimental results.

However due to the large theoretical and experimental uncertainties
involved in the atmospheric neutrino measurement, it failed to prove
itself as a compelling evidence of neutrino oscillations until the
arrival of the Super-Kamiokande atmospheric results in 1998 [ 58 ] . The
SK atmospheric neutrino data [ 58 , 59 , 60 ] not only confirmed the
suppression of the muon type neutrinos, it also firmly established the
fact that the observed deficit has a zenith angle dependence. That is,
the neutrinos coming at larger zenith angles and hence traveling
distances of the order of the diameter of the Earth were suppressed more
compared to neutrinos arriving directly from the top of the detector.
This differential depletion of the atmospheric @xmath flux is referred
to as the observed up-down asymmetry . The @xmath events on the other
hand are reported to be consistent with theoretical expectations.

The most convincing particle physics scenario which can explain all
aspects of the SK data is @xmath oscillations with @xmath eV @xmath and
@xmath [ 61 , 62 , 63 , 64 ] . Thus the theory of neutrino mass and
mixing, which was conjectured in the late sixties as a plausible
solution to the solar neutrino problem, was established as an accepted
reality by the SK atmospheric neutrino results in 1998. This observation
of neutrino mass by the SK (although indirect) is the first and till
date the only evidence of physics beyond the standard model of particle
physics.

The observed depletion of atmospheric neutrinos was also reported by the
IMB [ 55 ] earlier and more recently by the Soudan2 [ 65 ] and MACRO [
66 ] collaborations ⁸ ⁸ 8 The Frejus [ 56 ] and Nusex [ 57 ] experiments
though were consistent with no deficit of atmospheric neutrinos. . In
order to do justice to all these experiments one should perform a global
analysis taking all the experimental data into account. However due to
its overwhelming statistics, the SK data dictates the atmospheric
neutrino analysis, with the other experiments having little impact on
the fit and the allowed parameter regions. Hence considering the rich
statistics and low systematics of the SK, we choose to work with just
the SK data in our analysis of the atmospheric neutrino anomaly and
perform dedicated @xmath -fits to the SK 1144 day data. We describe two
different established methods of @xmath analysis of the atmospheric data
and discuss their merits and demerits, present the best-fit @xmath and
@xmath and display the 90% and 99% C.L. allowed zones in the @xmath -
@xmath parameter space for two-generation @xmath oscillations.

In section 3.2.1 we give an essence of the atmospheric neutrino flux
calculations and the theoretical uncertainties associated with it. In
section 3.2.2 we discuss the various features of the SK atmospheric
experiment and state the main experimental results. In section 3.2.3 we
describe our atmospheric neutrino code and discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of the two methods of @xmath analysis that we have used.
Finally in section 3.2.4 we present the results of our @xmath fits.

#### 3.2.1 Atmospheric Neutrino Flux Predictions

Atmospheric neutrinos are the result of a cascade of reactions following
the interaction of the cosmic rays with the air nuclei (cf. eq. ( 3.50
), ( 3.51 )). In the decay chain ( 3.51 ), for every electron neutrino
(or antineutrino) created one has two muon type neutrinos (or
antineutrinos) ⁹ ⁹ 9 For the purpose of discussion we shall henceforth
use the term neutrino to mean both neutrino as well as antineutrino
though for the actual calculation they are treated differently.
produced. Thus one may naively guess that the ratio of fluxes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.52)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

But for a realistic prediction for the atmospheric neutrino fluxes one
needs to fold in the cosmic ray fluxes with the hadronic interaction
model, which takes into account the complete reaction chain and perform
a comprehensive calculation. Two such widely used atmospheric flux
calculations are by Honda et al. [ 67 ] and Agarwal et al. [ 68 ] .

The primary cosmic rays which are the main ingredient of the atmospheric
neutrino flux calculations have large uncertainties in their over all
normalization, composition, as well as in their spectrum, all of which
are extremely crucial in the atmospheric neutrino flux calculations.
Though the cosmic ray fluxes are relatively well known at @xmath GeV
(these give rise to the sub-GeV atmospheric neutrino fluxes), there are
few experimental measurements for the higher energy cosmic rays ( @xmath
GeV which result in multi-GeV neutrino fluxes) and hence this regime is
plagued with large uncertainties.

The resultant atmospheric neutrino fluxes also depend crucially on the
hadronic interaction model. In their calculation, Honda et al. use a
full Monte Carlo method for the sub-GeV neutrinos while for the
multi-GeV fluxes they employ a “hybrid model” [ 67 ] . They make their
atmospheric neutrino flux calculations using a one-dimensional
approximation where they assume that all the secondary particles
including the mesons and the leptons are collinear with the incident
primary cosmic ray. Though this approximation works well for the higher
energy calculations, it fails for the low energy sub-GeV fluxes,
particularly for the horizontal zenith angles and therefore should be
replaced by a full three-dimensional calculation [ 69 ] .

Let us next discuss some of the most important factors which affect the
atmospheric neutrino flux predictions.

1.   The solar activity : The effect of the solar wind on the cosmic
    rays entering the solar sphere of influence is to deviate their
    trajectories away from the Earth. This affects the low energy cosmic
    rays more than the higher energy ones and is known as the solar
    modulation of the cosmic ray fluxes. Since the solar wind depends on
    the solar activity, the fluxes are maximum at the solar minimum and
    minimum at the solar maximum.

2.   The geomagnetic field : Since the cosmic rays consist of charged
    particles they experience a repulsion due to the Earth’s magnetic
    field and may be deflected away. Hence only particles with momentum
    above a certain threshold can break this barrier and enter the
    Earth’s atmosphere. This threshold is called the rigidity cut off
    and is defined as, rigidity=momentum/charge. This effect results in
    cutting off the lower energy cosmic rays which affects the low
    energy neutrino fluxes. The geomagnetic field bends the cosmic rays
    and thus introduces a directionality into the atmospheric fluxes,
    the effect obviously being more for lower energy neutrinos. This
    effect of the geomagnetic field results in predicting more neutrino
    flux from the west than from the east and is known as the east-west
    effect . SK has made observations of this predicted east-west
    anisotropy and has confirmed this estimated directional behavior [
    70 ] .

3.   The density structure of the atmosphere: Once the pions and kaons
    are produced in the air, they may either decay creating muons and
    neutrinos or may interact with other particles. Which of these
    processes dominate is dictated by the energy of the meson and decay
    becomes comparable to interaction when

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.53)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the rest frame lifetime of the meson of energy
    @xmath and mass m, @xmath is the interaction cross-section with air
    and @xmath is the number density of the air nuclei. Since the
    interaction rate depends inversely on the density of the atmosphere,
    and since the cosmic rays moving along the horizontal zenith angle
    interact with the air nuclei at a higher altitude (and hence lower
    density), the decay probability for these is more compared to
    interaction. Hence the resultant neutrino fluxes are maximum along
    the horizontal and minimum along the vertical directions. This gives
    rise to the zenith angle variation of the neutrino flux. Again,
    because the interaction rate of the meson is determined by its
    energy, the zenith angle dependence of the neutrino flux increases
    with energy.

4.   Decay lifetime of the mesons: The ratio @xmath only for @xmath
    decays at rest for which the decay ( 3.51 ) is complete. However
    above @xmath GeV the decay lifetime of the produced muon becomes so
    large that they fail to decay in air. This results in raising the
    value of @xmath from 2. Again, as the effective atmospheric depth
    along the horizontal direction is more than that along the vertical,
    the decay chain ( 3.51 ) has comparatively a better chance of
    completion along the horizontal direction and this results in
    endowing @xmath with a zenith angle dependence.

Though the uncertainty due to primary cosmic rays for the sub-GeV
neutrinos is small, they are significantly modulated by the solar
activity and the geomagnetic field. Being low in energy, they have less
zenith angle dependence. The multi-GeV fluxes on the other hand have
less dependence on solar activity and geomagnetic field, but have large
zenith angle variation and have to contend with huge cosmic ray
uncertainties. We show in fig 3.8 the atmospheric neutrino flux
predictions by Honda et al. [ 67 ] as a function of the zenith angle for
three typical values of energies. Also shown in the lower panels are the
corresponding values of @xmath . The fluxes shown are without the
geomagnetic effects so that they are symmetric about the horizontal and
hence the sign of @xmath is not important. We note that both @xmath as
well as @xmath decrease along the vertical, displaying the zenith angle
behavior discussed above, the effect being more for the @xmath . Thus
the ratio @xmath gets raised from the often quoted value of 2 along the
vertical. The above effect is seen to intensify with energy.

Among the major uncertainties involved in the atmospheric flux
calculations, the most important contribution comes from the lack of
correct estimates for the cosmic ray flux normalization, composition and
spectrum. This results in about @xmath error in the sub-GeV fluxes and
20% error in the multi-GeV flux range. The hadronic interaction model
brings about 10% uncertainty above 300 MeV. The other sources of
uncertainties include the method of calculation employed and the use of
one-dimensional approximation. All these factors sum up to result in
total uncertainty of about 20–30% in the absolute values of the fluxes [
67 ] . For the ratio @xmath on the other hand the uncertainties due to
the primary cosmic rays and the error in the calculation scheme cancel
out and one has only about 5% error for the sub-GeV and about 10% error
for the multi-GeV neutrinos [ 67 ] .

#### 3.2.2 Results from the Super-Kamiokande

The Super-Kamiokande as described before is a large water @xmath
erenkov detector. It contains 50 kton of ultra pure water, divided into
two concentric cylinders. The inner detector with a fiducial volume of
22.5 ktons, has its surface lined by 11,146 inward facing 50cm
photomultiplier tubes and 1885 outward facing 20cm photomultiplier
tubes. The outward facing phototubes view the outer detector volume
which serves both as a particle shield as well as a detector. The main
process by which it detects the atmospheric neutrinos is the charged
current quasi-elastic interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the flavor of the incident neutrino is tagged onto the flavor of
the released lepton. As this lepton moves in water it emits a @xmath
erenkov cone which can be viewed by the phototubes lining the detector
walls. The SK classifies its data into

-   @xmath type or @xmath type events : The single-ring events can be
    classified into @xmath or @xmath type depending on whether the
    observed @xmath erenkov ring is fuzzy or sharp respectively.

-    contained events: Events for which the products of neutrino
    interaction are contained within the detector volume are called
    contained events. If the products are fully contained within the
    inner detector volume itself, then these events are termed
    fully-contained events (FC). On the other hand if the produced
    leptons exit the inner detector volume and stop in the outer
    detector, then these events are called partially-contained events
    (PC). Only muons are penetrating enough to be able enter the outer
    detector and so only @xmath have PC events.

-    sub-GeV and multi-GeV events: Depending on the value of the visible
    energy of the released lepton ( @xmath ) the FC events are
    categorized as sub-GeV (if @xmath GeV) or multi-GeV (if @xmath GeV).

-    upward-going muons: If the muons are produced in the rock below the
    detector and penetrate into the detector volume, then such events
    are grouped together to be called upward-going muons [ 71 ] . If
    these muons traverse the entire detector volume and escape out then
    they are termed as upward through-going muons . If on the other hand
    they stop within the detector then one has upward stopping muons .
    These upward-going muons are recorded for zenith angle @xmath only.
    The neutrino induced muons with zenith angle less than this are not
    taken into account due the huge contamination resulting from the
    muons in the cosmic ray fluxes themselves.

-    zenith angle bins: At the detector, the neutrino flux come from all
    directions. Thus, the total path length between the production point
    in the atmosphere and the detector varies from about 10 km to 13,000
    km depending on the zenith angle. Neutrinos with zenith angle less
    than @xmath ( downward neutrinos ) travel a distance of @xmath 10 –
    100 km from their production point in the atmosphere to the detector
    while the neutrinos with larger zenith angles ( upward neutrinos )
    cross a distance of up to @xmath 13,000 km to reach the detector.
    The SK can see the zenith angle of the lepton that emits the @xmath
    erenkov cone. The lepton zenith angle @xmath is related to the
    incoming neutrino zenith angle @xmath through the relation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.55)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the angle between the incoming neutrino @xmath and
    the scattered lepton @xmath and @xmath is the azimuthal angle
    corresponding to the incident neutrino direction. The SK divides its
    events into bins corresponding to the zenith angle of the observed
    lepton @xmath .

After 1144 day of data taking [ 72 ] the SK divide their observed number
of sub-GeV and multi-GeV @xmath type and @xmath type events into 10
zenith angle bins each. Instead of showing the actual number of events
reported by SK, for the sake of clarity we present in fig 3.9 the ratio
of the number of observed ( @xmath ) to the number of expected ( @xmath
) events, for the sub-GeV @xmath -type ( @xmath ), multi-GeV @xmath
-type ( @xmath ), sub-GeV @xmath -type ( @xmath ) and multi-GeV @xmath
-type ( @xmath ) data samples. We have included the PC events along with
the FC @xmath events in the panel for @xmath . Henceforth we will follow
this procedure for representation of the PC and @xmath data samples. The
ratio @xmath are shown for the ten zenith angle bins along with the
@xmath errorbars.

Had there been no anomaly this ratio would have been one for all the
data bins. However we observe that

1.  The @xmath -type events, both @xmath and @xmath , are consistent
    with theoretical expectations.

2.  The observed @xmath -type events on the other hand show depletion
    compared to expectations.

3.  The deficit of @xmath -type events has a zenith angle distribution.
    The @xmath depletion being most in the first zenith angle bin
    (upward) and least in the last one (downward), for both the @xmath
    and @xmath data samples. Thus the data has a marked up-down
    asymmetry.

4.  In addition the @xmath deficit has an energy dependence. The up-down
    asymmetry being more for the multi-GeV than for the sub-GeV
    neutrinos.

Since the uncertainties in the absolute fluxes are immense ( @xmath ),
one may instead use the double ratio,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the ratio of the total number of observed @xmath -type
to @xmath -type events in the detector and @xmath is the corresponding
Monte Carlo expectation. Different atmospheric flux calculations agree
to within better than 5% on the magnitude of this quantity. The up-down
asymmetry can be then expressed in terms of an up-down asymmetry
parameter @xmath defined as [ 64 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes the number of @xmath -type events produced in the
detector with zenith angle @xmath , i.e. the upward neutrino events
while @xmath denotes the number of @xmath -type events for @xmath i.e.
events coming from downward neutrinos. The central bin has contributions
from both upward and downward neutrinos and is not useful for studying
the up-down asymmetry. For the 848 day and 535 day data the @xmath and
@xmath are given in Table 3.5 . The @xmath is close to 1 but the @xmath
and @xmath are less than unity for both the sub-GeV as well multi-GeV
cases.

#### 3.2.3 The Atmospheric Neutrino Code

The expected number of @xmath (e or @xmath ) like 1 ring events recorded
in the detector in presence of oscillations is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.58)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes the number of target nucleons, @xmath is the
neutrino energy, @xmath is the energy of the final charged lepton,
@xmath is the angle between the incoming neutrino @xmath and the
scattered lepton @xmath , @xmath is the zenith angle of the neutrino and
@xmath is the azimuthal angle corresponding to the incident neutrino
direction (the azimuthal angle relative to the @xmath has been
integrated out). The zenith angle of the charged lepton in terms of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath is given by eq. ( 3.55 ). @xmath is the
differential flux of atmospheric neutrinos of type @xmath , @xmath is
the differential cross section for @xmath scattering and @xmath is the
detection efficiency for the 1 ring events in the detector. The
efficiencies that were available to us are not the detection
efficiencies of the charged leptons but some function which we call
@xmath defined as [ 73 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the survival probability of a neutrino flavor @xmath after
traveling a distance @xmath given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath being the radius of the Earth and @xmath is the height of the
atmosphere where the neutrinos are produced. We use the atmospheric
neutrino fluxes from [ 67 ] . For the sub-GeV events the dominant
process is the charged current quasi-elastic scattering from free or
bound nucleons. We use the cross-sections given in [ 74 ] . The events
in multi-GeV range have contributions coming from quasi-elastic
scattering, single pion production and multi pion production and we have
used the cross-sections given in [ 75 ] . For the multi-GeV events we
assume that the lepton direction @xmath is the same as the incoming
neutrino direction @xmath . But actually they are slightly different. We
simulate this difference in the zenith angles by smearing the angular
distribution of the number of events with a Gaussian distribution having
a one sigma width of @xmath for @xmath type events and @xmath for the
@xmath type events [ 63 ] . For the sub-GeV events, difference in
direction between the charged lepton and the neutrinos are exactly taken
care of according to eq. ( 3.58 ) and ( 3.55 ).

In order to do a statistical analysis of the data we define a @xmath
function as [ 64 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum is over the sub-GeV and multi-GeV cases. The
experimentally observed rates are denoted by the superscript “exp” and
the theoretical predictions for the quantities are labeled by “th”.
@xmath is the error in @xmath obtained by combining the statistical and
systematic errors in quadrature. @xmath corresponds to the error in
@xmath . For this we take only the statistical errors since these are
much larger compared to the systematic errors. We include both the
@xmath -like and the @xmath -like up-down asymmetries in the fit so that
we have 4 degrees of freedom (6 experimental data - 2 parameters) for
the oscillation analysis in the two parameters @xmath and @xmath .

The use of these type of ratios for the @xmath analysis test has been
questioned in [ 76 ] because the error distribution of these ratios is
non-Gaussian in nature. However as it has been shown in [ 64 ] the use
of the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s as defined above is justified within the
3 @xmath region around the best-fit point for a high statistics
experiment like SK and provides an alternative way of doing the @xmath
-analysis. A comparison of the results of [ 64 ] with those obtained in
[ 63 , 61 ] shows that the best-fit points and the allowed regions
obtained do not differ significantly in the two approaches of data
fitting. The advantage of using the ratios is that they are relatively
insensitive to the uncertainties in the neutrino fluxes and
cross-sections as the overall normalization factor gets canceled out in
the ratio. We have included the @xmath in our analysis because to
justify the @xmath oscillation scenario, it is necessary to check that
@xmath including the data on electron events gives a low value and hence
it is the standard practice to include these in the @xmath -analysis [
64 , 63 , 61 ] .

Even though the method of @xmath analysis defined above is acceptable, a
better method is to use the absolute number of e or @xmath type events
taking into account the errors and their correlations properly [ 61 , 63
] . Following this method we define our @xmath as [ 61 , 63 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum is over the sub-GeV and multi-GeV electron and muon bins.
The experimentally observed number of events are denoted by the
superscript “exp” and the theoretical predictions for the quantities are
labeled by “th”. The element of the error matrix @xmath is calculated as
in [ 61 ] , including the correlations between the different bins. For
two-generation analysis of the SK atmospheric neutrino data we employ
this second more widely used method of @xmath analysis and present our
results in the next section.

#### 3.2.4 Results and Discussions

Since the @xmath type events are consistent with the Monte Carlo
expectations, the only possible two-generation oscillation schemes that
one should consider to be responsible for the @xmath deficit are the
@xmath and @xmath oscillation modes ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In more general four
generation schemes the @xmath can oscillate into a mixture of @xmath and
@xmath [ 62 ] . . The two cases differ from each other in the Earth
matter effects on the mass and mixing parameters for the upward
neutrinos. While for @xmath oscillations there are no effects of the
Earth matter, the @xmath has its @xmath and @xmath modulated in presence
of matter since the sterile neutrinos do not have any interaction with
the ambient matter. For the @xmath case the mass squared difference and
mixing angle in matter are given by eq. ( 2.52 ) and eq. ( 2.53 ) of
chapter 2. Since for the atmospheric neutrino anomaly the mixing angle
in vacuum is close to maximal, the effect of matter in this case is
mostly to reduce the mixing. Thus the @xmath oscillations predict a
lower suppression of the upward neutrinos than demanded by the data and
fail to reproduce the correct zenith angle distribution, the effect
being more for the higher energy neutrinos. Thus the @xmath solution
gets disfavored by the zenith angle data. In addition, since the sterile
neutrinos do not induce any neutral current event in the detector while
both the @xmath and @xmath neutrinos do, for @xmath mixing one expects a
reduction of the neutral current events while for @xmath oscillations
they remain unchanged. In their paper [ 77 ] , the SK collaboration have
shown that their neutral current sample is consistent with expectations,
there is no depletion of the events and hence transition of @xmath to
@xmath are disfavored. The SK collaboration have given 99% C.L.
exclusion plots for a combined analysis of the neutral current enriched
multi-ring events, the high energy partially contained events and the
upward-going muon data sets, in terms of @xmath oscillations. They
superimpose the 99% C.L. allowed region that they obtain from the @xmath
analysis of the FC data over these exclusion plots and show that there
is no region of overlap between the two. They thus conclude that pure
two-generation @xmath oscillations are disfavored by the data and hence
the pure @xmath mixing, which can provide excellent fit to all the
atmospheric data samples without any inconsistency is the favored
alternative [ 77 ] . The latest 1289 day data sample on the upward-going
events are consistent with @xmath appearance at the @xmath level [ 78 ]
thereby further disfavoring the sterile option. We therefore concentrate
on the @xmath oscillation scenario.

In the two-flavor @xmath picture the survival probability of an initial
@xmath of energy @xmath after traveling a distance @xmath in vacuum is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mixing angle between the two neutrino states in
vacuum and @xmath is the oscillation wavelength defined as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the mass squared difference between the two mass
eigenstates. If we insert eq. ( 3.63 ) in eq. ( 3.58 ) and minimize the
@xmath function defined by ( 3.62 ), then for the 1144 day of SK data we
get the following best-fits and @xmath

-   @xmath , @xmath = 0.0027 eV @xmath , @xmath = 1.0

For 38 degrees of freedom ( @xmath ) this corresponds to a goodness of
fit of 55.14%. We present in fig. 3.10 the 90% and 99% C.L. allowed area
in the neutrino parameter space for two-generation @xmath oscillations.
In fig 3.9 we show with dashed lines the histograms for the best-fit
value for two-generation @xmath oscillations. Both the absolute number
of events as well as the zenith angle distributions of the SK data are
seen to be reproduced well.

### 3.3 Bounds from Accelerator and Reactor Experiments

Neutrino oscillations experiments can be broadly classified into two
types:
@xmath Disappearance experiments : In these one starts with a neutrino
beam of a definite flavor @xmath and looks for a reduction in the
original flux, after the beam has traveled a certain distance.
@xmath Appearance experiments : These experiments search for a new
flavor @xmath in the original @xmath beam, after it has been made to
travel a distance L.

Both the solar neutrino problem and the atmospheric neutrino anomaly
that we have discussed above are disappearance experiments. But both
these experiments have the intrinsic defect of large uncertainties in
model predictions of neutrino fluxes. The neutrino beams in the
laboratory experiments on the other hand have well controlled spectrum
as well as path length and hence are better suited for precise study of
neutrino mass and mixing parameters. The laboratory accelerator and
reactor experiments may operate in either the disappearance or
appearance modes. While the appearance experiments have the advantage of
being apparently easier, since one is looking for a new flavor absent in
the initial beam, the disappearance experiments have the strength to
probe the oscillations of the initial @xmath to all channels including
@xmath which can never be seen in an appearance experiments.

In two-generations the conversion probability of @xmath to another
flavor @xmath after traveling distance @xmath is given by eq. ( 2.11 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath being the oscillation wavelength. Sensitivity of a given
experiment can be ascertained in terms of the minimum @xmath and @xmath
that the experiment can probe. For @xmath very large @xmath , and @xmath
. For the limiting value of @xmath seen by the experiment

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand if @xmath is such that @xmath is very small then we
can replace the sine function by its argument.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the minimum value of @xmath that the experiment can constraint
corresponds to the case where @xmath , that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the above argument the terrestrial experiments give exclusion
plots in the @xmath – @xmath plane. All accelerator and reactor
experiment till date barring the LSND in Los Alamos have failed to
observe any positive signal of neutrino oscillations ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The
preliminary results from the K2K experiment in Japan also gives a
positive indication of neutrino oscillations. and give exclusion plots
in the @xmath – @xmath plane. We give below a list of the most prominent
experiments and their main features.

@xmath Reactor Experiments
The neutrinos in these experiments are produced in @xmath decay of
fission products in the reactors. Thus typically one has an initial
@xmath beam with energies of the order a few MeV. Since the energies are
so small these experiments operate in the disappearance mode. These
@xmath are detected by liquid scintillation detectors through the
reaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since these are necessarily disappearance experiments, the incident
neutrino flux should be very accurately known to reduce the systematic
uncertainties. Due to these high systematic uncertainties the reactor
experiments fail to probe very low values of @xmath . To overcome this
problem to some extent and to reduce the uncertainties, most experiments
use two or more detectors placed at different distances and what is used
in the analysis is the ratio of the neutrino flux observed at these
different detectors. The characteristics of the most important reactor
experiments and their limits on the oscillation parameters are listed in
Table 3.6 . Among the reactor experiments the most stringent bounds in
the low @xmath range are obtained from the CHOOZ long-baseline
experiment in France [ 82 ] . This experiment has a baseline of 1 km so
that it has an average @xmath ( @xmath MeV) and hence is sensitive to
@xmath as low as @xmath eV @xmath . It observes no neutrino oscillations
in the @xmath disappearance mode and rules out @xmath for @xmath eV
@xmath [ 82 ] .

The Bugey experiment [ 81 ] also in France is most constraining in the
higher @xmath region. It rules out large parts of the LSND allowed zone
so that only @xmath eV @xmath of the allowed parameter space remains
valid.

@xmath Accelerator Experiments
The neutrino beam in these experiments consist of mainly @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , produced from decay of pions and kaons in
accelerators. These experiments have much higher energy neutrinos and
may operate either in the disappearance or the appearance mode,
depending on the energy of the initial neutrino beam. Table 3.6 reviews
the characteristics of the main accelerator experiments.

The L iquid S cintillator N eutrino D etector at the Los Alamos Meson
Physics Facility has claimed to have seen neutrino mass and mixing [ 89
, 90 ] . In this experiment a high energy proton beam is made to impinge
on a target thereby predominately producing @xmath . The small number of
@xmath created are absorbed so that the dominant decay chain is @xmath ,
and @xmath . Thus this beam has a paucity of @xmath and in their first
experiment, the LSND made a search for @xmath oscillations by looking
for @xmath appearance by recording the @xmath events. They reported a
detected transition probability of @xmath [ 89 ] . In this case the
@xmath and @xmath decay at rest (DAR). On the other hand if they are
made to decay in flight (DIF) (the energy for this has to be much
higher) then the @xmath do not decay much and the flux of @xmath in the
beam is small making it possible to probe the @xmath oscillation channel
as well. The LSND again claims to have seen a positive signal with a
transition probability of @xmath [ 90 ] . They have recently done a
reanalysis of their entire data sample collected between 1993-1998 for
both @xmath and @xmath oscillations with a common selection criteria and
use a novel event reconstruction [ 91 ] . The final transition
probability that they report to have observed is @xmath . The best-fit
value of the oscillation parameters @xmath and @xmath that they give are
shown in the Table 3.6 .

On the other hand KARMEN, the K arlsruhe- R utherford M edium E nergy N
eutrino experiment, at the ISIS spallation neutron facility, is an
experiment almost similar to LSND which uses @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
beam from @xmath and @xmath decays at rest and looks for @xmath and
@xmath oscillations. This experiment has been consistently inconsistent
with the positive neutrino oscillation observed at LSND [ 92 ] . It
gives an exclusion plot in the @xmath – @xmath plane which excludes the
entire LSND allowed region above @xmath eV @xmath and part of the zones
allowed for lower @xmath .

The other experiment which has reported to have seen a depletion of
expected flux due to oscillations is the still running K2K long-baseline
experiment in Japan. It sends a pure and intense @xmath beam from KEK to
SK with a baseline of 250 km [ 93 ] and is the first long-baseline
accelerator experiment. It has an average @xmath GeV which gives @xmath
and has two detectors. The near one at a distance of about 300m from the
source is a one kton water @xmath erenkov detector, similar in
technology to the SK. The far detector, 250 km away, is the SK itself.
The experiment can work both in the @xmath disappearance as well as in
the @xmath appearance modes. This experiment promises to probe the
region of the parameter space allowed by the SK atmospheric data and
thus holds the potential to pin down the exact values of the @xmath and
@xmath responsible for the atmospheric neutrino anomaly. The K2K
collaboration has already released their first results on muon events.
They detect 28 events in SK against an expectation of @xmath which is
based on the interactions of the incident beam at the near detector [ 93
] . Thus there is a suppression of the @xmath flux, though the
discrepancy is still within statistical errors. Even the neutrino energy
spectrum that they observe is as of yet very poor in statistics. Robust
results and oscillation analyses, on both the total fluxes as well as
the observed energy spectrum from this experiment is eagerly awaited.