In order to summarize the main results available from all the solar
neutrino experiments, we present in Table 3.2 the ratio of the observed
to the expected total rates ³ ³ 3 From now onwards we shall call these
ratios as the observed rates. in the Ga, Cl, SK and SNO experiments ⁴ ⁴
4 We choose to neglect the Kamiokande data since the Kamiokande
observations are consistent with the SK data which has much higher
statistics. . The corresponding rough estimates for the compositions of
the observed flux is also shown. Since the ES rate in SK and SNO is
sensitive to both @xmath as well as @xmath , we show in brackets
separately the @xmath contribution to the observed rate assuming @xmath
oscillations. We note that the observed rate have a strong nonmonotonic
dependence on the neutrino energy since the Ga experiments which see the
lowest energy @xmath have the highest rate, the Cl experiment observes
intermediate energy neutrinos and reports the lowest rate, while the SK
and SNO which are sensitive to the highest energy neutrinos, have a rate
that is intermediate between the Ga and Cl rates.

In sharp contrast to the strong nonmonotonic energy dependence exhibited
by the data on total rates, the recent SK data on the energy spectra at
day and night show no evidence for any energy dependence. The SNO is
also consistent with no spectral distortion, however the errorbars for
the SNO spectrum is still high. Hence there is an apparent conflict
between the total rates and the SK spectrum data since the former would
prefer solutions with strong nonmonotonic energy dependence while the
latter would favor solutions with relatively weak dependence on energy.
In addition the SK data is consistent with little or no day-night
asymmetry which we shall see rules out large parts of the parameter
space which predict strong Earth matter effects.
