## 4.2 General bounds

The most stringent bound ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 It was claimed racently
nucleon-nucleon gravi-bremsstrahlung in the early Universe could give a
stronger bound that SN1987A provides [ 168 ] . on the size of the
compact space comes from the emission of the supernova SN1987A core of
large fluxes of Kaluza-Klein gravitons which affects its energy release
[ 169 , 147 ] (see [ 24 ] for a review). For @xmath , these constrains
turn out to be @xmath mm and for @xmath , @xmath mm [ 149 ] . Collider
and other bounds on the size of compact extra dimensions can be found in
[ 24 ] , and a more recent analysis in [ 147 ] - [ 156 ] .
Higher-dimensional operators suppressed by small scales are model
dependent and they do not significantly modify the SM cross sections and
precision observables for a gravity scale greater than 1TeV [ 24 ] . ³⁷
³⁷ 37 A serious problem in Kaluza-Klein large radii compactification is
proton decay. For that, a TeV gravity scale will cause a serious problem
[ 157 ] , unless a specific symmetry is imposed. The bounds on
non-compact warped, Randall-Sundrum type, scenarios are less elaborated
and more model-dependent; such constraints can be found in [ 150 , 158 ,
159 ] .

#### KK gravitons

The existence of light Kaluza-Klein gravitons is a general feature of
compact large extra dimensions, although their coupling properties to
ordinary matter is more model-dependent. ³⁸ ³⁸ 38 For the manifestation
of these states in a string theory context see for example [ 169 ] .
Each KK graviton mode interacts with the ordinary matter through the
four-dimensional energy-momentum tensor and its coupling is
gravitationally week, suppressed by @xmath , as can be read from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which shows that upon integrating over @xmath the volume of the compact
space will appear in front of the first term producing @xmath . The
proper rescaling gives a coupling @xmath with the energy momentum tensor
(ordinary matter).

Despite the gravitationally weak coupling, there are a large
multiplicity of those massive gravitons below an energy level, @xmath ,
which is enormous @xmath , and their combined effect is much stronger
than the gravitational suppression. One of the typical processes for
producing a KK graviton is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The graviton produced here will have the form of a missing energy. The
total cross section is of order @xmath and is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which becomes comparable to the electromagnetic cross section at
energies @xmath (for further details of this and others, like hadronic
processes, we refer the reader to [ 156 ] ).

Beside their possible detection in colliders, through their emission or
exchange, they can be produced at high temperature sometime in the early
Universe, and if they decay after the Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN)
they will distort the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation. Not only
that, their abundant number and large mass will change the expansion of
the Universe, and this may be done during the BBN by slowing the
expansion down since they red shift as matter, @xmath rather than
radiation @xmath . Furthermore, their energy density may over-close the
Universe if their abundance is comparable to the photon abundance at
early times. These obstacles are enough to impose a strong upper bound
on the temperature of the Universe, @xmath , after which it should
behave as the usual Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) Universe [ 24 ] .

We explain below how these bounds arise (more or less along the lines of
[ 79 ] ).

At high enough temperature @xmath , the creation rate per unit time and
volume of a KK graviton of mass @xmath , based on dimensional analysis,
³⁹ ³⁹ 39 Strictly speaking, assuming a four-dimensional KK gravity
production at scales much higher than @xmath makes little sense, since
at such high scales the Universe appears multi-dimensional presuming the
general coordinate invariance is restored at high energies (the break
down of the isometry of the full space, and the formation of a domain
wall, is usually due to a spontaneous breaking characterized by @xmath
). @xmath , where the factor @xmath is the strength of the coupling of
the KK graviton to matter. The estimate for the total rate of KK
graviton production would be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming that after a certain temperature, @xmath , after which the
Universe evolves in the standard way (presumably during the reheating
after inflation) @xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath is the effective
number of relativistic degrees of freedom, one finds that the number of
KK gravitons created in a Hubble time per relativistic species (photons)
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is fairly large, and requires @xmath .

A stronger upper bound on the temperature @xmath comes from slowing the
expansion of the Universe at temperature below @xmath , since KK
gravitons produced after this temperature red-shift as non-relativistic
particles. At the time of BBN their mass density per energy density of
photons is of order

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Requiring @xmath yields to the following upper bound on the reheating
temperature (or normalcy temperature) [ 24 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The upper bound reads for @xmath TeV in two dimensions @xmath MeV which
it too severe. The bound relaxes somehow for @xmath and is @xmath GeV.

Finally we come to the most constraining Cosmological bound which is the
risk of overclosing the Universe. The energy density of the massive KK
gravitons should not exceed the critical energy density today which
correspond to @xmath GeV. The life time of a graviton with an energy
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Gravitons produced at temperatures below @xmath MeV have lifetime at
least as the age of the Universe. The energy density stored in the
gravitons produced at a temperature @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this constrains @xmath severely from above by a value of @xmath MeV,
@xmath GeV, and @xmath GeV for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath extra
dimensions with fundamental gravity scale @xmath TeV!. This bound
suggest that @xmath TeV for this scenario to be compatible with BBN in
the case of @xmath extra dimensions.

### 4.3 Kaluza-Klein Cosmology

It is obvious that the evolution of the Universe as a system in more
than four dimensions will be different than the standard
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker scenario.

The question to pause is whether or not recovering the standard
Cosmological expansion is possible and under which conditions. The
answer to this question is yes, it is possible for the four-dimensional
Universe to evolve according to the usual Freedmann expansion law if the
internal space is small enough compared to the size of the Universe [
170 ] - [ 175 ] . Other Cosmological consequences were also discussed as
massive relics [ 176 ] , inflation [ 172 ] , and other finite
temperature effects in [ 177 , 178 ] . In the few past years the some of
the above issues were re-examined in addition to some new cosmological
and phenomenological aspects [ 179 ] - [ 196 ] .

Let us look at what happens to a Universe living in @xmath dimensions
with the following metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the metrics on the @xmath -dimensional space
@xmath ( @xmath eventually) and the @xmath -dimensional compact one
@xmath respectively. Further, we assume the Universe to have the perfect
fluid description in @xmath dimensions, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the energy density @xmath and the pressures @xmath may depend on
time, but not the space coordinates @xmath . They are also assumed to
satisfy the equation of state @xmath , ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 This equation of state
is not well justified. For a generic treatment see [ 175 ] . @xmath .

The Einstein equations for the scale factor @xmath and @xmath in terms
of the entries of the energy-momentum tensor can be derived from the
action

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

For @xmath they are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the curvature scalars of @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Looking at the equations of motion (setting @xmath ) it
was shown in [ 174 ] that, for a flat @xmath , the typical distance
@xmath between two point on @xmath increases monotonically from @xmath
to @xmath at every value of @xmath , while @xmath , the radius of @xmath
, increases from zero to a maximum then drops back to zero. A similar
varying behavior of the compactification scale has been noted in [ 173 ]
⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 There is a major difference in the two results as in [ 173 ]
the compact space tends to increase after a certain critical length, in
contrast with [ 174 ] . by taking into account combined thermal and
quantum mechanical fluctuations effects, and the instability feature
remains to be accounted for. Therefore a stabilization mechanism is
needed to set @xmath at the desired value whatever it is chosen to be in
a short enough period, not only for keeping the fundamental scale of
gravity low enough, but also in order not to cause any conflict with the
variations of the four-dimensional Newton’s constant @xmath [ 197 ] and
big bang nucleosynthesis [ 198 ] .

Assuming that such a localization mechanism exists and that its net
effect is to induce a constant effective pressure @xmath the independent
four-dimensional Einstein equations to be solved at low energies become
[ 174 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which clearly resemble the evolution of FRW Universe.

As pointed out in [ 174 ] , the temperature profile of the early
Universe is radically changed due to the presence of the extra
dimensions. If all the dimensions were expanding, the Universe would
have only cooled down by time. However, if the extra space undergoes a
period of expansion and contraction, the @xmath -dimensional Universe
will start off very hot, cools down to a certain limit, afterwhich it
reheats until it becomes effectively the observed four-dimensional
Universe.

The energy momentum tensor ( 60 ) was shown in [ 175 ] to be derived
from a free energy function of free bosonic gas in thermal equilibrium.
It was shown that at energies below the compactification mass scale, the
Universe expands as usually observed in four dimensions while the radius
of compactification remains constant. ⁴² ⁴² 42 For alternative
expansion, e.g. inflation, see for instance [ 172 , 188 , 190 ] . This
is done by adding a source term to ( 61 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath represents the contribution of matter fields, vacuum
fluctuations,… etc . Its variations defines the energy-momentum tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The stress tensor @xmath is as usual expected to have the same
invariances as the metric. In [ 175 ] the full manifold is considered
@xmath , where the 3-dimensional space is taken to be closed. The case
of flat Universe can be obtained by taking @xmath after a careful
transition from the discrete to continuum limit. The symmetry of @xmath
in this case is @xmath . The action with this metric ansatz is hence

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the spatial volumes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the effective “potential” which incorporates a classical
gravity terms arising from @xmath , from the one-loop quantum part
@xmath , and from the thermal part depending on the entropy @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Free energy to be computed is obtained by Legendre transform of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the temperature is given by @xmath . Let the pressures @xmath and
@xmath entries in ( 60 ) be defined by the thermodynamic identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the conservation of energy @xmath implies the conservation of
entropy. ⁴³ ⁴³ 43 Recall that in the usual treatment [ 199 ] the energy
density and pressure must satisfy the integrability condition

@xmath

where @xmath which imply @xmath . Since the equations of motion are
@xmath , the entropy will be constant in time. Since we have no a priori
idea of what could the equation of state for Kaluza-Klein Cosmology be,
let us suppose that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are due to a gas of
non-interacting bosons in thermal equilibrium. The free energy of this
system can be written as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is a mass parameter, @xmath , and @xmath denotes the
Laplacian on the full compact manifold @xmath and the three first terms
in ( 65 ) represent its eigenvalues. @xmath is the multiplicity factor
related to each of the eigenvalues and is equal to the dimension of
@xmath representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The divergent sum ( 65 ) can be regularized by making use of the
identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The free energy can thus be rearranged as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the functions @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Note that each of the @xmath function can be written in terms of the
Jacobi Theta function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has away from @xmath the modular property

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sums ( 66 ) hence converge and define analytic functions on the half
plane @xmath and are singular at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , the zero temperature limit corresponds to @xmath , and the
flat four-dimensional space limit of the energy density @xmath
corresponds to @xmath .

Now, in a regime in which @xmath and a relativistic gas of particles,
@xmath , the formula for the free energy converges at @xmath (see [ 175
] for the technical details) and the “s” regularization can be removed,
and the approximate expression becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The 1-loop contribution to the potential @xmath related to @xmath by (
64 ) therefore is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The full potential ( 63 ) up to one loop is therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last term @xmath is identified by the energy for a constant
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

The time evolution of the @xmath -dimensional Universe is governed by
the Euler-Lagrange equations derived from ( 62 ). Is is shown that for
an appropriate choice of @xmath and the parameters in @xmath , it is
possible to obtain a solution where the internal radius is constant
while the large radius evolves as in the standard Cosmology [ 175 ] .
For @xmath the equations of motion become

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

The compatibility of ( 67 ), ( 68 ), and ( 69 ) requires

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this constraint allows us to determines @xmath and @xmath in terms
of @xmath which upon substituting back into ( 69 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is computed from ( 67 ) to be @xmath .

As a summary, there are solutions for Einstein equations in the regime
@xmath where the size of the internal space remain constant, and the
4-dimensional Universe evolves according to the conventional
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker Cosmology, as ( 70 ) clearly indicates, for a
closed Universe in a radiation dominated era. It remains to check the
classical stability, at least, of the value of @xmath by solving the
equations for small perturbations around the desired value.

### 4.4 Brane Cosmology

Here we review an example [ 135 ] of the evolution of a brane-world
embedded in five dimensions, and under which condition the FRW expansion
can be recovered. The time evolution of the scale factor, is worked out
explicitly for the a specific choice of the equation of state @xmath (
@xmath ), and it is shown that the standard cosmological evolution can
be obtained [ 135 ] .

Since we are interested in a FRW metric for the four-dimensional
Universe, we start from the following maximally symmetric
three-dimensional metric ansatz

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we assume the brane as a hypersurface in five dimensions defined by
@xmath .

Upon substituting this ansatz into the five-dimensional Einstein
equations, the non-vanishing components of the Einstein tensor
@xmath are [ 135 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (72)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where a prime stands for a derivative with respect to @xmath while a dot
denotes the derivative with respect to @xmath .

The energy-momentum tensor can be decomposed into two parts; the bulk
matter source and the brane matter one

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the energy-momentum tensor of the bulk matter which we
assume to have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the energy density @xmath and the pressures @xmath and @xmath are
independent of the coordinate @xmath . Later we will be interested in
the special case of a Cosmological constant @xmath .

The second term @xmath corresponds to the matter content on the brane,
i͡.e at @xmath . According to our metric ansatz, the matter description
on the brane is the one of a perfect fluid in four dimensions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the energy density and
pressure on the brane and are functions of time only. The last entry
being zero means physically that there is no flow of ordinary matter
along the fifth direction, and consequently the vanishing of @xmath and
this leads in turn that ( 71 ) and ( 74 ) become

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a function of @xmath and @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

Integrating ( 75 ) over @xmath , keeping in mind that @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant of integration.

Now, by taking the time derivative of ( 75 ), the @xmath derivative of (
76 ), and assuming @xmath we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which indicates that @xmath is independent of time for @xmath , the
thing we will assume from now on. ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴ 44 If @xmath is, for example, an
exponential function of @xmath and @xmath as @xmath this assumption is
no more valid. This will indicate that @xmath .

Coming back to ( 72 ), @xmath can be written using the Bianchi identity
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is identically satisfied when @xmath as can be seen using ( 75 ).

Hence, when the bulk source is a Cosmological constant, any set of
functions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath satisfying ( 77 ) or more
explicitly

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

together with @xmath will locally be solution of Einstein equations in
five dimensions, away from @xmath .

At the position of the brane, @xmath , the junctions condition should be
taken into account (see section 3.2 ) which here take the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath defines the jump of the function @xmath across @xmath .

Assuming the symmetry @xmath (for simplicity, which is not necessarily
imply the presence of another brane), the junction condition ( 79 ) can
be used to compute @xmath at the two sides of the brane, and by
continuity, when @xmath , one sees that the equation ( 78 ) implies the
generalization of the first Friedmann equation (after setting @xmath by
a suitable change of time):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note from the above equation that the bulk energy density enters
linearly while the brane energy density enters quadratically, and the
Cosmological evolution depends on the constant @xmath , an effective
radiation term, which is determined by the initial conditions can be
constrained by BBN [ 135 ] .

Equation ( 81 ) is enough to study the cosmological evolution on the
brane whatever the metric outside looks like and whether or not @xmath .

However, let us assume @xmath and set it to @xmath . Using the equation
@xmath one can express @xmath in terms of @xmath according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath depends solely on time. Inserting this into ( 75 ) leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which applies in the bulk at both sides of the brane. Integrating it
over @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

For @xmath , the solution is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the functions @xmath , and @xmath are functions of time (or
constants) and can be determined in terms of the input parameters of the
theory.

In order to see more explicitly the Cosmological evolution on the brane,
let us decompose the energy density on the brane into two parts:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant, and @xmath stands for the contribution of
matter on the brane. Substituting in ( 81 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we chose

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

we see that for @xmath the standard Cosmology is recovered [ 134 , 135 ]
(the solution for the case @xmath is also in [ 200 ] ).

Assuming the equations of state to be @xmath , the energy density and
pressure become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. The scale factor describing the
time evolution on the brane, when ( 82 ) is satisfied, behaves as [ 135
]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore the evolution of the Universe will be non-conventional
@xmath at early times while at late times it is described by the
standard Cosmology @xmath (further discussion can be found in [ 135 ] ).

### 4.5 Stability of the scale of compactification

So far, the examples explained in sections 4.3 and 4.4 represent
equilibrium configurations, what remains is to check their stability
against the perturbations of the metric and other background fields.

The procedure of checking classical perturbative stability of a solution
to Einstein equations was explained in section 2.6 under 2.6.3 . There,
it was argued that one way to see whether the solution is stable or not
is by looking at the spectrum and making sure it contains no tachyons or
ghosts. The absence of such modes would indicate that the radius of
compactification would only oscillate around the background value and
that the configuration, say @xmath , will not acquire a shape different
from the initial ansatz. ⁴⁵ ⁴⁵ 45 It was argued in [ 201 ] that even a
manifold which is stable against all deformations will become unstable
if the temperature is raised to a critical value, which is independent
of the shape of the manifold, as on rather general grounds the free
energy could become increasingly negative above the critical
temperature. The phase transition due to this phenomena indicates the
necessity of having time-dependence for the field associated with the
evolution of the compact space.

For example, the theory provided in section 2.6 (of reference [ 56 ] )
is free of both tachyons and negative norm fields, in addition to having
a fixed value of the radius in of @xmath in terms of the other
parameters in the theory (equation ( 17 )), ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 There is no
analogue for this relation in the original Kaluza-Klein compactification
performed on a circle since @xmath is flat. and therefore the radius of
compactification is expeted to be oscilating around the value @xmath .
It is may also be helpful to note that in this model there is no
massless mode in the gravity sector to associate with the radion , the
radius of compactification.

In general, this not the case. The radion is usually massless and it has
no potential (or a flat one). Therefore, there is no reason why the
scale of its vacuum expectation value should be fixed at a specific
point which is moreover close to the electroweak scale. When put in a
cosmological context, the value of the radius should not vary much as
this may have strong impact on the Universe as observed today.
Therefore, the ground state state of the radion field has to have a
determind value for at least two reasons. The first is that there is no
experimental evidence for a variation of the fundamental constants [ 198
] ; according to observations the internal space(s) should be static or
nearly static at least from the time of nucleosynthesis. The second is
that we wish to have a lower gravity scale, preferably as low as few
TeV, as a cutoff for the standard model of particle physics. Therefore,
a good stabilization mechanism for the radion should be a part of any
realistic model.

In superstring theories, the fundamental physical constants are related
to the vacuum expectation values of the moduli fields which are defined
by the shape and size of internal space(s) of compactification. In these
theories, some stabilization mechanisms are proposed, for example in [
202 , 203 ] , and recently it was shown that the stabilization can be
enhanced due to the coupling of the dilaton, the string coupling
constant @xmath to the kinetic energy of ordinary matter fields [ 223 ]
. In the context of Kaluza-Klein theory this issue was, and is still,
subject to numerous investigations (see for instance [ 204 ] - [ 223 ]
for tensor product compactification, and [ 224 ] - [ 233 ] for warped).

Another way to stabilize the radion, than the one provided in [ 56 ] ,
is by generating a potential for the radion, through an ad hoc coupling
to a scalar field for example (as in [ 224 ] ), and checking whether
this potential has a minimum which could correspond to the desired value
of the radion. ⁴⁷ ⁴⁷ 47 In [ 224 ] the back reaction of the scalar field
into the metric was not taken into account, for a discussion about this
point see [ 231 ] . In fact, the background solution for the scalar
field in [ 224 ] is, in a sense, similar to the Yang-Mills background (
16 ), and the relation determening the value of the radion in [ 224 ] in
terms of the values of the minima of scalar potential and other
paramters of the model is somehow analogous to equation ( 17 ).

In [ 221 ] the issue of stabilization was discussed within a
cosmological time evolution context, which is essentially the same idea.
Again a potential was introduced for this purpose, with the background
metric similar to ( 59 ), and it was argued that the fluctuations of the
radion were oscillatory with positive frequency, around a value @xmath ,
and this subsequently lead to the understanding that @xmath is a minumum
of the potential. Of course one has to check that all physical modes of
the model have the feature.

We believe that the method in section 2.6 is nice since it does not
involve ad hoc potentials to stabilize the radion as usually alternative
stability checks require. It may even be that higher order corrections
result in a potential [ 234 ] which could lead to a better understanding
to the origin of stabilization potentials, which may also shed some
light on the way how supersymmetry is broken in superstring theories,
and to possible relation of the value of the radion at the minimum with
the rest of parameters in the theory. This problem remains challenging.

### 4.6 Proton stability

Another problematic issue arising from models with large extra (and also
infinite) dimensions is the potentially too fast proton decay.
Generally, the proton decay rate due to gravitational effects of, e.g.
dimension @xmath operators, is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we know from the bounds on proton life time it should satisfy
@xmath years. This implies a bound, too well known in Grand Unified
Theories, that the smallest mass which could substitute @xmath and does
not lead to an unacceptably fast proton decay is @xmath GeV. Therefore
one does generally expect a problem with proton decay at low fundamental
scales @xmath TeV.

If the particle mediating proton decay, say via the dimension five
non-renormalizable operator @xmath , has a mass @xmath TeV range, it
should be incredibly weakly coupled in order not to lead to proton
decay. A way to suppress such an operator could be by imposing certain
symmetries [ 157 ] (see also [ 235 ] - [ 239 ] . Since global symmetries
are are expected to be broken by quantum effects, those symmetries
better be gauged. Moreover, the procedure of orbifold compactification
with fixed point (which is used by some in order to achieve chiral
fermions, project out unwanted states,… etc ) is allowed only in a
string theory context, and therefore a neater way to achive acceptable
proton decay rate could be by choosing an appropriate Yang-Mills gauge
group in @xmath -dimensions together with an appropriate compact space.
It is possible to construct examples of such compactification where
operators leading to proton decay are forbidden because the quantum
numbers of quarks and leptons can not form invariant couplings under the
unbroken symmetry (could be the unbroken part of the gauge group, the
isometry group, or both) as can be checked with the @xmath model in
chapter 5 . This possibility will be discussed elsewhere.

We review here a simple mechanism for proton stability suggested in [ 73
] , as this will serve in explaining chapter 4.7 . ⁴⁸ ⁴⁸ 48 See also [
10 , 157 , 182 ] for alternative suggestions. The same idea of fermion
localization [ 13 ] explained in section 3.5.2 can be adopted to
guarantee proton stability [ 73 ] : quarks and leptons are localized at
two slightly displaced point along the fifth direction, and this
suppressed their mutual interaction. To see how, let us give leptons and
baryons the following 5-dimensional masses

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

which correspond to the localizations ⁴⁹ ⁴⁹ 49 The last inequality in
the next expression comes from ( 58 ). We assume quarks of different
generations to be located in the same @xmath position in order to avoid
dangerous FCNC mediated by the Kaluza-Klein modes of the gluons [ 193 ]
.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

The shape of the fermion wave functions along the fifth dimension is the
one in ( 53 ) up to a normalization. It can be cast in an explicit and
simple form if we consider the limit @xmath , in which the effect of the
plateau for @xmath can be neglected: ⁵⁰ ⁵⁰ 50 This is also the limit in
which the approximation ( 57 ) is valid.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We assume the Standard Model to be embedded in some theory which, in
general, contains some additional bosons @xmath whose interactions
violate baryon number conservation. If it is the case, the four fermion
interaction @xmath can be effectively described by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the mass of the intermediate boson @xmath and @xmath is
a parameter of mass dimension one related to the five-dimensional
coupling of the @xmath -particle to quarks and leptons. This scattering
is thus suppressed by ⁵¹ ⁵¹ 51 From the approximation ( 57 ), only the
squared difference of the five-dimensional masses affects the
suppression factor. For this reason, the above choice @xmath was only
done in order to simplify notation and does not have any physical
meaning.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (86)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Current proton stability [ 240 ] requires @xmath that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

The numerator in the last equation is quite insensitive to the mass
scales of the model, and – due to the logarithmic mild dependence – can
be safely assumed to be of order @xmath . For definiteness, we will thus
fix it at the value of @xmath in the rest of this chapter. Conditions (
58 ) and ( 87 ) give altogether

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

that we can rewrite

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Notice that the last limit in equations ( 89 ) is stronger than the one
given in [ 73 ] where proton stability is achieved if the ratio of the
massive scales of the model is of order @xmath . However, in ref. [ 73 ]
the field @xmath simply scales linearly as a function of @xmath , while
we expect that whenever a specific model is assumed, conditions
analogous to our ( 58 ) and ( 89 ) should be imposed [ 241 ] .

### 4.7 Baryogenesis with Low Scale Gravity

In this section we discuss a mechanism for generating baryon number
violation in a model with one extra dimensions. As explained in section
4.6 , the Rubakov-Shaposhnikov localization mechanism [ 13 ] was used in
[ 73 ] in order to insure proton stability at zero temperature. ⁵² ⁵² 52
Beside providing an way around fast proton decay in theories with low
fundamental scales, this idea has further applications as one may
reproduce the entries of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix just
placing quarks of different generations at different and appropriately
chosen positions (this requires the presence of at least two extra
dimensions, as shown in [ 242 ] ) without assuming any hierarchy in the
original Yukawa couplings of the fermions to the Higgs field. Discussion
for collider signature is in [ 243 ] . The baryon number is almost
conserved at zero temperature due to the slight overlap of the wave
functions of quarks and lepton in the internal space due to their
different localization along the fifth direction. The suppression
decreases due to finite temperature effects leading to bayon number
violation at earlier times in the history of the Universe.

Here, we review [ 241 ] where the idea of [ 73 ] is adopted for
generating operators leading to baryon number violation at finite
temperature, while such operators remain appropriately suppressed at
zero temperature.

The starting point is to assume that quarks and leptons are now ( i.e.
at zero temperature) sufficiently apart in the extra space. However, we
wonder if finite temperature effects could change this picture
increasing the interactions between quarks and leptons at early times.
This would render proton stability now compatible with baryogenesis in
the early Universe. An exact computation of the corrections on a
solitonic background presents some technical difficulties. Moreover,
relying on a perturbative analysis at a scale close to the cut-off of
the theory may be unsafe. For this reason, we do not give a precise
final value for the temperature necessary to achieve the observed baryon
asymmetry. We limit ourselves to a perturbative analysis made on
dimensional arguments, which anyhow indicates that finite temperature
effects should indeed increase the interactions between baryons and
leptons.

As it is well known, baryon number violation alone is not sufficient for
baryogenesis. To present a more complete analysis we discuss a
particular model reminiscent of GUT baryogenesis. In doing so, we meet
another problem typical of these brane scenarios. Due to the low energy
densities involved, the expansion rate of the Universe is always very
small. If baryogenesis originates from the decay of a boson @xmath , the
out of equilibrium condition requires @xmath much higher than the
physical cut-off of brane models. This problem can be overcome for
example if the temperature of the Universe never exceeds @xmath and if
these bosons are created non-thermally (for instance at preheating).
This and some other options are briefly discussed in the last section.

#### 4.7.1 Thermal correction to the coefficients

Once the localization mechanism is incorporated in a low energy
effective theory – as the system described above may be considered –,
one can legitimately ask if thermal effects could play any significant
role. We are mainly interested in any possible change in the argument of
the exponential in ( 86 ), that will be the most relevant for the
purpose of baryogenesis. For this reason, we introduce the dimensionless
quantity

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

From ( 87 ) and ( 89 ), we can set @xmath at zero temperature. Thermal
effects will modify this value. There are however some obstacles that
one meets in evaluating the finite temperature result. Apart from some
technical difficulties arising from the fact that the scalar background
is not constant, the main problem is that nonperturbative effects may
play a very relevant role at high temperature. As it is customary in
theories with extra dimensions, the model described by ( 42 ) and ( 55 )
is nonrenormalizable and one expects that there is a cut-off (generally
related to the fundamental scale of gravity) above which it stops
holding. Our considerations will thus be valid only for low temperature
effects, and may be assumed only as an indication for what is expected
to happen at higher temperature.

Being aware of these problems, by looking at the dominant
finite-temperature one-loop effects, we estimate the first corrections
to the relevant parameters to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (91)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where the @xmath ’s are dimensionless coefficients whose values are
related to the exact particle content of the theory.

In writing the above equations, the first of conditions ( 89 ) has also
been taken into account. For example, both a scalar and a fermionic loop
contribute to the thermal correction to the parameter @xmath . While the
contribution from the former is of order @xmath , the one of the latter
is of order @xmath and thus dominates. ⁵³ ⁵³ 53 Notice also that with
our choice ( 83 ) loops with internal leptons dominate over loops with
internal quarks, since the former have vanishing 5-dimensional bare mass
and thus are not Boltzmann suppressed. However, although this choice is
the simplest one, one may equally consider the most general case where
all the fermions have a nonvanishing five-dimensional mass.

Substituting equations ( 92 ) into eq. ( 90 ), we get, in the limit of
low temperature,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

From the smallness of the quantity @xmath (see ( 89 )) we can safely
assume (apart from high hierarchy between the @xmath ’s coefficients
that we do not expect to hold) that the dominant contribution in the
above expression comes from the term proportional to @xmath .

We thus simply have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

We notice that the parameter @xmath , being related to the thermal
corrections to the @xmath coefficient due to a fermion loop, is expected
to be negative [ 222 ] : the first thermal effect is to decrease the
value of the parameter @xmath , making hence the baryon number violating
reactions more efficient at finite rather than at zero temperature.

There is another effect which may be very crucial at finite temperature,
linked to the stability of the @xmath symmetry. When a temperature is
turned on, we generally expect the formation of a fermion–antifermion
condensate @xmath . If it is the case, the Yukawa coupling @xmath in the
Lagrangian ( 42 ) renders one of the two vacua unstable. While this
leads to an instantaneous decay of the kink configuration, a
kink–antikink system could have a sufficiently long lifetime provided
the two objects are enough far apart.

Let us conclude this section with an important remark. While in this
discussion we have considered only the localization of fermions along
one extra dimension, almost everything we have said can be generalized
if two or more additional dimensions are present ⁵⁴ ⁵⁴ 54 This is
mandatory in the scenario [ 9 ] , since the presence of only one large
extra dimension is phenomenologically excluded. . The index theorem
guarantees [ 244 , 245 ] indeed the possibility of localizing fermions
on a topological defect of an arbitrary dimension. Just to give an
example, let us consider the localization on a Nielsen–Olesen [ 246 ]
vortex in the case of two extra–dimensions, as it is discussed in [ 9 ]
. Also in this case, one can localize quarks and leptons at two
different positions (actually along different circles about the center
of the vortex). Once again, proton stability requires conditions
completely analogous to conditions ( 89 ) here discussed. Of course the
calculation of thermal corrections gives different results, since the
dimension of the couplings of the model changes according to the number
of spatial dimensions. However, also in the case of the two-dimensional
vortex, the qualitative result turns out to be identical to what has
been derived in the one-dimensional case: the most significant effect
comes from the variation of the coefficient @xmath of the @xmath
interaction, and it is in the direction of enhancing the quark–lepton
interaction with increasing temperature.

#### 4.7.2 A model for baryogenesis

We saw in the previous section that thermal effects may increase the
rate of baryon number violating interactions of the system. This is very
welcome, since a theory which never violates baryon number cannot lead
to baryogenesis and thus can hardly reproduce the observed Universe.
Anyhow baryon number violation is only one of the ingredients for
baryogenesis, and the aim of this section is to investigate how the
above mechanism can be embedded in a more general context.

A particular scheme which may be adopted is baryogenesis through the
decay of massive bosons @xmath . ⁵⁵ ⁵⁵ 55 We may think of these bosons
as the intermediate particles which mediate the four fermion interaction
described by the term ( 85 ). This scheme closely resembles GUT
baryogenesis, but there are some important peculiarities due to the
different scales of energy involved. In GUT baryogenesis the massive
boson @xmath , coupled to matter by the interaction @xmath , has the
decay rate

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

An important condition is that the @xmath boson decays when the
temperature of the Universe is below its mass (out of equilibrium
decay), in order to avoid thermal regeneration. From the standard
equation for the expansion of the Universe,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

(where @xmath is the number of relativistic degrees of freedom at the
temperature @xmath ), this condition rewrites

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath is a Higgs particle, @xmath can be as low as @xmath . Even in
this case however the @xmath boson must be very massive. In principle
this may be problematic in the theories with extra dimensions we are
interested in, which have the main goal of having a very low fundamental
scale.

There are some possibilities to overcome this problem. One is related to
a possible deviation of the expansion of the system from the standard
Friedmann law. This is a concrete possibility, since the exact expansion
law is very dependent on the particular brane model one is considering
and on the fact that the size of the compact dimension is or is not
stabilized. For example, we will show in the next chapter that the
Randall-Sundrum model [ 22 ] with a stabilized radion can have
(depending on the energy density on the zero brane) an expansion rate
higher than the standard one for temperatures close to the cut-off scale
of the system (that is TeV). This accelerated expansion could in
principle favor the out of equilibrium condition for the @xmath bosons.

However this issue is very dependent on the specific cosmological
scenario adopted, and one may be interested in more general solutions
for the out of equilibrium problem. One very natural possibility is to
create the @xmath particles non thermally and to require the temperature
of the Universe to have been always smaller than their mass @xmath . In
this way, one kinematically forbids regeneration of the @xmath particles
after their decay. In addition, although interactions among these bosons
can bring them to thermal equilibrium, chemical equilibrium cannot be
achieved.

Nonthermal creation of matter has raised a considerable interest in the
last years. In particular, the mechanism of preheating has proven quite
successful, as we have discuss in the first part of this work. The
efficiency of preheating has been exploited in the work [ 247 ] to
revive GUT baryogenesis in the context of standard four-dimensional
theories. Here, we will not go into the details of the processes that
could have lead to the production of the @xmath bosons. Rather, we will
simply assume that, after inflation, their number density is @xmath . To
simplify our computations, we will also suppose that their energy
density dominates over the thermal bath produced by the perturbative
decay of the inflaton field. ⁵⁶ ⁵⁶ 56 An alternative way to overcome the
bound ( 97 ) relies on the fact that, as observed in the works [ 248 ,
249 ] , the maximal temperature reached by the thermal bath during
reheating can indeed be much higher than the final reheating
temperature. In this case, even if @xmath is considerably lower than
@xmath , @xmath particles can be produced in a significant amount, and
the out of equilibrium condition is easily achieved. However, the
treatment of this mechanism is in our case somewhat different from the
one given in [ 248 ] : due to the slowness of the expansion of the
Universe, the @xmath bosons will decay before the freeze out of their
production. The final baryon asymmetry cannot be estimated with the use
of the formulae of [ 248 ] , which are valid only if the decay of the
@xmath particles occurs well after their freeze out.

Just for definiteness, let us consider a very simple model where there
are two species of @xmath boson which can decay into quarks and leptons,
according to the 4-dimensional effective interactions ⁵⁷ ⁵⁷ 57 Here one
can not really adopt a GUT regime, since in unified theories the quarks
and leptons are in the same multiplets which is not consistent with the
idea of separation in the extra space.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

where (remember the suppression given by the different localization of
quarks and leptons) the quantity @xmath is defined in eq. ( 90 ). Again
for definiteness we will consider the minimal model where no extra
fermionic degrees of freedom are added to the ones present in the
Standard Model. Moreover we will assume @xmath to be conserved, even
though the extension to a more general scheme can be easily performed.

The decay of the @xmath bosons will reheat the Universe to a temperature
that can be evaluated to be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since we do not want the @xmath particles to be thermally regenerated
after their decay, we require @xmath , that can be rewritten as an upper
bound on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

Another limit comes from the necessity to forbid the @xmath violating
four fermion interaction ( 85 ) to erase the @xmath asymmetry that has
been just created by the decay of the @xmath bosons. We thus require the
interaction ( 85 ) to be out of equilibrium at temperatures lower than
@xmath . From eq. ( 86 ) we see that we can parameterize the four
fermion interaction with a coupling @xmath . Hence, the out of
equilibrium condition reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

One more upper bound on the reheating temperature comes from the out of
equilibrium condition for the sphalerons. This requirement is necessary
only if one chooses the theory to be @xmath invariant, while it does not
hold for @xmath violating schemes. We can approximately consider the
sphalerons to be in thermal equilibrium at temperatures above the
electroweak scale. Thus, if @xmath is a conserved quantity, we will
require the reheat temperature to be smaller than about @xmath .

If one neglects the presence of the thermal bath prior to the decay of
the @xmath bosons, the very first decays will be only into couples of
quarks, since the channel into one quark and one lepton is strongly
suppressed by the @xmath factor due to the fact that the kink is not
modified by any thermal correction. However, the decay process is not an
instantaneous event. It is shown in [ 248 ] that the particles produced
in the very first decays are generally expected to thermalize very
rapidly, so to create a thermal bath even when most of the energy
density is still stored in the decaying particles. ⁵⁸ ⁵⁸ 58 As shown in
[ 248 ] , what is called the reheating temperature is indeed the
temperature of the thermal bath when it starts to dominate. After the
first decays, the temperature of the light degrees of freedom can be
even much higher than @xmath . The temperature of this bath can even be
considerably higher than the final reheating temperature. The presence
of the heat bath modifies in turn the shape of the kink, as shown in the
previous section, and we can naturally expect that this modification
enhances the @xmath violating interactions.

If the energy density of the Universe is dominated by the @xmath bosons
before they decay, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of degrees of freedom associated to the
@xmath particles and @xmath is the difference between the rates of the
decays @xmath and @xmath .

We denote with @xmath and @xmath the two species of bosons whose
interactions ( 98 ) lead to baryon number violation, and parameterize by
@xmath the strength of CP-violation in these interactions. Considering
that @xmath is always much smaller than one, we get [ 250 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the function @xmath can be estimated to be of order @xmath . It is
also reasonable to assume @xmath .

Collecting all the above estimates, and assuming @xmath to be of order
@xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the requirement @xmath we get an upper limit on the baryon
asymmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the factor @xmath has to be calculated for a value of @xmath of
the order of the reheating temperature.

We get a different limit on @xmath from the bound ( 101 ): assuming
@xmath and @xmath indeed one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the observed amount of baryon asymmetry is of order @xmath , even
in the case of maximum efficiency of the process (that is, assuming
maximal @xmath violation and @xmath ), the bounds ( 105 ) and ( 106 )
imply that @xmath . Unfortunately, the temperature at which the
condition @xmath occurs cannot be evaluated by means of the expansion of
eq. ( 94 ), that have been obtained under the assumption @xmath . On the
other hand, it is remarkable that our mechanism may work with a ratio
@xmath of order one. We thus expect that a successful baryogenesis may
be realized for a range of the parameters of this model which – although
not possible to evaluate through a perturbative analysis – should be
quite wide and reasonable.

As we have discussed in the previous chapter, in scenarios with large
extra dimensions and low scale gravity, the maximal temperature reached
by the Universe after inflation is strongly bounded from above in order
to avoid overproducing Kaluza-Klein graviton modes, which may eventually
contradict cosmological observations [ 24 ] . For instance, in models
with two large extra dimensions the reheating temperature cannot exceed
much @xmath MeV (unless the fundamental scale @xmath is unnaturally
high.

This value is too low for the scenario we are describing since @xmath is
proportional to the ratio @xmath , and hence the observed amount of
baryons would be reproduced at the price of an unnaturally small value
of @xmath . However, other schemes with extra dimensions exist where the
bounds on @xmath are less severe. For example, in the proposals [ 22 ,
62 ] the mass of the first graviton KK mode is expected to be of order
TeV. The reheating temperature can thus safely be taken to be of order
@xmath .

There are of course several possible baryogenesis schemes alternative to
the one just presented (see for instance [ 251 , 252 ] ). A possible
option which also requires a minimal extension to the Standard Model
could be to achieve the baryon asymmetry directly through the @xmath
fermions interactions @xmath in the thermal primordial bath. The out of
equilibrium condition may be provided by the change of the kink as the
temperature of the bath decreases. ⁵⁹ ⁵⁹ 59 This condition may be easily
achieved due of the exponential dependence of the rate of this process
on the temperature, see equations ( 86 ) and ( 94 ). What may be
problematic is the source of @xmath violation which may lead the
creation of the baryon asymmetry. A possibility in this regard may be
provided by considering a second Higgs doublet, but the whole mechanism
certainly deserves a deep analysis by itself.

## 5 Gauge Hierarchy, Electroweak Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking, &
Fermion Chirality Linked

### 5.1 Introduction

In the SM, the hierarchy of mass scales is present at both classical and
quantum levels. At the tree level, there is a huge difference between
the scales associated with the electroweak and the gravitational
interactions, @xmath .

If quantum corrections were not to significantly alter the value of the
Higgs (mass) @xmath computed classically, one could simply consider the
number @xmath above as one of the many extreme ratios existing in nature
(like the mass ratio of a feather and of an elephant). However, there
are huge quadratic corrections to the Higgs (mass) @xmath at the quantum
level due to the fact that the Higgs particle is described by a
fundamental scalar field. These corrections change the classical value
of the Higgs (mass) @xmath by many orders of magnitude, and adjusting
the value back to its classical one requires a fine-tuning of order
@xmath in the case of a gravitational cutoff, and another of order
@xmath in GUTs.

Supersymmetry is a very good example where the problem is nicely solved
at the quantum level, in fact once the SUSY breaking scale is set
classically, usually taken to be around few TeV, only logarithmic
corrections will alter this value. The key principle for the absence of
quadratic divergences in this theory is that the Higgs mass is protected
by the symmetry above the cutoff. Being in a multiplet with chiral
fermions, the Higgs is deemed to be massless, due to chiral symmetry, as
long as SUSY is unbroken.

The idea of large extra dimensions explains perturbative stability of
the weak scale versus the Planck scale, ⁶⁰ ⁶⁰ 60 Provided that a
convincing stabilization mechanism for the radius of compactification is
found. , by lowering the cut-off of the theory. Nevertheless, it does
not address the issue of sensitivity of the Higgs mass to the
ultraviolet cut-off. This is an important issue from the point of view
of the low energy calculability, and is the central point to be
addressed in [ 253 ] .

In the chapter we present the work [ 253 ] , where the above key
principle is employed, though without supersymmetry, to explicit models
where the Higgs mass is protected by a gauge symmetry in @xmath
dimensions. It is argued that identifying the electroweak Higgs particle
with the extra components of the gauge field in @xmath dimensions
provides a solution to the hierarchy problem. ⁶¹ ⁶¹ 61 An alternative
approach was discussed in [ 255 ] , where the Higgs mass is controlled
by a higher-dimensional extended supersymmetry, spontaneously broken
globally by Scherk-Schwarz mechanism. An alternative to the Higgs
mechanism was suggested in [ 256 ] . The idea can also be thought of as
performing a compactification on a manifold with the first betti number
@xmath .

The absence of ultraviolate quadratic divergences is due to to the
manifistation of exact gauge symmetry at energies beyond the cutoff. ⁶²
⁶² 62 Soon after the proposal in [ 253 ] , several models appeared, [
257 , 258 , 259 ] , using the same idea in explaining the finiteness of
the Higgs mass. The higher-dimensional gauge symmetry plays the role of
the “protector” in this case forbidding the Higgs (mass) @xmath from
receiving cut off dependent (and hence local) corrections. This symmetry
is spontaneously broken by compactification.

The idea is implemented within explicit models which also provide a link
between fermion chirality and electroweak symmetry breaking in four
dimensions.

### 5.2 The proposal

After compactifying extra dimensions on a monopole background, via
mechanism of [ 53 ] , some of the extra components of the gauge fields
become tachyonic and spontaneously break the electroweak symmetry. Their
quantum numbers are identical to those of SM Higgs doublet. Notice that
the monopole background is essential for generating the families of
chiral fermions in four-dimensions, and therefore is doing a double job.
If the tachyonic mass is a tree level effect the natural scale of the
symmetry breaking is @xmath , the inverse radius of extra compact space,
since the only source of spontaneous breaking of the higher-dimensional
gauge invariance is the compactification itself. In other words, since
in the infinite volume limit @xmath the full higher-dimensional gauge
invariance must be recovered, the weak scale must go as @xmath . Thus in
this case the size of extra dimensions to which gauge fields can
propagate should be @xmath TeV (as in [ 15 ] ). However, it is important
to stress that in order for the theory not to become infinitely strongly
coupled above the compactification scale, the cut-off @xmath must be
lowered as in [ 9 ] , possibly via increase of the volume of some
additional dimensions to which only gravity can spread. This issue will
not be discussed here.

The models constructed in [ 253 ] were in the direction of answering the
following question: “How close can one get the to the Standard Model, in
four dimensions, by Kaluza-Klein compactifying large extra dimensions of
an Einstein Yang-Mills theory coupled to fermions in @xmath dimensions?”
.

Eventually, the effective action of a “good” theory should provide us in
four dimensions with:

-   chiral fermions in 4 dimensions.

-   standard model gauge group (or a group containing it), spontaneously
    broken to @xmath .

-   fermions and Higgs particles in the correct representations of the
    standard model gauge group.

-   a good solution to the hierarchy problem.

-   correct quark and lepton masses.

-   suppressed proton decay.

In the following, examples will explicitly given where the first four
points mentioned above can be realized, with some hints to achieving the
last two.

In a an attempt to approaching the answer of the above question, two
principal ideas were proposed: Identifying the electroweak Higgs with
the extra components of the Yang-Mills field as a solution for the
hierarchy problem, and linking fermion chirality to the spontaneous
electroweak symmetry breaking.

Approaching the hierarchy problem:

The suggestion to solving the hierarchy problem is that the electroweak
Higgs particle is identified with the extra components of the gauge
field in @xmath dimensions.

Note that this identification will not be meaningful, from the point of
view of explaining the absence of quadratic divergences to the Higgs
mass, unless it is proven that those extra components (which are a
scalar in four dimensions) possess a @xmath potential with a negative
bilinear term so to derive the usual spontaneous symmetry breaking
described by the SM. Not only that, this scalar filed should also have
the appropriate Yukawa couplings with the fermions in the right SM group
representations.

In the examples constructed in [ 253 ] , a Higgs-type potential is
produced at the tree-level and therefore the electroweak breaking scale
will be set by the compactification scale. A more appealing regime to
implement the above idea is when the extra components of the gauge field
of interest have a vanishing tree-level (mass) @xmath and acquire a
negative bilinear term via quantum corrections, at one loop say, as can
happen in SM [ 254 ] (the procedure is outlined in section 5.9 ). This
will render the electroweak scale to be, as desired, an order of
magnitude or two less than the scale of compactification, @xmath , which
is taken usually to be few TeV.

Since the Higgs phenomena happens only in four dimensions and at low
energies, the spontaneous symmetry breaking will be dealt with exactly
as in the standard model. This description will be valid at low
energies, below @xmath , as the four-dimensional observer will only see
the effective Lagrangian of the standard model however with an extra
advantage that most of its parameters are fixed (the magic hand is the
higher-dimensional theory): the parameters in the Higgs potential;
Yukawa couplings; and the gauge couplings are all determined by the
scale of compactification and the original Yang-Mills coupling in the
higher-dimensional theory.

Suppose that we start from an Einstein Yang-Mills theory coupled to
fermions on a @xmath dimensional manifold, @xmath , @xmath . The field
content to start with consists of a graviton, @xmath , a gauge field
@xmath in the algebra of a Lie group @xmath , and a fermion @xmath .
Where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the coordinates on @xmath
and @xmath respectively. We take @xmath to be a compact manifold with a
typical volume of order TeV @xmath , and @xmath to indicate a tensor
product. Arguing that the Higgs particle is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies a solution for the quantum instability of the electroweak scale
as was first pointed out by [ 260 , 261 ] . ⁶³ ⁶³ 63 An earlier attempt
for obtaining spontaneous symmetry breaking in six dimensions is in [
262 ] .

Classically, the Planck scale is related to the fundamental @xmath
dimensional gravity scale, as we mentioned previously, by the relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath , the @xmath should be replaced by the product of the
volumes of each manifold. As an example, we take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in the model we discussed in [ 253 ] for quarks and leptons. In this
example we have the gravity scale @xmath TeV, and hence new physics is
expected to show off at around @xmath TeV. Whether one considers the
cutoff to be @xmath , @xmath , or the scale at which the gauge coupling
in @xmath dimensions becomes strong (in our case this happens at around
@xmath TeV as well), the hierarchy between the weak scale and the
cutoff, @xmath , is much milder than the one in the ordinary gravity or
grand unified theories:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Quantum mechanically, the absence of quadratic, or large, divergences as
the ones present in the standard model ⁶⁴ ⁶⁴ 64 @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath are the self coupling of the Higgs and its coupling to the
top quark respectively. can be understood via the argument of symmetry,
as in the case of SUSY, however with no fundamental scalar to start
with. The gauge symmetry in this case is spontaneously broken due to the
presence of a topologically non-trivial background, ⁶⁵ ⁶⁵ 65 In [ 263 ,
264 ] , similar ideas have been used to study dynamical breaking of
supersymmetry in the context of type I string theory. In [ 265 ] the
idea of achieving spontaneous breaking of the C, P, and rotational
symmetries by topological defects in the internal space was discussed.
as will be explained later on, however, at energies larger than the
compactification scale, it is recovered and the Higgs field is massless
being a component of the massless gauge field. In other words the Higgs
mass @xmath , @xmath , can not be larger than @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the common energy scale, and @xmath is the typical
radius of compactification. We conjecture that @xmath . In fact, it was
shown in [ 261 , 266 , 267 ] that the function @xmath is exponentially
damping at energies higher than @xmath . Finding the explicit form of
@xmath in our case is technically more complicated due to the presence
of a monopole background, however we believe that the @xmath will always
be finite.

Linking chirality and SSB:

As discussed in an earlier chapter, the only way to get chiral fermions
in Kaluza-Klein type field theories couple them to a topologically
non-trivial background [ 56 , 37 ] . This in principle changes both the
index and the kernel of @xmath and hence allows for achieving a chiral
theory, as the standard model, in four dimensions. Examples will be
shown in details in the following sections.

### 5.3 The background solution

As discussed earlier, the background solutions should satisfy the
Einstein and Yang-Mills classical equations of motion. Although the
background we are going to use will solve the field equations of any
generally covariant and gauge invariant action containing the metric and
the Yang-Mills fields only, for the sake of simplicity we start from
Einstein-Yang-Mills system in @xmath -dimensions. The action is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is in some representation of the gauge group @xmath . This
action can be the low energy string field theory action with the @xmath
-term induced by some mechanism. The presence of @xmath in our
discussion is required if we insist on having product spaces like @xmath
as a solution of the classical bosonic field equations, where one of the
factors in the product is flat, e.g. the flat @xmath -dimensional
Minkowski space (as discussed earlier). Our argument about chirality is
not sensitive to the flatness of any of the factors in the product. The
presence of tachyons, however, depends on the definition of a mass
operator. This is different for example in AdS @xmath and (Minkowski)
@xmath .

The bosonic field equations are ( 12 ) and ( 13 ). In this paper we
shall consider solutions of the form @xmath , where @xmath is the flat
@xmath -dimensional Minkowski space and @xmath is a compact manifold.
Therefore the equations of motion ( 14 ) will be used.

The internal space @xmath will be mostly taken to be either @xmath or
@xmath . Furthermore we shall assume that the gauge field configuration
@xmath will be non-vanishing only on @xmath . One can of course think of
many other choices for @xmath .

For @xmath the metric is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the radii of @xmath and @xmath respectively,
and @xmath is a pair of local complex coordinates in @xmath . The @xmath
metric is the standard Fubini-Study metric. There are two facts about
@xmath which are of importance for our present discussion. The first is
the isometry group @xmath of @xmath . Together with the invariance group
@xmath of the metric of @xmath , @xmath will form part of the gauge
group in @xmath . @xmath will be identified with the strong interaction
color gauge group. The low energy @xmath -dimensional gauge group will
be @xmath , where @xmath is the subgroup of the @xmath -dimensional
gauge group @xmath which leaves the background solution invariant. Note
that even with @xmath we can obtain a @xmath -dimensional gauge theory
with a gauge group @xmath . Although such a solution can produce chiral
fermions in a non-trivial representation of @xmath , it is not possible,
however, to obtain the correct Standard Model spectrum of leptons,
quarks, and the Higgs fields. For this we need a bigger @xmath . We
shall discuss this point in a greater detail in a later section.

The second important fact about @xmath is that in the absence of a
background @xmath gauge field it is not possible to have globally well
defined spinor field on it. This is principally due to the fact that the
complex coordinates @xmath do not cover @xmath globally. We need at
least three patches @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , where in @xmath we
have the transition rule @xmath and @xmath . It needs some work to show
that the two chiral spinors of the tangent space @xmath of @xmath can
not be patched consistently on the overlap. We shall give some more
details of this later on.

To write the solution of the Yang-Mills equations on @xmath we first
work out the spin connection on @xmath . It is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the first factor refers to @xmath and the second, which is a
@xmath matrix, refers to @xmath . Here @xmath as well as @xmath and
@xmath are Pauli matrices. Also the expressions are valid on the upper
hemisphere on @xmath and the local patch @xmath on @xmath . The
expressions for @xmath and @xmath can be read from the Fubini-Study
metric ( 107 ) on @xmath . We shall not need the explicit expression for
@xmath . The one for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath is the self dual Kähler form on @xmath . It is thus an
instanton type solution of the Yang-Mills equation in @xmath .

It is important note from ( 108 ) that the @xmath spin-connection takes
its values in the subgroup @xmath of the tangent space @xmath .
Furthermore, under @xmath the two chiral spinors of @xmath decompose
according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (110)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the subscripts indicate the @xmath -charges. Using this fact one
can understand why spinors are not globally well defined on @xmath . The
point is that in the overlap of two patches @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined by @xmath . For @xmath to be globally well
defined @xmath should patch according to the rule @xmath . We thus
obtain transition functions which are anti-periodic under @xmath .
Coupling a background gauge field proportional to @xmath can change
this. With a little more work one can show that a similar obstruction
also prevents @xmath from being well defined.

Now we are in a position to write our solution of the Yang-Mills
equation on @xmath . It is easy to show that the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are matrices in the Cartan-subalgebra of @xmath
. The consistent patching of spinors requires that @xmath be integers
and @xmath be one half of an odd integer. Note that the substitution of
the above ansatz in the Einstein equations will require that the radii
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath are quantized.

As mentioned in the beginning of this section our ansatz for the
background configuration solves the field equations derived from any
generally covariant and gauge invariant Lagrangian in @xmath , which
contains the metric and the Yang-Mills potentials only. Such an
effective Lagrangian will contain infinite number of parameters and
therefore the relationship between the radii and other parameters will
be more involved.

### 5.4 Chiral fermions

It is a well known fact that in order to obtain chiral fermions in
@xmath we need topologically non-trivial background gauge fields on
@xmath . Our solution for the Yang-Mills equations consist of magnetic
monopole on @xmath and the potential for the Kähler form on @xmath . The
Kähler form defines a topologically non trivial line bundle on @xmath .

Consider the @xmath fermion Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the @xmath and the Lie algebra
valued spin and gauge connections. We analyze the fermion problem in two
steps. In the first step we write the manifold as @xmath .
Correspondingly we write the @xmath Dirac matrices as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively @xmath and @xmath Dirac
matrices satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and @xmath .

Substituting these @xmath ’s into @xmath and recalling that the geometry
has factorized form we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

The chiral fermions on @xmath will originate from those modes for which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

Those @xmath ’s which are not annihilated by @xmath will give rise to
massive fermionic modes on @xmath . The standard way to analyze ( 117 )
is to operate one more time with @xmath on it. Using the background
connections ( 108 ) and @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Kähler instanton @xmath is given by equation ( 109 ). Since @xmath (
118 ) will have no non-zero solutions. Thus fermions of @xmath type will
all be non-chiral and massive. Equation ( 119 ), on the other hand, can
have solutions. Their existence depends on the eigenvalues of @xmath .
Clearly for @xmath we have only one solution with @xmath . For @xmath we
obtain @xmath solutions with @xmath . They form a triplet of the
isometry group @xmath of @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath we obtain a
@xmath of @xmath . These are the only type of solutions we need to
consider.

Next we study the @xmath Dirac Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is assumed to be a solution of ( 119 ). We shall assume
that the @xmath spinor is chiral and has positive chirality. Then the
spinor of @xmath type will have negative @xmath chirality. We choose the
@xmath @xmath matrices to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath , @xmath .

Inserting the @xmath ’s in ( 122 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath are the @xmath components of an orthonormal frame on @xmath and
@xmath is the corresponding spin connection ( @xmath , @xmath in the
upper hemisphere and @xmath in the lower hemisphere ). Decomposing
@xmath , where @xmath , we obtain the analogue of ( 118 , 119 ) for the
Dirac operator on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath produces one @xmath while @xmath gives rise to two @xmath which
form a doublet of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath .

### 5.5 General rules for Higgs-type tachyons

To obtain the spectrum of the effective theory in @xmath -dimensions we
need to expand the functions about our background solution in harmonics
on @xmath . These include fluctuations of the gravitational, Yang-Mills,
as well as fermionic fields. The techniques of doing such analysis have
been developed long ago. In this paper we shall ignore the gravitational
fluctuations and consider only the Yang-Mills and fermionic fields. The
full set of linearized gravity Yang-Mills equations can be found in [ 53
] . In the same paper it was shown that there are tachyonic modes in the
components of the gauge field fluctuations tangent to @xmath . Here, we
would like to show that the rule to identify the tachyonic modes given
in [ 53 ] for @xmath is in fact quite general and applies to any gauge
group @xmath . It should be emphasized that neglecting the gravitational
fluctuations is justified as they will not mix with the gauge field
fluctuations of interest for us.

In general, we should write @xmath where @xmath is the background
solution and @xmath depends on the coordinates of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Our first interest is in the fields which are tangent to @xmath
. It is these fields, which if develop a tachyonic vacuum expectation
value, can break @xmath , provided such modes are singlets of @xmath
isometry of @xmath .

We suppress the @xmath dependence of these fields and denote by @xmath
and @xmath their components with respect to an orthonormal frame on
@xmath . It is convenient to use the “helicity” basis on @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath are matrices in the Lie algebra of @xmath . What governs their
mode expansion on @xmath is their isohelicities. This is basically the
effective charge of @xmath under the combination of @xmath
transformations which leave our background configuration invariant.
These charges can be evaluated in the same way which was done in [ 53 ]
. For the sake of simplicity, let us assumes @xmath and assume that
charge matrices @xmath and @xmath introduced in ( 113 ) are diagonal
@xmath matrices. Then @xmath are @xmath matrices with elements @xmath ,
@xmath . Their isohelicities, @xmath , are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that there is a hermiticity relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The harmonic expansion of @xmath on @xmath will produce an infinite
number of Kaluza-Klein modes. These expansions are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath are @xmath -dimensional unitary matrices.

The tachyonic modes are generally contained in the leading terms with
@xmath . The effective @xmath -dimensional mass @xmath of @xmath obtains
contributions from the appropriate Laplacian acting on @xmath and @xmath
. @xmath are charged scalar fields on @xmath . We shall analyze their
dependence on the @xmath coordinates in the next section. Here we shall
consider the @xmath contribution to their masses. The condition for this
contribution to be tachyonic is expressed in the following simple rule

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Likewise

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove these claims let us make more detailed analysis.

Since we are assuming @xmath are independent of the @xmath coordinates,
their mass term comes from the expansion of @xmath , where @xmath
indicate indices tangent to @xmath . The cubic and the quadratic parts
in @xmath will produce the interaction terms in the Higgs potential. We
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the covariant derivatives are defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath denotes the ordinary Riemannian covariant derivative on @xmath .
Now, since for @xmath ( @xmath ) @xmath we see that such modes will be
annihilated by @xmath and thus the @xmath contribution to their @xmath
action is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The mass terms hence come from @xmath term only.

To proceed it is convenient to choose the Cartan-Weyl basis for the Lie
algebra of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the basis of the Cartan
subalgebra, @xmath and @xmath the generators outside the Cartan
subalgebra. The only part of the algebra needed for the evaluation of
the mass terms is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this basis we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To simplify the discussion consider the case when only one @xmath . Set
the remaining modes to zero. Of course this is not a loss of generality.
In this case @xmath and @xmath . The mass term then becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we inserted @xmath . The kinetic part of the action for @xmath
thus becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting @xmath we obtain the mass of @xmath in terms of its
isohelicity as (recall that our signature is @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is negative for @xmath . Similar reasoning can be applied if for
some @xmath the corresponding isohelicity @xmath is non-negative.

This rule gives us an easy way of identifying possible tachyonic modes
which can act as Higgs scalars in the @xmath effective theory.

### 5.6 Examples

In this section we shall ignore the @xmath part and give some examples
of a @xmath gravity Yang-Mills theories which produce standard model
type Higgs sectors upon compactification to @xmath . Leptons and quarks
will be included in the next sections. We basically need to choose the
gauge group @xmath and assign magnetic charges @xmath .

The notation is always

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is in the Lie algebra of @xmath , @xmath give the
expression for @xmath in the upper (lower) hemispheres.

#### 5.6.1 Tachyons

#### @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

The isohelicities can be assembled in a @xmath matrix

  -- -- -- -------
           (131)
  -- -- -- -------

Using the results of section 5.4 we see that in order to obtain left
handed doublets and right handed singlets we had to take @xmath . With
these values of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath will contain
tachyonic modes in the leading term of their expansion on @xmath .

In this example the @xmath subgroup of @xmath is unbroken and the
tachyonic Higgs @xmath and @xmath form a doublet of @xmath with @xmath
charge of @xmath . We denote this doublet by @xmath . Its isohelicity is
@xmath . Therefore it will also be a doublet of the Kaluza-Klein
isometry of @xmath . One can integrate the @xmath dependence of @xmath
on @xmath and work out its @xmath effective action. The result is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have regarded @xmath as a @xmath complex matrix, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are respectively the @xmath , @xmath
, and the Kaluza-Klein @xmath gauge fields. @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
are their respective couplings. Some calculation show that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Kaluza-Klein gauge coupling @xmath can also be expressed in terms of
the fundamental scales @xmath and @xmath .

In the next section we shall work out the Yukawa couplings for this
model as well.

#### @xmath

With @xmath we can again work out the table of isohelicities for @xmath
. We shall see in section 5.6 that in order to obtain one family of
leptons and quarks we need to take @xmath . Note that since the group is
@xmath rather than @xmath , @xmath is not traceless. @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , therefore @xmath .

The tachyonic modes are contained in @xmath , and @xmath where @xmath .
They will all be doublets of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath . They also
transform under some representation of the unbroken part of @xmath ,
which is @xmath , which is generated by @xmath ,
@xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath ;
@xmath ; and the @xmath unit matrix @xmath which generates @xmath . The
tachyonic Higgs will be neutral under this @xmath , therefore their tree
level vacuum expectation value will not break it. Under @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantum numbers of the relevant Higgs tachyons will be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (136)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As we said earlier, the tachyonic modes in all these fields will be in
the doublet representation of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath . The vacuum
expectation value of the fields @xmath and @xmath will give masses to
the quarks and leptons respectively. In section 5.7 we shall show that
the leading term in their expansion on @xmath is a singlet of @xmath and
therefore their masses receive no contribution from the dependence on
the @xmath coordinates. Thus they remain tachyonic. The other tachyonic
fields, namely @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , would induce Yukawa
couplings between quarks and leptons. We shall show that in fact the
leading term in their harmonic expansion on @xmath is a triplet of
@xmath . Thus the vacuum expectation value of these fields can break the
color @xmath . We will determine the conditions to avoid this.

#### 5.6.2 Fermions

We consider the two examples of the previous section.

#### @xmath

Here we assume that @xmath and there is no @xmath factor. Let us take
@xmath in @xmath of @xmath and @xmath . According to our rules this will
produce two right handed singlets of the Kaluza-Klein @xmath which we
denote by @xmath and a left handed doublet. The singlets will form a
doublet of @xmath and the doublet of @xmath will be a singlet of @xmath
. Thus under @xmath where @xmath we have @xmath . The @xmath Yukawa and
gauge couplings can be easily worked out. The result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

This expression together with the bosonic part given in equation ( 122 )
give the total effective @xmath action for the @xmath example. Although
this example leads to interesting chiral and Higgs spectrum in @xmath
can not be considered satisfactory. It has both perturbative and global
chiral anomalies in @xmath . The perturbative anomalies can be
eliminated with the standard Green Schwarz mechanism [ 268 ] . To apply
this mechanism [ 269 ] we need first to introduce an antisymmetric rank
two potential together with three right handed @xmath @xmath singlets to
kill the pure gravitational anomaly which is given by @xmath term in the
anomaly @xmath form. The remaining terms in the anomaly @xmath -form
factorize appropriately in order to be canceled by a judicious
transformation of the antisymmetric potential. This mechanism does not
cancel the global anomalies [ 270 ] whose presence is due to the fact
that @xmath is non zero. To kill these ones we need to introduce further
@xmath multiplets or to change the gauge group altogether and chose to a
gauge group like @xmath which has a trivial @xmath .

#### @xmath

Now assume @xmath and choose @xmath to be in @xmath of @xmath and @xmath
. As before @xmath will be taken to be @xmath . According to the results
of the previous section with respect to the isometry group @xmath we
have the following chiral fermions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly the first three triplets are candidates for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The last two pieces can be identified with the leptons @xmath
and @xmath . ⁶⁶ ⁶⁶ 66 We have an extra right handed singlet in the
lepton sector. This can be removed by choosing the last entry in @xmath
to be for instance @xmath or the last entry in @xmath to be @xmath . In
this way the unbroken subgroup of @xmath will be @xmath .

These multiplets also transform in the following representation of the
unbroken @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Yukawa coupling between the quarks will be through the Higgs field
@xmath given in ( 136 ), while the electron will get its mass through
coupling to @xmath . Thus our construction leads to a multi Higgs theory
in which the quarks and leptons obtain their masses from their Yukawa
couplings to different Higgs scalars. Note also that there is no common
@xmath under which both Higgs multiplets are charged. The hypercharge
coupling in our model is different from the standard electroweak theory.

### 5.7 Higgs like Tachyons on @xmath

If the total space-time dimension is @xmath the masses of the Higgs like
tachyons are given by ( 128 ). In the case of a @xmath theory we need to
take into account the contribution of @xmath part as well. The fields
@xmath are like scalar fields on @xmath which are charged with respect
to the @xmath part of the background gauge field ( 113 ), viz, @xmath .
The @xmath contribution to the masses of @xmath come from the commutator
term in the @xmath covariant derivative of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To be specific let us consider the example of the @xmath model for which
@xmath . Write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath each is a @xmath matrix.
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This indicates that out of the Higgs fields given in equations ( 136 –
137 ) the ones which give masses to quarks and leptons, namely, @xmath
and @xmath (which lie respectively inside @xmath and @xmath in the above
notation), do not couple to the background @xmath field on @xmath . The
leading term in their harmonic expansion on @xmath will be a constant
(independent of the coordinates of @xmath ). Their masses will be
tachyonic and will be given by ( 128 ) for @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

The remaining fields @xmath and @xmath on the other hand are located
inside @xmath and they couple to the background @xmath -field. Their
masses will receive contribution from @xmath and in principle can become
non-tachyonic. To verify this we need to evaluate the eigenvalues of
@xmath on these fields. Their covariant derivatives are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since they couple with the same strength to the @xmath -field they will
receive the same contribution from @xmath . It turns out that the
leading term in the expansion of any of these fields on @xmath is a
triplet of @xmath and @xmath acting on it is @xmath . Thus the total
mass @xmath of such modes will be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath were independent we could choose @xmath and make
these fields non-tachyonic. If we insist on the validity of the
background Einstein equations then the ratio of @xmath will be fixed.
Equation ( 14 ) leads to @xmath . ⁶⁷ ⁶⁷ 67 To obtain @xmath we need to
use the following results, which can be obtained by straightforward
calculation,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . With this value unfortunately
the above mass @xmath is still negative. The vacuum expectation value of
these fields will break the color @xmath .

One way to change the ratio @xmath is to couple a @xmath gauge field to
gravity in @xmath . This @xmath will not couple to anything else. In
particular the fermions will be neutral under it, so the spectrum of the
chiral fermions will be unaltered. Its sole effect will be to add an
extra term to the right hand side of Einstein equations. In particular (
14 ) will be replaced by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath refer to the extra @xmath system. Now if we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are real numbers, the ratio of @xmath will turns
out to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a big range of parameters for which @xmath .

### 5.8 Other scalars

The components of the gauge field fluctuations tangent to @xmath will
also give rise to infinite tower of Kaluza-Klein modes which will be
scalars fields in @xmath . These modes will belong to unitary
representations of @xmath . If there is a tachyon Higgs among them they
will break @xmath . We need to verify that this does not happen. To this
end we denote these fields by @xmath , where @xmath is tangent to @xmath
, and write those terms in the bilinear part of @xmath which contains
@xmath . In this section we are considering only the @xmath model. The
@xmath are @xmath Hermitian matrices. After some manipulation and the
imposition if the @xmath background gauge condition @xmath , the
bilinear terms of interest to us can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the covariant derivatives on
@xmath and @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the Riemann covariant derivative on @xmath . The contribution
of @xmath on each @xmath mode of @xmath will simply be @xmath , @xmath
where @xmath represents the isohelicities of various components of
@xmath , @xmath , where @xmath are given in equation ( 134 ).

To work out the contributions of @xmath and the commutator term @xmath ,
we represent @xmath as in ( 138 ), i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath each is a @xmath matrix. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

This indicates that the commutator terms in ( 139 ) and ( 141 ) do not
contribute to @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath acting on these fields is
just the Riemannian Laplacian acting on vectors and its contribution to
the masses of these fields will be non-tachyonic.

The only fields we need to be concerned about are those in @xmath . To
analyze the contribution of these terms we introduce @xmath complex
@xmath vectors @xmath and @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are directions tangent to
@xmath . In terms of these new fields the @xmath part of ( 141 ) can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

The contribution of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath will again be positive.

Finally we need to evaluate the contribution of @xmath to the masses of
@xmath and @xmath . After some calculation this turns out to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is seen that the contribution of this term to the @xmath mass is
non-tachyonic. However, it makes a negative contribution to the mass
@xmath of @xmath field. Upon substitution of the above in ( 141 ) we
find out that the negative contribution in ( 147 ) is off-set by the
@xmath term in equation ( 139 ), with the result that @xmath is also
non-tachyonic.

We thus conclude that all the tachyonic Higgs are singlets of @xmath and
doublets of @xmath .

### 5.9 Massless scalars and loop-induced hierarchy

So far we have been discussing tachyonic mass of the scalar particles at
the tree level of the effective @xmath dimensional theory. The natural
scale of this mass and therefore also of the symmetry breaking is the
compactification scale. This is few order of magnitude above the
electroweak symmetry breaking scale of a 200 hundred GeV. It will be
very desirable if we could find a mechanism to lower the scale of the
tachyonic mass. An obvious idea is if the tree level mass of the scalars
is zero and they obtain their tachyonic value as a consequence of loop
effects. Our theory is of course a non renormalizable one, at least in
conventional sense. However, the Higgs mass is controlled by @xmath due
to higher dimensional gauge invariance. Our main point is that the sign
of the one loop induced effective mass will depend on the imbalance
between the contribution of fermions and bosons. By a judicious choice
of the fermionic degrees of freedom this sign can be made tachyonic. Any
way whatever the justification the first step in implementing this idea
is to find tree level massless scalars in the spectrum of the effective
four dimensional theory. Unlike the massless chiral fermions whose
presence is dictated by the topology of the gauge field in compact
subspace, to verify the existence of the massless scalars in the
spectrum requires more detailed analysis of the mass spectrum and should
be carried out separately for each case. In this section we give an
example of a model in @xmath in which a monopole background on the
@xmath internal space leads to massless scalars transforming non
trivially under the @xmath isometry group of the internal space. This
example which was is only for illustrative purpose and is not going to
be used for a realistic model building.

We start from a @xmath gauge theory in @xmath dimensions and consider a
solution of equations ( 14 ) in which the internal space is @xmath . In
the notation of previous section we denote the magnetic charge matrices
on the three @xmath ’s by @xmath @xmath and @xmath . Denoting all the
quantities on @xmath with a prime our ansatz for the gauge field becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The structure of the charge matrices will determine the unbroken
subgroup of @xmath . As before we shall take them to be @xmath diagonal
real matrices.

The scalars of interest for us are those components of the fluctuations
of the vector potential which are tangent to @xmath and are in the
directions of perpendicular to the Cartan subalgebra of @xmath .
Consider the field @xmath tangent to @xmath .

The masses of these fields can be calculated using the appropriate
modification of equation ( 139 ). The result is

@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the appropriate Laplacian on the
three @xmath ’s. The eigenvalues of these Laplacians are basically
determined from the isohelicities of @xmath which are given by

@xmath

Similar expressions can be written for the bilinear parts of the fields
tangent to @xmath and @xmath .

For our illustrative example we consider an @xmath matrix which has only
the elements @xmath and @xmath different from zero and such that @xmath
. Then @xmath and according to our general rule the leading mode in this
field can be tachyonic. The question we would like to answer is if by an
appropriate choice of magnetic charges we can make the mass of this
field to vanish. It is not difficult to write down the formula for the
masses of the infinite tower of modes of @xmath . These are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To verify the existence of a massless mode first we employ the
background equations ( 14 ) to obtain the ratios

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is seen that for the choice of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the leading
mode is indeed massless. For this choice there will of course be a
similar massless mode in the fluctuations @xmath tangent to @xmath . The
@xmath quantum numbers of these modes will be
@xmath , and @xmath , respectively. We can make all other modes to have
positive masses by appropriate choices of the remaining magnetic
charges.

## 6 Concluding Remark

Considering the possibility of living in a higher-dimensional space-time
seriously opens new gates towards understanding the present problems of
particle physics, mainly the unification of gravity with the other
fundamental forces, and the gauge hierarchy problem. So far, the
dimensionality of our space-time is an assumption based on our
observational, technical, and probably mental limitations. The new
colliders, like LHC, will be able to test this possibility and detect a
possible modification of Newton’s low at energies around few TeV.

The last three years has witnessed an enormous development in
extra-dimensional model building. It is very desirable to significantly
increase the predictability of the new scenarios as a compensation of
having extra dimensions. In particular, it would be nice if these models
are free of the same problems the standard model suffers from in four
dimensions at low energies.

The hope is that, eventually, most of these models can be somehow a low
energy effective field theoretical description of a supertring theory.
Alternatively, one can be more modest and seek a consistent theory in a
field theory context trying to make the best of this approach.

Interestingly enough, by going to higher dimensions one can link some of
the features of the standard model together. The fermion chirality and
electroweak spontaneous symmetry breaking can have the same origin: a
non-trivial Yang-Mills background in the internal space. What is even
more interesting is that the mechanism in which the SM gauge group is
spontaneously broken does not involve a fundamental scalar field, the
thing which leads to the absence of quadratic corrections to the
classical value of Higgs mass square.

There are certainly many other interesting issues to discuss.
Unfortunately, it was impossible to incorporate all the work done in
this subject as the recent literature consists of more than 1,000
article written from 1998 until now, touching various sides and
implications of the new thrilling idea, while the total number of
papers, old and new, probably exceeds 2,000. Therefore, only examples
could be provided.

As perhaps all new subjects in physics, the models with extra dimensions
seem to open a way for new problems and not to completely solve any. It
remains to check the classical and semiclassical stability for many of
the scenarios with both categories of warped and factorizable geometry.
The issue of semiclassical stability was not discussed here, and can be
found in [ 271 ] - [ 274 ] for Kaluza-Klein compactification, and for
instance [ 106 ] for brane-worlds. Furthermore, the stabilization of the
compactification scale close to the electroweak scale is an open problem
although some attempts exist [ 221 , 224 ] . Other aspects not discussed
here include unification with large extra dimensions [ 275 ] ,
brane-world in [ 9 ] scenario, thick branes as [ 98 ] - [ 103 ] , the
cosmological constant problem (see [ 79 ] for a review),… etc. , in
addition to many aspects of the older literature (for which the reader
is refered to [ 274 ] and [ 29 ] ).

### Acknowledgement

I am grateful to Antonio Masiero and Seifallh Randjbar-Daemi for
supervising my thesis, and to ICTP and SISSA for sponsoring me during my
studies.