[6pt] FACULTY OF MATHEMATICAL STUDIES

[6pt] MATHEMATICS

[6pt] Doctor of Philosophy

[6pt] NON-LINEAR NUMERICAL SCHEMES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY

[6pt] by Ulrich Sperhake

[6pt]

\setstretch

1.0 This thesis describes the application of numerical techniques to
solve Einsteinâ€™s field equations in three distinct cases.
First we present the first long-term stable second order convergent
Cauchy characteristic matching code in cylindrical symmetry including
both gravitational degrees of freedom. Compared with previous work we
achieve a substantial simplification of the evolution equations as well
as the relations at the interface by applying the method of Geroch
decomposition to both the inner and the outer region. We use analytic
vacuum solutions with one and two gravitational degrees of freedom to
demonstrate the accuracy and convergence properties of the code.

In the second part we numerically solve the equations for static and
dynamic cosmic strings of infinite length coupled to gravity and provide
the first fully non-linear evolutions of cosmic strings in curved
spacetimes. The inclusion of null infinity as part of the numerical grid
allows us to apply suitable boundary conditions on the metric and the
matter fields to suppress unphysical divergent solutions. The resulting
code is checked for internal consistency by a convergence analysis and
also by verifying that static cosmic string initial data remain constant
when evolved. The dynamic code is also shown to reproduce analytic
vacuum solutions with high accuracy. We then study the interaction
between a Weber-Wheeler pulse of gravitational radiation with an
initially static string. The interaction causes the string to oscillate
with frequencies proportional to the masses of its scalar and vector
field. After the pulse has largely radiated away, the string continues
to ring but the oscillations slowly decay and eventually the variables
return to their equilibrium values.

In the final part of the thesis we probe a new numerical approach for
highly accurate evolutions of neutron star oscillations in the case of
radial oscillations of spherically symmetric stars. For this purpose we
decompose the problem into a static background governed by the
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff equations and time dependent perturbations.
In contrast to conventional treatments, the fully non-linear form of the
resulting perturbative equations is used. In an Eulerian formulation of
the problem the movement of the surface of the star relative to the
fixed numerical grid leads to difficulties in the numerical as well as
the algebraic analysis. In order to alleviate the surface problem we use
a simplified neutron star model to study the non-linear coupling of
eigenmodes. By virtue of the high accuracy of our numerical method we
are able to analyse the excitation of eigenmodes over a wide range of
initial amplitudes. We find two distinct regimes, a weakly non-linear
regime where the coefficients of higher order eigenmodes increase
quadratically with the initial amplitude and a moderately non-linear
regime where this increase steepens and an initially present mode of
order @xmath couples more efficiently to modes of order @xmath , @xmath
and so on.

We conclude this work with the development of a fully non-linear
perturbative Lagrangian code. We demonstrate how the difficulties at the
surface of the star that arise in an Eulerian framework are naturally
resolved in the Lagrangian formulation. This code is used to study the
formation of discontinuities near the surface for initial data of low
amplitude.

\setstretch

1.0
