## Introduction

### Outline of the thesis

This thesis considers a way to construct Riemann surfaces out of
3-regular graphs. In Chapter 1 , we present a method to construct a
finite-area Riemann surface out of a 3-regular graph. We then compactify
it to get a compact Riemann surface. In sections 1.1 – 1.6 we describe
this construction in detail. In section 1.7 we show that symmetries of
the graph are reflected in symmetries of the surface. This allows us to
give several examples in section 1.9 . In the last section of the
chapter we show that the compact Riemann surfaces we construct are dense
in the moduli space by considering them as Belyi surfaces.

We would like to learn about the compact Riemann surfaces by studying
the geometry and spectral properties of the graphs from which they
originated. Early works of Prof. Brooks ( [ Br1 , Br2 ] ) show
connections between the graphs and the non-compact Riemann surface.
Later results in [ Br3 ] show that under nice conditions (the “large
cusps condition”), the complete metrics of constant curvature on the
non-compact Riemann surface and its compactification are arbitrarily
close, outside of standard cusp neighbourhoods.

It is at this point that we start chapter 2 . We would like to know, for
example, when we can control the metric on the compact Riemann surface.
More precisely, when can we change the hyperbolic metric on the
non-compact Riemann surface in neighbourhoods of the cusps to get a
hyperbolic metric on the compact Riemann surface? For example, if we
compactify the 3-punctured sphere we lose the hyperbolic structure. To
that end, we work in a punctured-disk neighbourhood of a cusp, and
consider the problem of extension of metrics smoothly across the cusps
to obtain metrics of negative curvature. We prove that in a “large
cusps” condition we can in fact extend the metric from the outside to a
smooth metric of negative curvature inside. This is the content of
theorem 2.3.1 .

The “large cusps” condition is discussed in section 2.2 . There, we
prove also the classical Shimizu–Leutbecher theorem in a nice way. We
study the hyperbolic punctured disk in sections 2.4 – 2.5 , and theorem
2.3.1 is proved in sections 2.6 and 2.7 .

In section 2.8 we show that the “large cusps” condition in theorem 2.3.1
is sharp. This leads us in section 2.9 to a very interesting problem:
Suppose we have a closed curve bounding a domain @xmath in the unit
disk, and we have a conformal Riemannian metric of negative curvature
outside of @xmath . We ask whether we can extend the metric to @xmath in
such a way, that we are left with a conformal Riemannian metric of
negative curvature. The Gauss–Bonnet theorem imposes a natural
restriction on the extension, but this is not enough. We show that we
can find curves which satisfy the Gauss–Bonnet restriction for which we
cannot extend the metric. We do this by using the maximum principle for
subharmonic functions. Indeed, we show that such curves can be taken to
be convex and arbitrarily close to the horocycle of length @xmath .

We also consider curves which satisfy the Gauss–Bonnet restriction and
for which no metric of negative curvature, conformal or nonconformal,
can extend the metric from the outside.

In section 2.10 we show results from [ Br3 ] : If we have large cusps,
the hyperbolic metric on the compactification is very close to the
original hyperbolic metric, outside of cusp neighbourhoods. This is
theorem 2.10.1 . The basic idea here is to use the Ahlfors–Schwarz
Lemma, which is proved and discussed in appendix A .

### Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Curt McMullen for giving us his permission to use
his example in section 1.9 . We would also like to thank Curt McMullen
for discussions with us concerning the thesis, giving us some new ideas
to think about.

We would like to thank Mikhail Katz for his fruitful ideas concerning
the problem of extension of metrics in section 2.9 .

## Chapter 1 Riemann Surfaces and 3-regular Graphs

### 1.1 Ideal Triangles

Let us denote by @xmath the unit disk, equipped with the hyperbolic
metric.

###### Definition 1.1.1.

An ideal triangle in @xmath is a triangle which has 3 vertices at
infinity.

Remark: Any two ideal triangles are isometric, since we may find a
Möbius transformation, which takes one onto the other.

Choose a point on each edge of the ideal triangle. The chosen points
will be called tick-marks .

###### Definition 1.1.2.

A marked ideal triangle is an ideal triangle with a tick-mark on each
one of its three sides.

An isomorphism between two marked ideal triangles is an isomorphism
between the ideal triangles which preserves the tick-marks.
The standard marked ideal triangle (figure 1.1 ) is any marked ideal
triangle which is isometric to the marked ideal triangle whose vertices
in the disk model are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and whose tick-marks are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Under the isometry which takes the half-plane onto the disk and is given
by the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the ideal triangle of figure 1.1 corresponds to the first ideal triangle
from the left in figure 1.2 . In the second ideal triangle there, we
have drawn also three horocyclic segments, which will be called the
standard horocyclic segments . Note that each standard horocyclic
segment is of length 1.

### 1.2 Some notions in Graph Theory

Throughout our work, the term graph will refer to a graph with loops and
multiple edges permitted.

###### Definition 1.2.1.

A 3-regular graph is a graph for which there are three edges incident at
each vertex (loops are counted twice).

Let @xmath be a 3-regular graph. Denote by @xmath and @xmath the set of
its vertices and the set of its edges respectively.

###### Definition 1.2.2.

An orientation at a vertex @xmath is a cyclic ordering of the edges
incident at @xmath .

At each vertex of @xmath choose an orientation (We will suppress the
orientation and will denote the graph with orientation by @xmath ). We
may regard the orientation as follows: If we take a tour on the graph,
at each vertex it tells us which way is left. We define:

###### Definition 1.2.3.

A left-hand-turn path in @xmath is a directed closed path in @xmath such
that if @xmath are successive edges in the path meeting at @xmath , then
@xmath are successive edges with respect to the orientation at @xmath
(see figure 1.3 ).

Where convenient, we will denote a left-hand-turn path by a cyclic
sequence @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . In this notation @xmath ,
and @xmath for @xmath .

### 1.3 Triangulations and 3-regular Graphs

Let @xmath be a closed (topological) surface. Let @xmath be a
triangulation of @xmath . Mark a point in the interior of each triangle,
and connect points corresponding to adjacent triangles. We get a
3-regular graph, @xmath , drawn on the surface. @xmath inherits an
orientation from the surface’s orientation - at each vertex, @xmath , of
@xmath we order the three emanating edges from @xmath counterclockwise.
For convenience, we will refer to the vertices and edges of the
triangulation as @xmath -vertices and @xmath -edges respectively, while
the vertices and edges of @xmath will be referred as @xmath -vertices
and @xmath -edges respectively.

First, we note that any @xmath -edge is crossed by exactly one @xmath
-edge, and vice versa. Therefore the @xmath -edges are in one-to-one
correspondence with the @xmath -edges. Second, any left-hand-turn path
in @xmath cuts, on its left side, a disk from the surface in which there
are no @xmath -vertices, since otherwise one could join any @xmath
-vertex inside the disk by a shortest path in @xmath to the boundary of
the disk to get that the boundary would not be a left-hand-turn path. In
this disk there is exactly one @xmath -vertex: Indeed, any @xmath -edge
which crosses the boundary of the disk must have one of its ends inside
the disk - so there is at least one @xmath -vertex in this disk.
Conversely, take any @xmath -vertex, @xmath , in the disk, and let
@xmath be the length of the boundary of the disk. If there were less
than @xmath @xmath -edges emanating from @xmath , one of the triangles
surrounding @xmath would contain at least two @xmath -vertices from the
boundary of the disk. Therefore, there are @xmath @xmath -edges
emanating from @xmath , and we are left with “no room” for another
@xmath -vertex inside the disk.

We have shown that we have a well-defined bijection: A left-hand-turn
path in @xmath maps to the @xmath -vertex it encloses on its left side.
As we will see in the next section, this bijection lets us reconstruct
the surface from the graph with orientation. Or, in more fancy language,
{graphs with orientations} @xmath {triangulations of
surfaces}/{isotopy}.

### 1.4 Constructing a Riemann Surface out of a 3-regular Graph

Let @xmath be a 3-regular graph with orientation. Paste one copy of the
standard marked ideal triangle on each vertex of @xmath , in such a way
that the three successive edges emanating from the vertex of the graph
fit the three geodesic segments @xmath in figure 1.1 , respectively. We
glue adjacent sides of marked triangles, such that the tick-marks fit
and the orientations of the corresponding triangles match up. We can
begin doing the pasting without leaving the hyperbolic plane, until we
get a polygon, @xmath , together with a side pairing (Remark: We may
think of the graph @xmath as made out of threads, and of each triangle
as having a white face and a black face. The threads are glued on the
white face of each triangle. We build the polygon such that all the
triangles have white face up). Then, we apply the Poincaré Polygon
Theorem (see Appendix B ) to @xmath : We attach to each side pairing
@xmath an orientation preserving transformation, @xmath , such that
@xmath , @xmath preserves tick-marks, and @xmath . Denote by @xmath the
subgroup of @xmath generated by all the side-pairing transformations. By
the Poincaré Polygon Theorem, @xmath is a discrete group of isometries
with @xmath as its fundamental domain. Hence @xmath is a complete
hyperbolic Riemann surface, which we will denote by @xmath .

As was shown in the preceding section, the cusps of @xmath are in
bijection with the left-hand-turn paths in @xmath , and the
triangulation of @xmath obtained by our construction corresponds to
@xmath in the sense of section 1.3 . Finally, take the unique conformal
compactification (see section 1.8 ) of @xmath , to get a closed Riemann
surface, @xmath .

### 1.5 A slightly more general construction

Again, let @xmath be a 3-regular graph with orientation. We paste a
marked ideal triangle on each vertex as before, but now we allow also
non-standard marked ideal triangles to be pasted. The marked ideal
triangles can be parametrized by three real parameters, ( @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath ), which describe the hyperbolic shift of the tick-marks
with respect to the tick-marks @xmath , @xmath , @xmath of the standard
marked ideal triangle. For instance, the standard marked ideal triangle
will be denoted by @xmath , and the non-standard marked ideal triangle
in figure 1.2 is @xmath . In the next step, we glue adjacent edges as
before, remembering to match orientations and tick-marks.

To each pair of a vertex, @xmath , and an edge @xmath emanating from
@xmath , there corresponds one side of the triangle we paste at @xmath .
Therefore we can attach to such a pair a real number @xmath which
describes the shift of the tick-mark on the corresponding side.

In order to apply the Poincaré Polygon Theorem all the vertex-cycle
transformations must be parabolic. This, in turn, is equivalent to the
following condition:
For every left-hand-turn path in @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.6 The Genus of @xmath

In section 1.4 we obtained from a 3-regular graph with orientation,
@xmath , a closed Riemann surface @xmath . Let us calculate the genus of
@xmath . To that end, let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , be the number of
vertices, edges and faces, respectively, in the triangulation
corresponding to @xmath . In section 1.3 we have shown that @xmath the
number of left-hand-turn paths in @xmath , @xmath the number of edges in
@xmath , and obviously, @xmath the number of vertices in @xmath . Since
@xmath is a 3-regular graph, we also have @xmath . Hence, the Euler
characteristic of @xmath can totally be recovered from @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, the genus of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We could also calculate more geometrically as follows: The Euler
characteristic, @xmath , of @xmath is @xmath . We now use Gauss-Bonnet
formula for Riemannian surfaces without boundary :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the curvature. In our case @xmath , and the area of
@xmath is @xmath , since the area of the ideal triangle is @xmath .
Substituing, we get @xmath , which leads again to formula ( 1.1 ).

### 1.7 Automorphisms

Let @xmath , @xmath be two graphs with orientation. Let @xmath be an
isomorphism of graphs.

###### Definition 1.7.1.

We say that @xmath is orientation-preserving if for any three edges,
@xmath , in @xmath meeting at a vertex @xmath , the cyclic ordered
triplet @xmath fits the orientation at @xmath iff @xmath fits the
orientation at @xmath .

A similar definition holds for orientation-reversing .

We observe that the left-hand-turn paths are preserved under an
isomorphism of graphs with orientation. In particular, the length of a
left-hand-turn path is preserved. These simple facts will help us later
in finding automorphisms of graphs.

In order to understand the automorphisms of a 3-regular graph with
orientation, let us first try to understand the automorphisms of its
universal cover, the 3-regular tree, @xmath : We choose some vertex of
this tree, and call it the root . Denote by @xmath the 3-regular rooted
tree. On a rooted tree we can define the notion of level : level @xmath
is the set of all vertices which are at a distance @xmath from the root.
A map between two rooted trees, is a graph-map which maps the root to
the root. It has the property that it preserves the levels of the tree.

Now, Let @xmath be a 3-regular rooted tree, with some choice of
orientation on its vertices (actually, all the choices are equivalent).
We have:

###### Lemma 1.7.2.

The group of automorphisms of @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since we are dealing with orientation-preserving automorphisms, a
generator is determined by the image of a first-level vertex of the
tree. ∎

From the last lemma, we immediately get:

###### Lemma 1.7.3.

An automorphism of the 3-regular tree with orientation, @xmath , is
determined by the images of one vertex and an edge emanating from it.

Now, that we understand the automorphism group of the universal cover we
can proceed:

###### Lemma 1.7.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two pairs of vertices and edges emanating from
them. Then, there exists at most one automorphism @xmath , such that
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a 3-regular graph with orientation, and @xmath be its
universal covering map (figure 1.4 ).

Choose liftings of @xmath @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath and
@xmath both map @xmath to @xmath and @xmath then they can be lifted to
two different automorphisms @xmath , which map @xmath to @xmath . This
contradicts the previous lemma. ∎

The situation is very similar to what happens in @xmath : We recall that
an automorphism of the disk, @xmath is determined by the image of one
point and a rotation. This simple analogy shows:

###### Proposition 1.7.5.

Any automorphism of @xmath induces an automorphism of @xmath .

#### 1.7.1 Extension of Automorphisms

Let @xmath be a complete hyperbolic Riemann surface of finite area, and
@xmath be a conformal compactification (see section 1.8 ).

###### Proposition 1.7.6.

Any conformal automorphism of @xmath can be extended to a conformal
automorphism of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Take a punctured-disk neighbourhood @xmath of a cusp @xmath . @xmath is
also a punctured disk. Thus, by Riemann’s theorem on removable
singularities, @xmath is a removeable singularity of @xmath . ∎

### 1.8 Conformal Compactification

Let @xmath be a Riemann surface, and let @xmath be a compact Riemann
surface. If @xmath is a conformal embedding with dense image, we say
that @xmath is a conformal compactification of @xmath .
Examples:

1.  The Riemann sphere is a conformal compactification of the complex
    plane.

2.  Take @xmath . By Riemann’s Mapping Theorem @xmath is conformally
    equivalent to @xmath . Hence, the Riemann sphere is a conformal
    compactification of @xmath .

3.  Suppose @xmath is a complete hyperbolic Riemann surface of finite
    area. @xmath has a finite number of cusps (this follows from
    Gauss-Bonnet theorem or from Shimizu-Leutbecher theorem 2.2.2 ). We
    may build a conformal compactification of @xmath as follows: We find
    pairwise disjoint neighbourhoods of the cusps, such that each
    neighbourhood is conformally equivalent to a punctured disk, and we
    fill in the missing point in each punctured disk. The conformal
    structure on the filled-in disk is unique, by the Uniformization
    Theorem (see appendix C ). Thus, we get a compact Riemann surface in
    which @xmath is conformally and densely embedded.

4.  Any Riemann surface of infinite genus does not admit a conformal
    compactification.

We will mainly be interested in example 3 .

###### Proposition 1.8.1.

In example 3 the conformal compactification is unique.

###### Proof.

Denote by @xmath the conformal compactification described above, and
suppose that @xmath is a second conformal compactification. If the cusps
of @xmath are @xmath , then we get a conformal map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The same arguments as in the proof of proposition 1.7.6 show that @xmath
can be extended to the cusps of @xmath . So, we obtain that @xmath is
conformally equivalent to @xmath . ∎

### 1.9 Examples

In order to give some examples, we first recall that any
(anti-)automorphism of the graph @xmath induces an (anti-)automorphism
of @xmath , and this, in turn induces an (anti-)automorphism of @xmath
(see section 1.7 ). In other words, symmetries of the graph @xmath are
reflected in symmetries of @xmath .

Uniformize now @xmath by a metric of constant curvature. The geodesic
triangulation, @xmath , of @xmath induced from @xmath maps to some
triangulation of @xmath under the conformal embedding @xmath . We may
isotope @xmath to a geodesic triangulation of @xmath keeping the
vertices of @xmath fixed. Let us call this geodesic triangulation @xmath
. The automorphisms of @xmath which are extensions of automorphisms of
@xmath stabilize @xmath . Thus, in order to determine the conformal
structure of @xmath we can follow the following steps:

1.  We determine the topological type of @xmath by counting the
    left-hand-turn paths in @xmath and using the genus formula ( 1.1 ).

2.  We name the angles of the triangles in the geodesic triangulation,
    @xmath , of @xmath .

3.  For each left-hand-turn path in @xmath we write the corresponding
    cusp-equation: The angles around the filled-in cusp amount to @xmath
    .

4.  We find the automorphisms and anti-automorphisms of the graph with
    orientation.

5.  We write the constraints on the angles implied by the symmetries
    found in step 4 .

Remark: In general these steps are not enough to determine the conformal
structure of @xmath , since we do not use the full pasting rule in the
construction of @xmath , which says that tick-marks go to tick-marks. We
have yet to find a good method to take these conditions into account.

We begin by the simplest 3-regular graph, viz. two vertices and three
edges. It admits two possible non-isomorphic orientations:

1.  See figure 1.5 .

    We paste two triangles together to get a 3-punctured sphere. Then we
    compactify to get the Riemann sphere (the conformal structure on the
    sphere is unique).

2.  See figure 1.6 .

    We are still working with the graph of example 1.5 , but now we flip
    the right triangle over. By the genus formula ( 1.1 ), we get a
    once-punctured torus. We want to calculate the conformal class of
    this torus: The angles around the filled-in cusp should amount to 2
    @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We have the automorphism of order 6:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which implies (together with its iterates) the equalities

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence, we have that each angle equals @xmath , and we obtain the
    equilateral torus.

In the next three examples we take @xmath to be the 1-skeleton of the
tetrahedron:

1.  See figure 1.7 .

    We take the 1-skeleton of the tetrahedron, with orientation induced
    from its surface. The surface @xmath is a sphere with 4 cusps at the
    vertices of a tetrahedron. It is readily seen by the symmetries of
    the tetrahedron that those vertices may be taken to be at @xmath ,
    where @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity. Obviously, @xmath is
    the Riemann sphere.

2.  See figure 1.8 .

    We take the 1-skeleton of the tetrahedron with the orientation
    induced from its surface, and we flip orientation at one vertex.
    @xmath is a 2-punctured torus. The cusp equations are:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    We have the automorphism of order 3 (rotation around @xmath ):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which implies:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We have also an anti-automorphism of order 2:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which implies:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Combining all together, we have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since the triangulation on @xmath is geodesic and our geometry is
    flat, we have the additional equations:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We obtain that triangle 3 is an equilateral triangle. This implies
    that @xmath is an equilateral torus.

3.  See figure 1.9 .

    We take the 1-skeleton of the tetrahedron with the orientation
    induced from its surface, and we flip orientation at two vertices.
    @xmath is a 2-punctured torus. The cusp equations are:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    We have several anti-automorphisms of order 2:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which implies:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We have a second reflection:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which implies:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    …and a third reflection:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which implies:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    combining all together, we have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence, we have a square torus.

Next, we take @xmath to be the 1-skeleton of a cube:

1.  See figure 1.10 .

    We take the 1-skeleton of the cube, with orientation induced from
    its surface. The surface @xmath is a sphere with 6 cusps at the
    vertices of an octahedron. It is readily seen by a stereographic
    projection that the vertices can be taken to be @xmath . Then, we
    can map them by a Möbius transformation to @xmath respectively,
    where @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity and @xmath . (If we
    apply another Möbius transformation: @xmath , we get that we could
    take the vertices to be exactly at the vertices and tick-marks of
    the standard ideal triangle). @xmath is the Riemann sphere.

2.  We take the 1-skeleton of the cube with orientation induced from its
    surface, and we flip the orientation at one vertex, say @xmath . We
    calculate @xmath according to ideas we learned from Curt McMullen.

    Set @xmath . @xmath is a torus with four cusps. One of the cusps is
    surrounded by twelve triangles and the other three are surrounded by
    four each. We have a @xmath action on @xmath , coming from the
    order-3 rotation of the cube along its diagonal through @xmath . The
    quotient, @xmath , is an orbifold with two cusps and two
    ramification points of order 3: One cusp is the image of the three
    cusps of length 4, the other cusp is the image of the cusp of length
    12, and the two ramification points come from the centers of the
    triangles pasted on the vertices of the rotation axis.
    The genus of @xmath may be calculated by the Riemann–Hurwitz
    relation:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the relevant Euler characteristics are:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    After substituing we get that @xmath .

    The compactification of @xmath , @xmath , is obtained as a 3-regular
    covering of the sphere, branched over three points, each of them,
    with ramification index 3, which may be taken to be @xmath , @xmath
    and @xmath . Hence, a possible equation for @xmath in @xmath is:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  (Due to Curt McMullen). See figure 1.11 .

    We take the 1-skeleton of the cube, with orientation at the vertices
    induced from the surface of the cube. Then we flip orientation at 2
    opposite vertices, say @xmath & @xmath . What we get is a surface,
    @xmath , of genus 2, with 2 cusps, and 12 ideal triangles around
    each cusp.

    Consider the automorphism of @xmath of order 3 obtained from
    rotating the cube along the diagonal @xmath . When we mod out @xmath
    by the action of @xmath , we get an orbifold, Y, with two cusps and
    two points of ramification index 3: The points of order 3 come from
    the centers of the triangles at @xmath and @xmath . The genus of
    @xmath may be calculated by the Riemann-Hurwitz relation:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    from which we get @xmath . The triangulation of @xmath descends to a
    triangulation of @xmath composed of four cells around each cusp.

    Normalize @xmath so that the ramification points of order 3 are at
    @xmath , and @xmath , and the cusps are at @xmath , and @xmath . We
    now take the 3-regular cover, @xmath , of @xmath with ramification
    of order 3 at @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is a surface (not orbifold)
    of genus 0, with 6 cusps at the cube roots of @xmath and @xmath .
    One may verify this by again applying the Riemann-Hurwitz relation:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    The covering map @xmath is given by @xmath , and the cellulation of
    @xmath lifts to a triangulation of @xmath , with four triangles
    surrounding each cusp. Thus, it is readily seen that @xmath can be
    constructed from a 3-regular graph, @xmath , which corresponds to
    this triangulation. @xmath is of genus @xmath and has six cusps of
    length 4 each. By formula ( 1.1 ), @xmath has eight vertices. The
    only graph with this combinatorics is the 1-skeleton of the cube
    with orientation induced from the surface of the cube. Therefore,
    @xmath is a sphere with six cusps at the vertices of an octahedron.

    In example 1.10 it was shown that the vertices of an octahedron may
    be taken to be @xmath , where @xmath (or @xmath ), and @xmath is a
    primitive cube root of unity. From here we conclude that @xmath .
    Hence, the conformal compactification of @xmath , @xmath , is the
    surface obtained as a degree 3-regular cover of @xmath with
    ramification points of order 3 at @xmath . An equation for @xmath in
    @xmath may be:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  ( [ Br3 , BFK ] ). Set @xmath , and let @xmath be a finite index
    torsion free subgroup of @xmath . We have:

    ###### Theorem 1.9.1.
    @xmath can be constructed out of a 3-regular graph.

    ###### Proof.
    The classical fundamental domain for @xmath is given by (see figure
    1.12 ):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Here, we take as a fundamental domain for @xmath (see figure 1.13 ):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Observe that three copies of @xmath around @xmath @xmath fit
    together to give the marked ideal triangle. The equivalence between
    three such copies is given by an elliptic element of order 3 in
    @xmath .

    A fundamental domain for @xmath is composed of copies of @xmath ,
    and since @xmath is torsion free, the three copies above are not
    equivalent under @xmath , and can all be included in a fundamental
    domain for @xmath . We have shown:

    ###### Lemma 1.9.2.
    A fundamental domain for @xmath can be chosen such that it is
    composed of copies of the marked ideal triangle.

    Let @xmath be such a fundamental domain for @xmath , and mark in
    each marked ideal triangle the three copies of @xmath . Take @xmath
    to be the three-regular graph which is composed of the finite edges
    of the copies of @xmath , and its vertices are the centers of the
    marked ideal triangles. The orientaion on @xmath is induced from the
    surface @xmath . It is readily seen that @xmath . ∎

    A well known family of finite-index torsion free normal subgroups of
    @xmath are the congruence subgroups (see [ BFK ] ):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Observe that @xmath . As we have seen @xmath all arise from graphs.
    These graphs, called dual Platonic graphs in [ BFK ] , have a simple
    algebraic description, and generalize the classical Platonic solids.

    Denote the conformal compactification of @xmath by @xmath . In [ Br3
    ] these surfaces were called the Platonic Surfaces .

### 1.10 Belyi Surfaces

In this section we show that we know how to construct Belyi surfaces out
of graphs. By Belyi’s theorem it will follow that the set of constructed
surfaces is dense in the moduli space.

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface. It is well known that there
exists a non-constant meromorphic function on @xmath , @xmath .

###### Definition 1.10.1.

If there exists a branched covering @xmath , such that @xmath is
branched over at most three points, then @xmath is called a Belyi
surface .

###### Theorem 1.10.2 ([Be]).

@xmath is a Belyi surface if and only if as a curve in @xmath its
minimal polynomial lies over some number field.

###### Corollary 1.10.3.

For every integer @xmath Belyi surfaces are dense in the moduli space of
compact Riemann surfaces of genus @xmath .

We can characterize Belyi surfaces as follows:

###### Lemma 1.10.4.

@xmath is a Belyi surface if and only if we can find finitely many
points on @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath ,
where @xmath is a finite index torsion free subgroup of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We begin by some basic observations: Let @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has fundamental domain,F, which is composed of 2 ideal triangles
glued along a common edge (figure 1.14 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this, we see that the 3-punctured sphere (the punctures may be
taken to be at @xmath ) may be realized as @xmath . Moreover, as we
observed in example 1.9.1 , each ideal triangle is composed of three
copies of the fundamental domain of @xmath . Therefore, the 3-punctured
sphere is a degree-6 branched covering of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface. If @xmath is a Belyi surface,
then there exists a finite number of points on @xmath , @xmath such that
@xmath is a regular smooth finite degree covering of @xmath . Therefore,
@xmath may be realized as @xmath , where @xmath is a finite-index
subgroup of @xmath , and since @xmath is a finite-index torsion-free
(see [ BFK ] ) subgroup of @xmath , we get that @xmath is a finite-index
torsion-free subgroup of @xmath .

Conversely, if we can find finitely many points @xmath on @xmath , such
that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , where @xmath is a finite index
torsion free subgroup of @xmath , then @xmath is a finite-degree
branched covering of @xmath , which is a sphere with one cusp and 2
ramification points. Therefore, if we remove the 2 ramification points
and their pre-images, we get that @xmath is a regular smooth
finite-degree covering of the 3-punctured sphere. So, by definition,
@xmath is a Belyi surface. ∎

Using the last lemma we can now prove:

###### Theorem 1.10.5.

A Riemann surface can be constructed out of a 3-regular graph if and
only if it is a Belyi surface.

###### Proof.

Lemma 1.10.4 and theorem 1.9.1 show that any Belyi surface can be
constructed out of some 3-regular graph with orientation.

Conversely, take a 3-regular graph with orientation, @xmath . A
fundamental domain, @xmath , for @xmath is composed of copies of the
ideal triangle. By decomposing each ideal triangle into three copies of
the fundamental domain for @xmath , we see that @xmath may be realized
as @xmath , where @xmath is a finite-index torsion free subgroup of
@xmath . ∎

## Chapter 2 Geometric Relations between @xmath and @xmath.

### 2.1 Introduction

Let @xmath be a 3-regular graph with orientation. In chapter 1 we
introduced a way to construct a finite area Riemann surface, @xmath ,
out of @xmath . We denoted its conformal compactification by @xmath .

According to the Uniformization Theorem (see appendix C ), @xmath admits
a complete Riemannian metric of constant curvature (which is compatible
with the given conformal structure). In general, this metric might be
very different from the metric on @xmath . For instance, the 3-punctured
sphere admits a hyperbolic structure while its compactification, the
Riemann sphere, doesn’t admit a hyperbolic metric at all. The main
results of this chapter are theorems 2.3.1 and 2.10.1 . These results
give conditions under which we do have a hyperbolic metric on @xmath
which is close in some sense to the metric on @xmath . These conditions
are related to the size of the cusps of @xmath .

As a last remark, we would like to suggest the reader to bear in mind
the Ahlfors–Schwarz Lemma (see appendix A ) while reading this chapter.

### 2.2 Large Cusps

The number of cusps on a complete hyperbolic Riemann surface of finite
area, @xmath , is finite. This follows from Gauss–Bonnet theorem, which
reduces in that situation to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the genus of @xmath , and @xmath is the number of cusps.
Alternatively, it follows from theorem 2.2.2 .

Each cusp of @xmath has a horocyclic neighbourhood , i.e a neighbourhood
isometric to @xmath for some @xmath . The area of @xmath , @xmath , will
be a measure for the size of the cusp:

###### Definition 2.2.1.

We say that the cusps of @xmath are bigger than @xmath if there exist
pairwise disjoint horocyclic neighbourhoods of the cusps @xmath such
that @xmath .

A beautiful classical theorem is the following:

###### Theorem 2.2.2 (Shimizu-Leutbecher).

Let @xmath be a complete hyperbolic Riemann surface. Then, the cusps of
@xmath are @xmath 1.

The classical proof of Shimizu and Leutbecher uses an iteration argument
and can be found in [ K ] . We bring here another proof, based on the
decomposition of @xmath into ideal triangles. A different proof in a
similar spirit can be found in [ Bu ] .

###### Proof.

We can find a locally finite triangulation on @xmath , such that each
vertex of the triangulation is a cusp of @xmath . In each ideal triangle
we can mark the “standard horocyclic segments” (see section 1.1 and
figure 1.2 ). Fix one cusp, @xmath . Look at the ideal triangles which
surround @xmath . We pick the triangle, @xmath , with the “closest”
opposite horocycle to the cusp (in the universal cover, we can describe
the situation easily - see figure 2.1 ).

We continue this horocycle segment to close a horocyclic neighbourhood
around @xmath . We repeat this for all cusps of @xmath . It is clear
that the horocyclic neighbourhoods constructed in this way are pairwise
disjoint, and since each horocycle segment is of length 1, the
horocycles are of length at least 1. ∎

### 2.3 Controlling @xmath

Let @xmath be a complete hyperbolic Riemann surface of finite area. Let
@xmath be its conformal compactification (see section 1.8 ). The
following theorem roughly says that if the cusps of @xmath are large, we
have some control on the geometry of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.3.1.

If the cusps of @xmath are bigger than @xmath , then @xmath admits a
conformal Riemannian metric of negative curvature which coincides with
the metric on @xmath outside horocyclic cusp neighbourhoods, @xmath , of
area @xmath .

In order to prove this theorem, we begin with some preliminary
calculations in the next two sections.

### 2.4 The Complete Hyperbolic Punctured Disk

Let @xmath denote punctured unit disk with the Euclidean conformal
structure on it. The map from @xmath onto @xmath defined by @xmath
realizes @xmath as @xmath . From this it is easy to give an explicit
expression for the complete hyperbolic metric on @xmath :

###### Lemma 2.4.1.

The complete hyperbolic metric on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

Denote by @xmath the horocyclic neighbourhood @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.4.2.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

By lemma 2.4.1

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

We also have the following interpretation of the total geodesic
curvature of a closed curve:

###### Lemma 2.4.3.

For a simple closed curve, @xmath , which bounds a domain @xmath which
includes @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The Euler characteristic of @xmath is @xmath . So, by the Gauss–Bonnet
theorem we have:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

But here @xmath , and the lemma follows. ∎

Set

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Then we have (see figure 2.2 ):

###### Lemma 2.4.4.

@xmath satisfies:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath for @xmath .

4.  @xmath for @xmath .

5.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

Easy. ∎

### 2.5 The Curvature of Metrics on @xmath

Let @xmath be a Riemannian metric on @xmath , which is compatible with
the conformal structure on @xmath . @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive function.

###### Lemma 2.5.1.

The curvature of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

We calculate according to the following formula for the Gaussian
curvature:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection. The Christoffel symbols for
the Levi-Civita connection are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Riemannian metric tensor. Substituing the metric
tensor @xmath in this formula, we get

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

We need also @xmath to calculate:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

…and

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

When we substitute equations ( 2.9 ) – ( LABEL:eqn:norms ) into the
curvature formula ( 2.5 ), we get the desired result ( 2.4 ). ∎

In the special case of a radial metric on @xmath , we have

###### Corollary 2.5.2.

The curvature of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The Laplacian in polar coordinates is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

### 2.6 A Key Lemma

Recall that @xmath

###### Lemma 2.6.1.

If @xmath , then there exists a Riemannian metric on @xmath on @xmath ,
such that

1.  @xmath is conformally equivalent to @xmath .

2.  @xmath coincides with @xmath outside a circle of Euclidean radius
    @xmath .

3.  @xmath extends smoothly to a metric on @xmath .

4.  @xmath has negative curvature.

###### Proof.

By lemma 2.4.2 , @xmath implies @xmath . By lemma 2.4.4 @xmath and
@xmath . Therefore, there exists a strictly convex monotonically
increasing @xmath -function @xmath on @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can construct @xmath as follows: First, define a positive continuous
function @xmath such that,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, define the function @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that @xmath is a @xmath -function which coincides with @xmath
for @xmath . Finally, define @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a @xmath -function which satisfies:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Set @xmath , and @xmath . Then, we have:

1.  @xmath @xmath is smooth at @xmath .

2.  @xmath coincides with @xmath for @xmath .

3.  @xmath by corollary 2.5.2 .

∎

### 2.7 Proof of Theorem 2.3.1

The key lemma 2.6.1 is the heart of the proof of theorem 2.3.1 :

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be pairwise disjoint horocyclic neighbourhoods of the cusps,
@xmath , of areas @xmath . According to the key lemma 2.6.1 , for each
@xmath we can alter the Riemannian metric in @xmath , without affecting
the metric outside of this neighbourhood. Doing so, we are left with a
Riemannian metric of negative curvature, which extends smoothly across
the cusps. In other words, @xmath admits a Riemannian metric of negative
curvature, which coincides with the metric on @xmath outside the
horocyclic cusp-neighbourhoods, @xmath . ∎

### 2.8 A Discussion of Theorem 2.3.1

The best constant in theorem 2.3.1 is @xmath .

One way to see this is by applying the maximum principle for subharmonic
functions: Suppose we have a metric of negative curvature in @xmath of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is smooth and coincides with @xmath outside @xmath . By
formula ( 2.4 ) the negativity of the curvature is equivalent to @xmath
. Hence, @xmath is a subharmonic function. By the maximum principle and
Hopf’s lemma the maximum of @xmath in @xmath is attained on the boundary
and @xmath on the boundary. But since @xmath on the boundary = @xmath ,
it follows by lemma 2.4.4 that @xmath . Finally, by lemma 2.4.2 the last
inequality is equivalent to @xmath .

A different way to see that @xmath is a best constant is by applying the
Gauss–Bonnet theorem to the region @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the curvature of the metric, and @xmath is the geodesic
curvature of @xmath . Since @xmath we obtain a necessary condition on
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

By lemma 2.4.3 this is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.9 An Extension Problem

The necessary condition ( 2.20 ) raises a natural question: Suppose we
have a simple closed smooth curve @xmath in @xmath , which bounds a
domain @xmath which contains @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

- Is it sufficient in order to extend the metric outside of @xmath to a
Riemannian metric with negative curvature in @xmath ? A more general
form of this question was raised already by M. Gromov in [ G ] ,
pp. 109–110.

Since the metric outside of @xmath is conformally equivalent to the
Euclidean metric, we may write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some positive function @xmath defined outside of @xmath . We prove:

###### Theorem 2.9.1.

If the maximum of @xmath on @xmath is attained at a point @xmath , where
the normal derivative @xmath , then @xmath cannot be extended to a
conformal metric of negative curvature in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is a Riemannian metric of negative curvature on @xmath ,
which extends @xmath and is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a smooth positive function defined on @xmath and extends
@xmath . By formula 2.4

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, @xmath is a subharmonic function. By the maximum principle, the
maximum of @xmath in @xmath is attained on @xmath . Hence, it is
attained at @xmath . But, this is not possible, since the normal
derivative there is negative. ∎

The next theorem shows that there exists curves as in theorem 2.9.1 :

###### Theorem 2.9.2.

There exists a curve @xmath in @xmath , bounding a domain @xmath which
includes @xmath such that

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath has the property of theorem 2.9.1 with respect to the
    complete hyperbolic metric on @xmath .

###### Proof.

We can take @xmath to be a horocycle with a slit (see figure 2.3 ):
Smooth the curve whose image is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We choose @xmath to satisfy @xmath . By lemma 2.4.4 , we can find @xmath
such that @xmath . Since by lemma 2.4.2 @xmath , we can find @xmath such
that the area bounded by @xmath in the complete hyperbolic metric on
@xmath @xmath . By lemma 2.4.3 , @xmath satisfies i ).

By construction of @xmath and by lemma 2.4.4 , we see that the maximum
of @xmath on @xmath is attained at a point where the normal derivative
is negative. ∎

If we work a little harder, we can show:

###### Theorem 2.9.3.

@xmath in theorem 2.9.2 can be taken to be convex (i.e. @xmath ).

###### Proof.

Take @xmath to be be composed of a horocycle and a geodesic circular arc
as in figure 2.4 .

The total geodesic curvature (taking singular points into account) of
@xmath is given by the area above it (lemma 2.4.3 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We would like to have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and recalling that the map which realizes @xmath as @xmath is given by
@xmath , we would also like to have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining ( 2.22 )—( 2.25 ) together, and noting that @xmath is given
by ( 2.2 ), we see that we should find @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We may first find a pair @xmath with equality in ( 2.26 ), and then
decrease @xmath . So extracting @xmath from ( 2.26 ), we obtain that we
should find @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The existence of such a @xmath can be shown by elementary calculus. ∎

Ultimately, we can show

###### Theorem 2.9.4.

There exists a convex curve @xmath in @xmath , such that

1.  @xmath .

2.   no metric of negative curvature, conformal or nonconformal to the
    Euclidean metric, can extend the outside metric into the domain
    bounded by @xmath .

###### Proof.

We construct @xmath as follows (see figure 2.5 ):

Take any geodesic @xmath in @xmath , whose end points are in @xmath .
Take a symmetric segment @xmath about the “center” of @xmath of length,
say, @xmath . Now, extend the end points of @xmath , by horocyclic
segments of length @xmath each. Then, identify @xmath with @xmath ,
where @xmath is the Euclidean distance between the endpoints of the
horocyclic segments.

We get a convex curve @xmath in @xmath whose total geodesic curvature
(taking singular points into account) @xmath , by lemma 2.4.3 . Suppose
we have a Riemannian metric @xmath of negative curvature in the domain
bounded by @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ). Since the distance between the
end points of @xmath @xmath , there exists a geodesic @xmath which
connects these points. But this is a contradiction to the fact that in a
Riemannian surface of negative curvature, there is only one geodesic in
each homotopy class. ∎

### 2.10 A Comparison Theorem

If @xmath denotes a Riemann surface with a complete hyperbolic metric of
finite area @xmath , and @xmath its conformal compactification, we
regard @xmath as embedded conformally in @xmath . The hyperbolic metric
on @xmath will be denoted by @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.10.1 ([Br3]).

For every @xmath , there exists @xmath such that, if the cusps of @xmath
@xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will need the following lemma, which shows that under a “large cusps”
condition we can fix the complete hyperbolic metric on @xmath to a
smooth metric on @xmath without losing control on the curvature:

###### Lemma 2.10.2 ([Br3]).

For any @xmath there exists @xmath and a smooth metric @xmath on @xmath
, such that

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath

###### Proof.

We have that for a metric @xmath , on the disk (or the punctured disk)
the curvature is given by (see corollary 2.5.2 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of @xmath , @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the curvature is given in terms of @xmath by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From this formula we see that if we do not change @xmath and @xmath too
much then the curvature doesn’t change much.

We have already seen that the complete hyperbolic metrics on @xmath and
on @xmath are given, respectively, by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One may calculate that (see 2.30 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, if @xmath is small, set @xmath such that @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then, define the function @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, smooth @xmath at @xmath to a smooth function, @xmath , without
altering much the derivative.

For any @xmath , @xmath and its derivative are close to @xmath or @xmath
and their derivatives. Therefore, the corresponding curvature @xmath is
close to @xmath .

If we define @xmath by formula ( 2.31 ), then @xmath is smooth at @xmath
, it coincides with @xmath for @xmath and its curvature is close to -1.
∎

Now we can prove the main theorem ( 2.10.1 ).

###### Proof.

We use the following version of the Ahlfors–Schwarz Lemma due to Wolpert
(see theorem A.2.2 ):

###### Theorem 2.10.3 ([W]).

Let @xmath be two (conformal) metrics on a compact Riemann surface. If
@xmath , then @xmath .

For any @xmath let @xmath be as in lemma ( 2.10.2 ). If the cusps of
@xmath @xmath @xmath , then @xmath admits a metric @xmath whose
curvature satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it conicides with the metric on @xmath away from horocyclic
neighbourhoods of the cusps. We observe that @xmath (lemma 2.5.1 ). So,
we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Wolpert’s theorem we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

## Appendix A Ahlfors–Schwarz Lemma

### a.1 The Lemma of Schwarz

Ahlfors, in his book [ Ah1 ] , proves the lemma of Schwarz:

###### Lemma A.1.1.

Let @xmath be an analytic function, with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath for some @xmath or @xmath then @xmath is a rotation.

The proof is based on the maximum principle.

Ahlfors remarks that the condition @xmath should be considered only as a
normalization: If we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , then @xmath is an order-2 automorphism of the disk
switching @xmath and @xmath . For any analytic map @xmath and @xmath
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath maps @xmath into @xmath and fixes @xmath . Applying the Lemma of
Schwarz to @xmath with @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and in a differential form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recalling that the complete hyperbolic Riemannian metric on @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or in its integrated form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get a first geometric interpretation of the Lemma of Schwarz:

###### Lemma A.1.2 (Schwarz–Pick).

If @xmath is analytic, then @xmath is length-decreasing. i.e., for any
curve, @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath preserves the distance between one pair of distinct points,
then @xmath is an isometry.

We have the following important corollary:

###### Corollary A.1.3.

Let @xmath be an analytic mapping between complete hyperbolic Riemann
surfaces. Then @xmath is length-decreasing.

###### Proof.

The universal covering of @xmath is @xmath equipped with complete
hyperbolic metric. We may lift @xmath to a an analytic map @xmath ,
between the universal coverings. @xmath is length-decreasing iff @xmath
is length-decreasing. But @xmath is length-decreasing by the previous
lemma. ∎

### a.2 Curvature and the Lemma of Schwarz

In [ Ah2 ] Ahlfors shows that the Lemma of Schwarz is related with the
notion of curvature.

###### Lemma A.2.1 ([Ah2]).

Let @xmath be a Riemann surface endowed with a Riemannian metric @xmath
whose curvature @xmath , and let @xmath be analytic. Then @xmath is
length-decreasing.

###### Proof.

We denote the complete hyperbolic metric on @xmath by @xmath . Consider
the pull-back singular metric on @xmath , @xmath . @xmath is conformally
equivalent to @xmath . So, we may write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We need to show

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

(sometimes this is written as @xmath ). where the @xmath ’s are
nonnegative functions and @xmath . The last inequality is trivial at the
branch points of @xmath .

The curvatures (at nonsingular points) are given by (see 2.5.1 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Laplacian: @xmath . Hence, if we set @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Suppose first that @xmath attains its maximum in @xmath (a maximum point
is obviously nonsingular), then @xmath attains its maximum in @xmath and
at maximum we have,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We got @xmath , as we wished.

In the general case, we pick @xmath and approximate @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is finite on @xmath . Hence @xmath attains its maximum in @xmath
. Also, @xmath . So, by ( A.2 ) we get @xmath . Letting @xmath tend to
@xmath we obtain the desired result. ∎

One may ask what happens if we replace @xmath , with an arbitrary
Riemann surface. For compact Riemann surfaces an answer was given by
Wolpert:

###### Theorem A.2.2 ([W]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two Riemann surfaces equipped with Riemannian
metrics, where @xmath is compact and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, an analytic @xmath is length decreasing.

###### Proof.

We pull-back the metric on @xmath to a metric on @xmath . The two
metrics on @xmath are conformal. Therefore their ratio is a well defined
nonnegative function on @xmath which attains its maximum by compactness.
From here, we proceed as in the proof of Ahlfors–Schwarz Lemma. ∎

Brooks proved the following version of Ahlfors–Schwarz Lemma:

###### Theorem A.2.3 ([Br4]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two Riemann surfaces equipped with Riemannian
metrics and with @xmath as an analytic univeral covering. If @xmath is
complete and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then an analytic @xmath is length decreasing.

###### Proof.

We consider the univeral coverings, @xmath and @xmath with the pull-back
metrics by the projection maps, and we lift @xmath to @xmath . Then we
pull-back the metric on @xmath to a metric on @xmath . The completeness
of @xmath guarantees that the corresponding metric on @xmath blows up on
the boundary, and the @xmath inequality guarantees that the
approximation argument in the proof of Ahlfors–Schwarz lemma will work.
∎

## Appendix B The Poincaré Polygon Theorem

Let @xmath be the hyperbolic plane. Consider a finite-sided polygon with
all vertices at infinity, @xmath , in @xmath . @xmath has sides of two
kinds: The sides of the first kind are the sides which are not contained
in the boundary of @xmath . The sides of the second kind are the sides,
which are contained in the boundary of the hyperbolic plane. Suppose
that the number of sides of the first kind is even, and we divide them
into pairwise disjoint pairs. To each pair @xmath we associate an
orientation-preserving transformation, @xmath , which maps @xmath onto
@xmath in such a way that @xmath . We consider the subgroup, @xmath , of
@xmath , which is generated by the side-pairing transformations.

###### Definition B.1.

A vertex-cycle transformation is an element of @xmath which stabilizes a
vertex of the polygon @xmath .

Remark: For any vertex @xmath of @xmath @xmath is a cyclic group.

###### Theorem B.2.

If all the vertex-cycle transformations in @xmath are parabolic, then
@xmath is a discrete subgroup of @xmath , with @xmath as a fundamental
domain.

I liked De Rham’s survey and proof of the theorem in the compact and
non-compact polygones cases in [ dR ] .

## Appendix C The Uniformization Theorem

The Uniformization Theorem can be formulated as follows:

###### Theorem C.1.

Any simply connected Riemann surface is conformally equivalent to one
and only one of the following surfaces:

1.   The Riemann sphere.

2.   The complex plane.

3.   The unit disk.

A proof can be found in [ FK ] .

###### Corollary C.2.

On a Riemann surface there exists a complete Riemannian metric of
constant curvature 1, 0, or -1.
