Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the theory of the strong interaction, is
one of the most prominent examples for a beautiful and successful
physical theory. At large distance, or equivalently at low energy,
perturbative expansions in the coupling constant—the standard tool to
treat quantum field theories analytically—break down, and a
non-perturbative formulation is required to calculate physical
quantities. In this thesis, we construct the Fixed-Point fermion action
for lattice QCD, which is a highly improved discretization of the
continuum theory that preserves the chiral symmetry inherent in the
original formulation. We perform studies in quenched light hadron
spectroscopy to examine the properties of this action and investigate in
detail the chiral limit of pseudoscalar mesons, which is inaccessible to
non-chiral lattice formulations.

To start with, Chapter 1 provides a brief introduction to the field of
elementary particle physics, to Quantum Chromodynamics and the lattice
as a tool to probe the non-perturbative regime of the strong
interaction, and motivates the construction of improved transcriptions
of the theory to discrete space-time. A long standing problem, namely
the formulation of chiral symmetric lattice fermions, is addressed in
Chapter 2 . An elegant solution has been found using Renormalization
Group methods, leading to the classically perfect Fixed-Point actions.
Chapter 3 describes the parametrization and construction of the
Fixed-Point fermion action for lattice QCD and presents some elementary
properties of the resulting Dirac operator. A different possibility to
obtain chiral lattice fermions is the overlap construction. We combine
the Fixed-Point and the overlap approach in Chapter 4 to remove the
residual chiral symmetry breaking of our parametrized Dirac operator,
getting a fermion action which inherits the advantages of both
formulations at a higher computational cost. The chirality and locality
properties of this overlap-improved Dirac operator are then tested in
the artificial framework of smooth instanton gauge configurations.

Next, we turn to one of the most fundamental applications of lattice
QCD, namely the calculation of hadron masses. Chapter 5 gives an
introduction to the technical details of how the light hadron mass
spectrum is extracted from lattice simulations. With chiral symmetric
fermion actions, it is possible to perform lattice simulations at quark
masses very close to or even at the physical mass of up and down quarks,
thus allowing to study the chiral limit, which is complicated by
non-analytic terms in the quenched approximation to QCD. At such small
quark masses, additional quenching effects appear in a finite lattice
volume which contaminate in particular the pseudoscalar meson channel
and are related to the zero modes of the Dirac operator. We devote
Chapter 6 to the study of these topological finite-volume effects and
examine possible solutions for the problem of extracting reliable
pseudoscalar meson masses at small volumes and quark masses.

In Chapter 7 , we present the results of a spectroscopy simulation with
the Fixed-Point fermion and gluon lattice actions. This study is the one
of the first hadron spectroscopy calculations with a chiral symmetric
action including checks for cut-off and finite-volume effects. After
estimating the magnitude of the topological quenching effects, we
closely examine the chiral limit of the pseudoscalar meson and extract
the coefficient of the quenched chiral logarithm in two different ways.
We also consider the chiral extrapolations for vector mesons and baryons
and present part of the light hadron spectrum at finite lattice spacing.
Then we study the dependence of the hadron masses on the physical volume
and the lattice spacing for the parametrized Fixed-Point Dirac operator.
The scaling properties of the vector meson mass is compared to other
formulations of lattice fermions. Finally, we investigate how well the
continuum energy-momentum hadron dispersion relation is preserved by our
lattice action, and examine the effect of overlap-improvement on the
spectrum and dispersion relation. The final chapter contains our
conclusions and prospects for the future.

The work covered in this thesis is part of an ongoing project of
parametrizing, testing and applying Fixed-Point fermions in lattice QCD,
carried out in collaboration with Thomas Jörg, Peter Hasenfratz, Ferenc
Niedermayer and Kieran Holland. The simulations in the last chapter were
performed in the framework of the BGR collaboration. Part of the results
presented here have already been published in papers [ 1 , 2 ] and
conference proceedings [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] . While the focus of this thesis is
on simulations of the light hadron spectrum, we will recapitulate some
of the basic issues discussed in the PhD thesis of Thomas Jörg [ 6 ]
which are relevant for understanding the applications and results in the
later chapters in order to keep this work as self-contained as possible.
