### Introduction

Coherence is a property of waves which describes how much they resemble
a smooth sine wave. In a quantum theory matter, similarly to light, has
a wave-like character and can exhibit coherence. However, neither the
wave nature of matter nor coherent states are generally observed in
everyday life. This is because, usually, only a tiny fraction of
particles occupy the same quantum state leading to an incoherent,
classical world.

It is, however, possible to produce systems in which a large number of
particles occupy the same coherent state observable on a macroscopic
scale. One of the most common and widely used for practical applications
is the laser - a coherent state of light. Observation of a coherent
state of massive, interacting and number conserved bosons, known as a
Bose Einstein condensate (BEC), is very difficult due to large
decoherence effects, and requires very low temperatures. Liquid Helium
and trapped atomic gases remain the only systems where BEC is
experimentally observed and controlled. Superconductivity - a coherent
state of paired electrons - closes the list of current experimental
realisations of macroscopic quantum coherent states. These few
experimental realisations have had a large impact on an understanding of
quantum physics.

Another candidate for BEC, which would be very interesting for practical
applications, is excitons - bound states of electrons and holes which
occur in semiconductors. Together with the decoherence effects the major
difficulty in obtaining the coherent state of excitons is their
non-equilibrium nature. They decay into light. Excitons can, however, be
placed in an optical cavity, where photons are prevented from escaping.
If the exciton-photon interaction is sufficiently strong they form new
particles: cavity exciton-polaritons which are bosons and so can Bose
condense.

Miniaturisation and improvements in the quality of optical cavities in
recent years bring new possibilities for the observation of coherent
effects. In cavities the size of a wavelength of light, called
microcavities, the exciton-photon interaction is particularly strong and
the decoherence is reduced. The experimental observation of Bose
condensation of cavity polaritons might become possible. Such a
polariton condensate could also be a new source of coherent light where,
in contrast to lasers, no population inversion would be required.

Although the first laser action was observed long ago, extensive
research is still being done in the search for miniaturised,
low-threshold lasers. Recent achievements in manufacturing good quality
low-dimensional microstructures provide the possibility for much better
performance of optical devices.

My thesis addresses two aspects of this subject. In the first part we
develop a theory which connects Bose-Einstein condensation of
microcavity polaritons and lasing. The second part is devoted to
modelling excitonic lasing in quasi-one-dimensional, T-shaped quantum
wires.

#### Bose Einstein condensation of microcavity polaritons and lasing
crossover between the two regimes

There are two distinct phenomena where quantum coherence has been
observed on the macroscopic scale: the laser and Bose Einstein
condensation. Although the physics underlying both processes is
fundamentally different, they both could potentially be observed in the
same microcavities, and both would be a source of a coherent light.

The BEC of excitons or exciton-polaritons is still an open issue,
undergoing extensive experimental research. Indications of some
excitonic coherence effects in semiconductor microcavities were reported
but whether BEC of exciton-polaritons took place remains unresolved.

As the BEC of polaritons could be a source of a coherent light the issue
arises how the condensation can be distinguished from an ordinary
lasing. The development of a theory which connects these two regimes in
microcavity, predicts the major signs of a condensate, and checks its
stability with respect to decoherence processes is of both fundamental
interest and will help experimentalists in the search for condensation.

Generalisation of existing laser theories to include the media coherence
effects seems very promising as a polariton condensate could be a source
of a coherent light without the population inversion.

We study the intermediate regime between ordinary lasing and a BEC of
exciton polaritons. We take into account the fermionic structure of
polaritons, treating the excitons as two-level systems coupled to a
single mode in a microcavity. We introduce decoherence and dissipation
processes to this system.

In the limit of very large decoherence we obtain a conventional laser.
In the opposite regime we can examine the stability of the BEC of
polaritons.

The work, although motivated by the experiments on semiconductor
excitons, is much more general, and can be applied to any two-level
systems interacting via photons confined in a cavity.

#### Excitons in T-shaped quantum wires

Optical properties of electrons and holes confined to few dimensions are
of particular interest for optical and electronic devices. As the
dimensionality of the structure is reduced, the density of states tends
to bunch together leading to a singularity in the 1D case. At the same
time the excitonic interaction in 1D is enhanced. For the ideal 1D
quantum wire, the excitonic binding energy and oscillator strength
diverge suggesting that they can be greatly increased in practice for
quasi-1D wires. Both effects provide possibilities for improving the
performance of optical devices such as semiconductor lasers.

A much studied quasi-1D experimental system is the T-shaped quantum wire
formed at the intersection of two quantum wells. Laser emission from the
lowest exciton state in T-shaped quantum wires has been experimentally
observed, and an interesting observation of two-mode lasing in such
wires has been recently reported.

We develop a rate equation model to understand this two-mode lasing
phenomena. The model gives very good agreement with experimental data,
which suggests that we have lasing from two different excitonic states
in the structure. Thus excited states seem to be very important for the
operation of excitonic lasers.

Motivated by the growing experimental realisation of these structures,
as well as the interesting report of lasing phenomena, we have developed
a numerical method to calculate energies, oscillator strengths for
radiative recombinations, and two-particle wave functions for the ground
state exciton and the excited states in a T-shaped quantum wire. These
calculations are being used to design improved excitonic lasers which
will operate at room temperature.

## Part I Bose Condensation of Cavity Polaritons and Lasing Crossover
Between the Two Regimes

### Chapter 1 Introduction

In this Chapter we introduce basic concepts of Bose-Einstein
condensation and briefly review the main theoretical and experimental
work which has been done up to date in the area of BEC of excitons and
polaritons which is relevant for our work. We also give a short
description of the quantum theory of the laser and a general account of
the relationship between a Bose condensate and a laser.

#### 1.1 Bose-Einstein Condensation

Bose-Einstein condensation is a phase transition in which a macroscopic
number of particles all go into the same quantum state [ 1 ] . This
property place the Bose condensate as a separate state of matter,
distinct from all other states in which the occupation of any
single-particle eigenstate is negligible in comparison to the total
particle number. This macroscopically occupied state has remarkable
properties. In an extended system macroscopic occupation of one state
implies that the wave function of a single particle can extend over
macroscopic distances throughout the system and thus there is a
long-range order in the phase of the condensate. Long-range phase
coherence means that the local phase at every point in the condensate
has a well define value. Since the Hamiltonian does not depend on the
phase of the wavefunctions such phase locking implies broken gauge
symmetry. A well defined phase, according to the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle, causes the number of particles not to have a definite value
and thus the condensate has to be a coherent state and not a number
state.

The only experimental realisations of BEC are liquid Helium and trapped
atomic gases. A superconductor is yet another example of a macroscopic
coherent state. However the fermionic structure of Cooper pairs in a
superconductor affects some of its properties, and thus this state is
sometimes distinguished from the BEC in a strict sense. It would be of a
great fundamental interest to add a few more experimental realisations
to this short list. Liquid Helium and trapped atomic gases are probably
not the most suitable systems for practical applications and a
realisation of a BEC in a solid - state system would be more practical.

Neutral electronic excitations in a solid can have a bosonic nature, and
thus could be candidates for Bose condensation. In semiconductors the
electron in the conduction band and the hole in the valence band
interact via an attractive Coulomb interaction, and can form a bound
state called exciton. An exciton, as a particle build up from two
fermions, is a boson and thus has the properties which result from Bose
statistics.

There are, however, some practical difficulties concerning BEC of
excitons. In semiconductors the Coulomb interaction between the electron
and the hole within exciton is screened by other carriers and thus the
binding energy of exciton is much weaker than that of the analogous
hydrogen atom. Therefore excitons can only exist at low temperatures or
in low-dimensional structures, where their binding energy is enhanced.
Another fundamental difficulty is that the large population of an
externally excited excitons is not a real ground state of semiconductor.
Excitons are not conserved particles and can recombine emitting photons.
However, if the lifetime of the exciton is long in comparison with the
thermalisation time a quasi-equilibrium Bose condensate could be
observed. Thus materials with very weak light-matter coupling would be
good candidates for such condensates. We will give a brief review of
experimental advances in this area in Section 1.2 .

The strong light-matter interaction does not always have to be
disadvantageous for the formation of the condensate. At certain
conditions it is the strong dipole coupling which would favour the
condensation. One of the examples is a coherently excited semiconductor.
In experiments where electrons and holes are created by an external
coherent light the non-equilibrium driven condensate would form.
Coherence in such systems does not appear spontaneously but is inherited
from an external coherent pump. Another example would be to prevent the
coherent excitations from escaping by placing the sample in an optical
cavity. If the interaction between atoms or excitons in semiconductors
and light is strong the new quasiparticles, called cavity polaritons,
would form. Polaritons as a coupled states of photons and electronic
excitations are bosons and thus similarly as pure excitons could Bose
condense. Bose condensation of excitons and polaritons has been a
subject of extensive experimental investigations in recent years which
we will briefly review in Section 1.4 and Chapter 4 .

BEC was first described for a non-interacting, ideal gas of free bosons.
This description still remains a standard textbook theory despite that
it does not explain all basic properties of real Bose condensates stated
in the first paragraph of this Section. However, the instability of the
normal state is present even in the non-interacting Bose-gas and thus
this model gives the first insight into the phenomena of Bose
condensation.

For an ideal gas of bosons with mass @xmath and particle number @xmath ,
the occupation of a single eigenstate with energy @xmath is given by a
Bose distribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath is a chemical potential and @xmath . The total
number of particles in the system is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus the density of particles is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be noticed that the integral ( 1.2 ) cannot account for all the
particles in a system at all @xmath and @xmath , since @xmath must have
an upper bound of zero for the distribution function to be defined at
all energies. At a given temperature the density of particles which
corresponds to @xmath is a critical density which can not be exceeded
within the equation ( 1.2 ). This implies that for densities higher that
this critical density the summation in equation ( 1.1 ) can not be
simply replaced by an integral and the only way to accommodate all the
particles in the system is by placing the macroscopic number of bosons
into a small, non-macroscopic number of states.

The theory of a non-interacting Bose gas explains the macroscopic
occupation of a small number of quantum states and gives the density and
the temperature of a transition. However, this theory does not explain
why all the excess particles should occupy only one single-particle
state and not a few states close to the ground state [ 2 ] . Another
problem is that for the non-interacting boson model the condensate would
be a number state of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The wavefunction ( 1.3 ) does not contain the phase coherence
characteristic of real condensates.

Interactions between particles would resolve both problems discussed in
the previous paragraph. Even arbitrarily weak interactions can create a
macroscopic energy difference between different macroscopically occupied
eigenstates, whose energies would be very close to the ground state in
the absence of interactions. Interactions thus favour the occupation of
the single lowest energy eigenstate only. In the presence of
interactions the condensate wavefunction will no longer be a number
state but will become a coherent state of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The interaction mixes the single particle states and thus the total
energy of the system can be lowered with respect to the energy in a
number state by taking into account the interference terms between
different single-particle eigenstates within the coherent state
wavefunction. Coherent state has a fixed phase but allows for the
fluctuation of the condensate population. Only the average particle
number in the condensate is well defined and equal to @xmath (eqn 1.4 ).

The Bogoliubov theory of the weakly interacting Bose gas is used to
describe atomic condensates. Other condensates mentioned at the
beginning of this section have additional complications which can not be
accounted for by this theory. The interactions in liquid Helium are far
too strong to be described by the weakly interacting gas model. In the
case of superconductors the internal fermionic structure of the Cooper
pairs cannot be neglected. Excitons and polaritons could be treated as
structureless bosons only at very low densities, probably to low to
acquire phase coherence. For higher densities, similarly as in
superconductors, the internal fermionic structure has to be included.

In the next few sections we will review the existing theories and
experiments concerning quasi-equilibrium exciton condensation,
coherently driven condensates, polariton stimulated scattering and
equilibrium isolated polariton condensation.

#### 1.2 Condensation of Excitons

In materials where the light-matter interaction is very weak, for
example @xmath or @xmath , the electronic excitations have long
life-time. This time might be long enough to achieve a thermal
equilibrium and to acquire a phase coherence due to the mutual
interactions. Thus we might expect a quasi-equilibrium condensate.

Bosons on an atomic energy scale, apart from photons, are always
composite, build up from an even number of fermions. In the case of
@xmath or any other atomic or molecular system it is very difficult
experimentally to compress them to such high densities that the
underlying fermionic degrees of freedom would play an important role. In
the case of electronic excitations, such as for example excitons in
semiconductors, due to their large radii and the possibilities of
creating them by external excitations, the high densities can be easily
realised and the underlying fermionic nature can play an important role.

The major nonlinearities arising with increasing density are screening
and the saturation of the underlying fermionic states, the so called
“phase-space filling” effect. At low densities, when the exciton radius
is small compared with the distance between excitons, the condensate
would resemble a BEC of point-like bosons, while in the opposite limit,
where excitons overlap and the fermionic states saturate, the system
would form a BCS-like coherent pair-state, called an excitonic insulator
in semiconductor physics. In other words we have a transition from a
real-space pairing of tightly bound excitons to a momentum-space pairing
of weakly correlated and overlapping electron-hole pairs.

By analogy to superconductivity Keldysh, Kozlov and Kopaev developed a
theory [ 3 , 4 ] which smoothly connects these two regimes of densities.
Excitons are treated not as structureless bosons but as electrons and
holes interacting via the attractive Coulomb potential. Introducing
@xmath and @xmath as annihilation operators for an electron with
momentum k in the conduction and valence bands respectively, the
creation operator for an exciton is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the internal orbital wavefunction and remains close to the
single exciton form at low densities, where exciton-exciton interactions
do not affect the internal structure of the exciton. As we discussed in
the Section 1.1 , the Bose condensate is a macroscopically occupied
state with long-range phase coherence. Thus we expect the wavefunction
of an exciton condensate to be a coherent state of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expanding the exponential in the equation ( 1.5 ) and taking into
account the exclusion principle for fermionic operators @xmath and
@xmath , the condensate wavefunctions would have the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 1.6 ) is a special case of the BCS wavefunction for the
coherent state of Cooper pairs in the superconductors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The wavefunction ( 1.7 ) provides a smooth transition between
Bose-condensed excitons at low densities and BCS-like collective state
of electron and holes (so called excitonic insulator) at high densities;
at very high densities it approaches an uncondensed electron-hole
plasma. This form of the wavefuncion was widely used to describe BEC of
excitons, particularly by Comte and Nozières [ 5 ] .

The evolution of the state ( 1.7 ) as the density grows can be seen in
Figure 1.1 .

The behaviour of @xmath is shown as a function of the energy @xmath for
different densities. @xmath is an average number of particles in the
state, fixed by the density, while the shape of the @xmath shows the
internal structure of the electron-hole pair. At low densities where
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath scales with a constant shape as a function of
density (curves a and b in Fig. 1.1 ) and describes essentially the
single exciton wavefunction.

With increase in the density the @xmath finally approaches 1 (curve c in
Fig. 1.1 ) and due to the exclusion principle, expressed by the equation
( 1.8 ), cannot increase any further. In order to accumulate more
particles it is necessary to occupy more energetic states in k -space
(curves d and e in Fig. 1.1 ). This saturation occurs when excitons
start overlapping, and the resulting ground state becomes BCS-like
collective state, characterised by a small energy gap in the excitation
spectrum which decreases with density. In the regime of very high
densities @xmath becomes a step function, @xmath if @xmath , @xmath if
@xmath , characteristic for electron-hole plasma. Thus, the saturation
of the fermionic states together with screening would eventually
suppress the condensation at high densities.

Another enemy of the excitonic condensation are impurities present in
semiconductor. The influence of impurities on the excitonic insulator
was discussed by Zittartz [ 7 ] . He studied randomly distributed normal
impurities which, in the case of oppositely charged electrons and holes,
have the same effect as magnetic impurities in superconductors. He
applied the Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory [ 8 ] to the excitonic
insulator case and showed that beyond a critical impurity concentration
the excitonic phase cannot exist. Close to the critical concentration
there is a gapless excitonic insulator analogous to a gapless
superconductor.

Experimental work on Bose condensation of excitons rely on looking at
systems with a long lifetime for recombination such as @xmath and @xmath
or dipole excitons in coupled quantum wells. A very good review of the
recent advances in this area, both the experimental and the theoretical,
can be found in references [ 6 , 1 ] .

The evidences for the existence of Bose condensates in @xmath are based
on spectral analysis or detecting superfluidity of excitons. Lin and
Wolfe [ 9 ] observed lineshapes in photoemission that were consistent
with strong degeneracy and possibly consistent with BEC of excitons.
Experiments by Mysyrowicz and co-workers [ 10 ] - [ 14 ] reported an
anomalous ballistic transport of excitons over large distances which was
argued to be a sign of superfluidity; these have been criticised as
possibly being due to phonon-wind transport [ 15 ] - [ 17 ] , a purely
classical effect. Most recently [ 18 ] , Wolfe retracted the earlier
experiments because the absolute measurements of the exciton density
showed they were too low to give BEC.

A coupled quantum wells system consists of two different, adjacent
planes with electrons in one layer and holes in the other. Applied
electric field keep both kinds of carriers in separate two-dimensional
planes. This arrangement reduces the overlap of the wavefunctions of the
electron and the hole and thus increases the lifetime of excitons. While
the first set of experiments claiming to see Bose statistics in these
systems were retracted, the most recent work by Butov et al. [ 19 ] - [
21 ] concludes that there is evidence of stimulated scattering, and
therefore densities reaching the quantum regime; but there is no
evidence for BEC.

One problem with an interpretation of the experimental data, and also
with the control of the condensate, comes from the fact that excitons
decay emitting light, and thus the condensate is only a
quasi-equilibrium phenomena, which can survive only up to the time scale
for recombination. One way to go would be to look for materials where
light-matter interaction is very weak and so consequently excitons have
relatively long lifetime. But the strong exciton-photon interaction does
not necessarily preclude the existence of a condensate if the coherence
is maintained in the photons. This could be realised in two
fundamentally different situations.

The first one is the coherently driven system. In the presence of an
external strong, coherent laser field the non-equilibrium condensate of
electronic excitation can form. Instead of spontaneous symmetry breaking
leading to a condensation the exciton system inherit its coherence from
the external coherent photon field.

The second case is a spontaneous condensation of cavity polaritons
achieved by placing the system in an optical cavity, where photons and
thus the coherence is prevented from escaping.

#### 1.3 Coherently driven systems

The properties of the media in the strong coherent electromagnetic field
were first studied by Galitskii, Goreslavskii and Elesin [ 22 ] then
broth into the context of exciton condensation by Elesin and Kopaev [ 23
] and further developed by Schmitt-Rink, Chemla and Haug [ 24 ] .

In the presence of electromagnetic field with very high intensity the
interaction between electronic excitations and light is particularly
strong. It cannot be tackled by a perturbation theory but as a major
interaction in the system must be treated exactly. The Hamiltonian for
the electronic excitations and their interaction with the external
electromagnetic wave @xmath cos @xmath is the following

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is a coupling strength between matter and light.
The @xmath is the Coulomb interaction between carriers. In the absence
of the Coulomb interaction it is possible to diagonalise this
Hamiltonian by means of first a unitary transformation to change to a
representation in which the Hamiltonian does not depend on time and then
a canonical transformation to make it diagonal:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new quasiparticles @xmath and @xmath are linear combinations of
@xmath and @xmath with the dispersion law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the presence of a strong electromagnetic field the electronic levels
get mixed and the relevant description is in terms of new quasiparticles
@xmath and @xmath , which are coherent superpositions of the upper and
the lower electronic states. Since the electron is in a coherent
superposition of both levels, the polarisation of the particles is
finite. Thus a macroscopic coherent polarisation of the media appears,
inherited from the coherent pump field.

The new quasiparticles @xmath and @xmath are subject to other
interactions of a different origin (Coulomb interactions, collisions
with phonons or impurities). These additional interactions can be
treated perturbatievly if they are weak in comparison with electron -
photon coupling, and the kinetic equations for the quasiparticles can be
obtained. If the other interactions become comparable with light-matter
coupling, the quasiparticle picture breaks down and we are back to the
usual weak regime of light-matter interactions.

Schmitt-Rink et al [ 24 ] studied the behaviour of a coherently driven
system for a wide range of pump intensity (i.e the density of electronic
excitations) for two cases with and without the Coulomb interaction
using more rigorous Keldysh non-equilibrium Green function techniques.
They obtained all regimes of real-space and momentum space pairing
discussed in the Section 1.2 . At high pump intensities the Coulomb
interaction gives only a small correction to the dominant processes
induced by the coherent pump filed. In contrast at small pump
intensities the Coulomb interactions play an important role and leads
the electrons and holes to form bound excitons which are then coherently
driven by the field.

Due to the external source of a coherence the coherently driven
condensate is much more robust than the equilibrium excitonic insulator
and thus exist for all temperatures and densities. Screening and
phase-filling effects, which suppress the equilibrium excitonic
condensate at high densities, are also present in the case of coherently
driven systems. However, high densities in this case correspond to a
strong pump field which dominates the physics, and the gapped condensate
is present.

Schmitt-Rink et al [ 24 ] also point out that their results, in the case
without the Coulomb interaction, are equivalent to those obtained for an
ensemble of independent two-level atoms as the optical transition with
different k decouple. We will come back to this point in Section 3.1
when we introduce the two-level oscillators model for the electronic
excitations.

#### 1.4 Polariton Condensation

Another way to prevent the exciton condensate from decaying is to place
the media in the cavity, where photons are confined and thus prevented
from escaping. Similarly as in Section 1.3 strong light-matter
interaction mixes the photon and exciton states and causes the formation
of the new quasiparticle cavity-polariton. Polariton can be seen as a
superposition of a plane wave of the electromagnetic field and a plane
wave of polarisation. It was first introduced by Hopfield [ 25 ] to
describe the light in a bulk material. Cavity polaritons have been
experimentally observed for atoms [ 26 ] , quantum wells [ 27 ] and bulk
excitons [ 28 ] , excitons in organic semiconductors [ 29 , 30 ] and
exciton complexes [ 31 ] .

Quantum wells confined in a planar microcavity is a particularly good
system to observe the coherence effects. The binding energy of ideal
quantum well exciton is four times that of the bulk exciton and the
photon-matter interaction in a microcavity is particularly strong, as
the decoherence effects are reduced, allowing to study the so called
strong-coupling regime.

Microcavity polaritons are subject of intensive experimental research in
recent years. A strong-coupling polariton effect for excitons coupled to
photons was first observed in microcavity GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well by
Weisbuch et al [ 27 ] in 1992. Since then there were many experiments
studying the properties of cavity polaritons in various systems out of
which the most interesting is the observation of stimulating scattering
for polaritons [ 32 ] - [ 37 ] .

Stimulating scattering, similarly as BEC, is an effect of quantum
statistics of indistinguishable Bose particles. The scattering rate into
a particular final state is proportional to a factor @xmath , where
@xmath is the occupation number of the final state. Thus, particles
already present in the particular eigenstate enhance the transitions of
other particles into this eigenstate. This process for photons leads to
a lasing action while for polaritons it can give an increase by orders
of magnitude of the total scattering rate even in the normal state. This
effect can be observed by measuring the photoluminescence from an
optically excited semiconductors and indeed in recent experiments [ 32 ]
- [ 37 ] authors observe a nonlinear build-up of a lower polariton
population as a pumping intensity is increased. There is a clear
threshold in the pump intensity where the stimulated scattering starts.
Above this threshold a large occupation of the lower polariton states is
observed. This population is usually far from thermal equilibrium with
few exceptions where the thermalised emission is claimed [ 34 ] .

Stimulated scattering of polaritons causes macroscopic occupation of a
single quantum state and in this way is similar to Bose condensate.
However BEC is characterised by a phase coherence which is unlikely to
be present in these experiments. The experiments are performed in the
very low density limit and thus a considerably long time is required for
the interactions to produce a phase coherence. This time is most likely
to be longer that the lifetime of the cavity mode. In addition there are
also other pair-breaking decoherence processes, which we will show in
this work to be more destructive at low densities. In present
experiments the attempt to increase the density of polaritons results
not in the formation of the condensate but in a switching into the
weak-coupling regime and lasing. Thus definite evidence for BEC of
polaritons has not been given.

However, the observation of the stimulating scattering for polaritons
suggests that another effect of bosonic statistic, BEC should be in
principle possible in these systems. The issue is not whether or not
excitons are bound or ionised into a plasma, but whether the decoherence
suppresses the excitonic polarisation. We will show in this work that
indeed the regime of BEC exists for sufficiently large densities and low
decoherence. Thus the problem is to experimentally achieve the right
regime. We will come back to this issue in more details in the Chapter 4
.

Now we will present the existing theory of isolated polaritons in which
the decoherence and dissipations processes are ignored. First we discuss
the low density regime and then the generalised model for all densities.

##### 1.4.1 Low Density Regime

The first approximation usually made is to treat the excitons as
structureless bosons and thus the interacting exciton-photon system is
nothing more than two coupled harmonic oscillators. The Hamiltonian for
structureless excitons dipole coupled to photons after the rotating-wave
approximation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian ( 1.12 ) can be diagonalised using the canonical
transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to the following form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the two polariton levels and are linear
combinations of exciton and photon @xmath with the dispersion relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two-dimensional polariton energies are illustrated in Fig. 1.2 .

The first estimate in studying the BEC of polaritons is to treat them as
weakly interacting, structureless bosons and to use the theory of atomic
condensates to predict the transition temperature and density. However
one can easily notice that this picture is far from being complete.
There are several effects which are important for the formation of the
condensate and are not included within the above treatment.

1) Phase space filling effect . With the increase in the excitonic
density saturation of the underlying fermionic states becomes important.
This saturation takes place for densities at which excitons start
overlapping. Phase space filling effect is not included in the model of
polaritons described at the beginning of this Section.

2) Disorder. All theories for exciton and polariton condensation as well
as driven condensates discussed so far consider ideal and infinite
structures, where bare electronic excitations are propagating states
with a well defined momentum. However, the real structures are far from
being perfect and contain a high level of disorder caused by
fluctuations in thickness of quantum well and alloying concentration or
presence of impurities. The disorder potential is usually weak with
respect to the binding energy of excitons and thus does not destroy
them. However, the exciton centre of mass wavefunction would be
localised in the minima of the disorder potential rather then
propagating through the sample. The correlation length of the disorder
potential and thus the spatial extend of the exciton centre of mass
wavefunction vary typically from a few to about ten exciton Bohr radius
[ 39 ] . Thus a localised exciton picture might be more relevant for
these structures.

3) Screening. The Coulomb interaction between electron and hole in the
exciton is screened by other excitations. This screening increases with
the increase in density leading to a complete dissociation of excitons
at very high densities and thus the decrease in the strength of the
exciton-photon interaction.

4) Decoherence effects. Apart from the exciton-photon interaction there
are other processes present in the cavity. Excitons interact with
phonons and impurities, they are subject to collisions and pumping
processes. Despite the advances in the fabrication of microcavities the
mirrors are not perfect and the photons can escape. These processes
could cause the suppression of the condensate and the strong coupling
regime altogether.

##### 1.4.2 Generalisation of Polariton Condensation to Include Phase
Space Filling Effect

The first two of the effects described at the end of the Section 1.4.1 :
the phase space filling effect and the disorder were studied by Eastham
and Littlewood [ 40 , 38 ] . In contrast to the propagated excitons
model they use the generalised Dicke model widely applied in quantum
optics to study the radiative decay of atomic gases and lasers. The
electronic excitations are treated as an ensemble of two-level
oscillators dipole coupled to one mode of the electromagnetic filed. The
upper level corresponds to the excited state of an atom or the presence
of a localised exciton at a given site in the material, while the lower
state corresponds to the ground state of the atom or the lack of an
exciton. The two-level oscillators interact through the common photon
mode and all other direct interactions are neglected. The Dicke model is
generalised to include the distribution of excitonic energies and
coupling strength and the constrain in the number of excitations is
imposed. The Hamiltonian for this model is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are fermionic annihilation operators for an
electron in an upper and lower states respectively and @xmath is a
photon bosonic annihilation operator. The sum here is over the possible
sites where an exciton can be present (different molecules or localised
states in the disorder potential) and not over the momentum like in the
case of propagating excitons. The fermionic structure is included
through the single occupancy constrain for both levels of the two-level
oscillator expressed in the commutation relations for the @xmath and
@xmath fermionic operators. Thus this model includes a phase space
filling type effect and the disorder, and does not include screening and
decoherence effects.

In real structures different types of excitons could be present. The
exciton could be localised in a minimum of the disorder potential, some
traps could be big enough so that a few excitons can be present on one
side, some excitons could extend for large distances and finally some
propagate in the sample. Depending on the material and the growth
condition of the sample certain types would be dominant. The model
discussed in this Section gives very good description of the tightly
bound, Frenkel excitons which can be treated as a point-like compared
with a wavelength of light, localised by the disorder or bound on
impurities or molecular excitons in organic materials. This model
describes the opposite limit to the ideal structures with propagating
exciton centre-of mass wavefunctions but recent experiments in quantum
wells [ 41 ] - [ 45 ] suggest that it might be more relevant, at least
at low densities.

Eastham and Littlewood consider a thermal equilibrium of this model at
fixed number of excitations (excitation density) in the cavity equal to
@xmath ( @xmath ), where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This corresponds to the situation, where system is initially excited
with an external pump and then isolated so that the excitations can not
decay out of the cavity, and the thermal equilibrium can be achieved.

They use functional path integral techniques and show that the
mean-field solution is well controlled by the number of sites available,
N, with fluctuations of order of 1/N and thus exact in the limit where
@xmath . They show that the wavefunction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an exact ground state for @xmath .

Eastham and Littlewood study the ground state and the excitation
spectrum of this model for a range of temperature, excitation densities,
photon-exciton detuning and exciton energy distribution. They recover
the crossover from the structureless polariton condensate to the
BCS-like coherent state, where saturation effects are important. In
contrast to the excitonic insulator the BEC of generalised polaritons is
present even at very high excitation densities due to the presence of
highly occupied photon mode. At low densities the condensate is more
exciton-like, while at high densities it has more photon-like character.
At zero temperature the system is always condensed as the decoherence
processes are not included in the model. The condensate has a gap in the
excitation spectrum of magnitude @xmath , where @xmath is an amplitude
of the coherent photon field and @xmath , as usual, is the coupling
constant between photon and exciton (see Figure 1.3 ).

Their work shows that although the phase space filling effect causes the
collapse of the splitting between the two polariton peaks in the normal
state with increasing density, it does not destroy condensation even at
very high excitation densities. Due to this saturation effect in the
fermionic space the condensate is becoming more photon like as the
excitation density is increased, but nevertheless the coherence in the
media and the gap in the excitation spectrum are present (see Figure 1.3
).

Polariton condensate as a coherent state of photons and electronic
excitations would be a source of a coherent light. The issue arises how
it is different and how it can be distinguished from the ordinary laser.
Two major conclusions can be derived from their theory. Firstly, in
contrast to lasers the coherent light in polariton condensate would be
present even without population inversion. Secondly, the polariton
condensate, unlike the laser, would have a gap in the excitation
spectrum.

Both processes, the polariton condensate and laser, are fundamentally
different and appear in different regimes of the light-matter
interaction. Polariton condensate is a condensate of strongly coupled
modes of light and electronic excitations. Laser is a weak-coupling
phenomenon and is essentially a coherent state of photons created by
stimulated emission from an inverted electronic population due to the
strong pumping. Both processes can be present in the same microcavity
systems and the essential light-matter interaction would be described by
the same Hamiltonian ( 1.14 ). Thus the laser and the polariton
condensate can be viewed as two different regimes in microcavity. In the
Section 1.2 we discussed the crossover between the regime of BEC and
BCS-like states with a change in the density of the electronic
excitations. Now, the crossover between the strong coupling regime of a
polariton condensate and a weak coupling regime of a laser is caused by
a different phenomena. We will show in the Chapter 3 that the
decoherence processes drive this crossover.

The model studied by Eastham and Littlewood is a closed system model
with the dipole interaction between excitons and photons only. However,
in real microcavities other interactions are also present. There are
elastic collisions between excitons, exciton interactions with phonons
and impurities and radiative decay to modes different that the cavity
mode. Excitons are also subject to pumping and the photon field decay
from the cavity. All these processes would cause the decoherence of the
coherent state favoured by the major exciton-photon interaction. The
relative strength of these processes with respect to the light-matter
interaction will determine the regime in the cavity. In a strong
coupling regime all other interactions are very small in comparison to
the dipole interaction, while in the opposite, weak-coupling regime the
other interactions are comparable to the exciton-photon coupling.

In this work we would like to address the problem of the influence of
the decoherence processes on the polariton condensate. Decoherence can
drive this system through phase transitions. Thus, we would like to
study different regimes as the decoherence is changed for a range of
excitation densities. This will firstly allow us to study the stability
of the polariton condensate to various decoherence processes, and then
to establish a crossover between an ideal polariton condensate and a
laser.

In order to establish the connection between the polariton condensate
and the laser we will first review the basic properties and a quantum
theory of the laser.

#### 1.5 Laser

Photon laser is a weak-coupling regime phenomenon in which, according to
the Fermi golden rule, the rate of transition is determined by the
squared matrix element of the perturbation between the initial and final
states. In a laser an ensemble of atoms (excitons, electron and holes)
interacts with a photon field confined in the cavity. This interaction
causes transitions between two electronic levels in the media stimulated
by the photon field and thus proportional to the number of photons in
the cavity. Stimulated emission, proportional also to the number of
atoms in an upper state, results in emission of a photon with the same
phase as the photon which causes the transition and is thus coherent
with the cavity mode. Stimulated absorption results in an absorption of
the cavity mode photon and is proportional to the number of atoms in the
lower state. The transition from the upper to the lower level can also
be caused by vacuum fluctuations and is called spontaneous emission. It
causes the emission of the photon with a random phase and is thus
incoherent with the photon mode in the cavity. Spontaneous emission is
small in comparison to the stimulated emission if many photons are
present in the cavity with a ratio 1:n, where n is the number of photons
in the cavity mode. In order to build up a macroscopic coherent
population of photons stimulated emission has to overcome absorption and
thus an inverted ensemble of atoms is necessary for a laser action. In
order to overcome the cavity losses, spontaneous emission and all other
decay processes and to keep the population of atoms inverted, a
sufficiently strong pumping mechanism has to be applied.

The pumping mechanism and other decoherence processes acting on atoms
are strong, comparable to the interaction with light. Thus lasers
operate in the regime, where the coherent polarisation of the media is
very heavily damped and the atomic coherence is very much reduced. A
coherent photon field, oscillating at bare cavity mode frequency, is the
only order parameter in the system. The above properties define the
regime considered by all laser theories.

The quantum theory of a laser was developed in the sixties using the
quantum Langevin equations, equations of motion for the density matrix
or master equations [ 46 ] . We will present the quantum Langevin
equations’ formulation developed by Haken [ 47 , 48 ] as it can be
easily connected to the formulation of polariton condensate developed by
Eastham and Littlewood.

A laser is described as an open system interacting with an environment.
The system consists of an ensemble of two-level oscillators dipole
interacting with a cavity mode. The Hamiltonian for the system is given
by the equation ( 1.14 ). All other processes are treated as an
environment which cause decoherence, dissipation and pumping of the
energy. These processes are of a different physical nature, depending on
the material, and their exact details are not important for the general
laser theory. They can be modelled as baths of harmonic oscillators,
interacting with the system in a way that would give the same effect as
the original interactions. These baths are assumed to be very large in
comparison with the system and thus not changed by the system. The laser
Hamiltonian can be written in a general form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a system Hamiltonian given by equation ( 1.14 ). @xmath
describes the interactions between the system and its baths

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

while @xmath is a Hamiltonian for the baths

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the bosonic creation and annihilation
operators, respectively, for the baths. The first term in equation (
1.17 ) gives the decay of the photon field from the cavity. The second
term describes incoherent pumping of atoms, while the third term
describes nonradiative recombinations or spontaneous emission to the
modes other than the cavity mode. The fourth term gives rise to all the
decoherence processes which do not destroy excitations like collisions,
phonons or impurity scattering. The first three terms in equation ( 1.17
), apart from fluctuations, give rise to the flow of an energy through
the system. In order to obtain a dissipation of the energy from the
system the baths need to be kept at a positive temperature whereas to
model the pumping process the bath must be at negative temperature which
correspond to the ensemble of inverted harmonic oscillators.

From the Hamiltonian ( 1.16 ), using some approximations, it is possible
to derive the quantum Langevin equations for the system operators or
density matrix, where the influence of the baths would be simplified. We
will present this procedure for the field operator only, as the
derivation for the atomic operators would follow in a similar manner.

The Heisenberg equations of motion for the field and its bath
annihilation operators are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Integrating the equation ( 1.20 ) we obtain the following equation for
the bath operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting equation ( 1.21 ) into equation ( 1.19 ) we obtain the
following integro-differential equation for the field operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The third term in equation ( 1.22 ) does not depend on the field
operators and acts as a random fluctuating force. The forth term is in
general quite complicated and connects the behaviour of the field
operator at time @xmath with its past. In laser theory this term is
simplified using the following approximations:

-   There is a smooth dense spectrum of oscillator frequencies.

-   The coupling constant of the system to the bath and the density of
    states for the bath are smooth, slowly varying functions of the
    frequency of the oscillators.

-   The time scales for the bath degrees of freedom are much shorter
    than for the system degrees of freedom, so that there is no memory
    in the system, and the state of the system does not depend on its
    past. It is the so-called Markov approximation.

Transforming @xmath and using the above approximations, the last term in
equation ( 1.22 ) can be simplified:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a density of states for the bath. Introducing
the following abbreviation for the fluctuating force

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the final equation for the field operator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the same procedure it is possible to derive similar equations
of motion for the atomic operators. The equation for the atomic
polarisation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for the atomic population inversion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the densities of states for the
appropriate baths.

All the interactions with an environment together with the distribution
of energies @xmath due to disorder, give additional broadening to the
natural linewidth of the system. This broadening can be homogeneous or
inhomogeneous depending on its physical origin.

Inhomogeneous broadening takes place when the optical transition
energies are split (in the case of degeneracies) or shifted in a
different way for different sites. This broadening has a Gaussian
distribution and can be included into the model by setting the two-level
oscillators energies @xmath to be Gaussian distributed around some mean
value. The physical origin of this broadening depends on the material
used for a laser medium. It can be caused by the fluctuations in
thickness of a quantum well and alloying concentration or presence of
impurities inserted at non-equivalent lattice sites.

The homogeneous broadening corresponds to the situation, where all sites
are broadened in the same way. It can be caused by collisions with
phonons or impurities, or lattice vibrations which are fast in
comparison to the laser process. This broadening can only be modelled by
the means of appropriate dynamic baths.

The influence of baths in the Heisenberg equations of motion, after the
approximations described in this section, manifests itself as decay
constants for the photon field and the polarisation independent of time
and frequency, a pump constant for inversion, and the random fluctuating
forces (noise). The mean values of the noise terms are zero. Thus in the
mean-field approximation equations ( 1.24 ) - ( 1.26 ) would have only
appropriate decay constants and the random forces would disappear. The
atomic equations could be summed to obtain the equation for the total
inversion @xmath , and a total polarisation @xmath . If we then rescale
these equations by the number of atoms in the cavity N, introducing a
rescaled photon field @xmath , polarisation @xmath and inversion @xmath
it will become apparent that the deterministic terms are of order @xmath
, while the noise terms are all of order @xmath . In realistic systems
the number of atoms is very large and thus the noise terms are small
compared with the deterministic terms. In a limit where @xmath the noise
terms become zero and the mean-field approach is exact.

In order to study a regime below the lasing threshold, where the
macroscopic coherent fields are absent, and also to determine the
linewidth of the laser light, fluctuations above mean-field have to be
included. Most of the other properties of lasers above threshold can be
derived using the mean-field approximation, since the number of atoms is
always very large.

#### 1.6 BEC and Lasing

The properties of a laser can be derived from the Hamiltonian ( 1.16 )
with large interactions with an environment. If in the same Hamiltonian
we set the coupling constants between the system and the environment to
zero, we obtain Hamiltonian ( 1.14 ) of which the ground state was shown
by Eastham and Littlewood to be a polariton condensate. Thus by varying
the magnitude of the coupling constants between the system and the baths
in the Hamiltonian ( 1.16 ) we should be able to study all different
phases driven by the decoherence. This should allow us to check the
stability of the polariton condensation to the interactions with the
outside world at a small coupling strength, and to establish the
connection between polariton condensation and lasers as the decoherence
is increased.

In Chapter 2 we will show that the Langevin equations ( 1.24 ) - ( 1.26
), widely used in laser theories, cannot be used to establish this
connection. We will show that the time(frequency) independent decay
constants are critical in these equations and even at arbitrarily small
decoherence strength lead to completely different solutions from those
in the absence of the environment. We will give physical insight why the
approximate treatment of the baths, in the manner of equations ( 1.24 )
- ( 1.26 ), gives non-physical answers in some regimes. In Chapter 3 we
use Green’s function techniques, similar to Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory
of gapless superconductivity, to treat the influence of the environment
in the self-consistent way and to study different regimes as the
decoherence is changed. Finally, in Chapter 4 we summarise the
conclusions and give an account of the work still in progress as well as
possible future developments.

### Chapter 2 BEC and Lasing - Langevin Equations

In this Chapter we consider the Langevin equations derived for the laser
system in Section 1.5 . These equations become the equations of motions
for the isolated system studied by Eastham and Littlewood when the
coupling to the environment is zero. Firstly we show that these
equations in a steady state lead to the same solutions obtained by
Eastham and Littlewood using path-integral methods. Thus the equation of
motion is yet another method of studying the polariton condensate but
more importantly it brings a connection to the laser equations. We then
consider the Langevin equations with a finite coupling to the
environment and show that the fact the decay constants are independent
of time (frequency) is critical in these equations and even at
arbitrarily small decoherence strength lead to completely different
solutions than in the absence of an environment. This criticality is
however non-physical and arises only due to the approximations used in
deriving the Langevin equations.

#### 2.1 Mean-Field Langevin Equations

The Langevin equations for the laser system ( 1.24 ) - ( 1.26 ) after
the mean-field approximation take the following form:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the photon field, the polarisation
and the inversion of a two-level oscillator. At zero temperature @xmath
means the quantum-mechanical average in the ground state of the system.
By definition the coherent state is an eigenstate of a bosonic
annihilation operator and thus the average of this operator in the
coherent state is equal to the corresponding eigenvalue which is
non-zero for an occupied state. The average of an annihilation operator
in an normal state is however zero. Thus the mean-field equations ( 2.1
) - ( 2.3 ) describe the behaviour of the coherent part of the photon
field and polarisation. As we discussed in Section 1.5 they are exact in
the limit @xmath for an isolated condensate and laser system above the
laser threshold.

Equation ( 2.2 ) can be rearranged to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting this expression into equation ( 2.3 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation is a differential equation which connects the coherent
polarisation and the inversion of the two-level oscillator. By setting
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath to zero in the equations ( 2.1 ) - ( 2.3 ) we
can obtain the Heisenberg equations of motion for the isolated system
studied by Eastham and Littlewood. Let us first consider the isolated
case.

#### 2.2 Isolated System

The equation ( 2.5 ) for the isolated system becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The polarisation of the medium is connected with the transitions between
levels and is equal to the off-diagonal terms of the system density
matrix or the Green function. For the coherent polarisation to have a
non-zero value, the system must be in a mixture of lower and upper
states. When the inversion is exactly 1 (or -1), all atoms are in the
upper (or lower state) and thus the coherent polarisation must
disappear. This condition would be satisfied by constant in equation (
2.6 ) equalling unity and thus the relation between the coherent
polarisation and inversion would become

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The dependence of the coherent polarisation on the inversion is shown in
Figure 2.1 (blue curve). In the isolated condensate, unlike in lasers,
the coherent polarisation is present even without the population
inversion in the system (even for @xmath ). We are interested in the
steady state solutions to these equations in which the coherent fields
oscillate at the constant frequency:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Substituting both the Ansatz ( 2.8 ) and equation ( 2.7 ) into equations
( 2.1 ) and ( 2.2 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From equations ( 2.9 ) and ( 2.10 ) after rescaling the coherent field
by @xmath ( @xmath ) we obtain the following equation for the coherent
field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equations ( 2.9 ) - ( 2.12 ) are exactly the same as the zero
temperature equations obtained by Eastham and Littlewood [ 40 , 38 ]
using path-integral methods and describe the polariton condensate for a
wide range of densities. The structure of the equation ( 2.12 ) is
similar to the BCS gap equation.

#### 2.3 System with Decoherence

In this Section we will examine the case when interactions with the
environment are present. We are again interested in the steady state
solutions of the equation ( 2.5 ). It can be shown that the only steady
state solution to this equation occurs when

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the most ideal case when we have neither spontaneous emission nor any
other decoherence process in the system and the only interactions with
the environment are pumping and the decay of the cavity field we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see from equations ( 2.13 ) and ( 2.14 ) that for an arbitrarily
small strength of the interaction with the environment we obtain
completely different solutions to that given by equation ( 2.7 ) for an
isolated system. It can be shown that the solutions for an isolated
condensate would decay out when interactions with the outside world are
present. Even for an arbitrary small interaction with the environment in
order to obtain a non-zero coherent polarisation, the inversion @xmath
must be grater than zero which means the system must be inverted. Figure
2.1 shows the comparison between the isolated condensate (blue curve)
and one interacting with an environment (red curves). The solid red
curve shows the most ideal case when the only interactions are pumping
and the decay of the cavity field. Even in this situation for an
arbitrarily small pumping the system goes from the blue to the solid red
curve. The dashed red curve shows the example when other decoherence
processes are present for the case where @xmath and @xmath . This is
still a very small decoherence. In a usual operating regime for a laser
@xmath and thus the coherent polarisation would be very small for all
values of the inversion.

The frequency at which the coherent fields oscillate for an isolated
condensate can be obtained from the density equation ( 1.15 ). In
general this frequency has a very complicated form but at low densities
approaches the polariton energy given by equation ( 1.13 ) and is
dependent on the coupling strength between matter and light, @xmath for
all densities. In the case where the interactions with the environment
are included within the Langevin equations ( 1.24 ) - ( 1.26 ) this
frequency can be calculated by comparing the real and the imaginary
parts of equations ( 2.1 ) and ( 2.2 ). In the case of uniform energies
@xmath and coupling constant @xmath it takes a simple form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which in the case of the usual laser operating condition @xmath leads to
@xmath . Again it can be seen that even for an arbitrarily small
coupling to the environment this frequency is completely different to
the one obtained for an isolated condensate. Most importantly it does
not depend on @xmath . Thus we can conclude that within the Langevin
equation approach with constant decay rates even for arbitrary small
coupling to the environment the system goes to the weak light-matter
coupling regime. This surely cannot be physical.

#### 2.4 Conclusions

We have shown that the Langevin equations with constant decay rates even
for an arbitrary small decoherence strength lead to completely
different, essentially laser-type, solutions than for the isolated
system.

In this work we would like to stress that this criticality is not a
physical one and results purely from the approximations applied in
deriving the Langevin equations for this system. This conclusion seems
not to be widely appreciated and even in a relatively recent publication
[ 49 ] similar decay constants in the equations of motion for the
coherently driven excitonic insulator have been used, leading to the
conclusion that the excitonic insulator phase cannot exist for an
arbitrary small decoherence.

Let us get some physical insight into this problem. In order to obtain
the Langevin equations ( 1.24 ) - ( 1.26 ) all the baths were averaged
out before the essential dipole interaction was taken into account. The
ideal condensate has a gap in the density of states which would still be
present for small decoherence. It is clear that the coherent fields in
this regime cannot be damped just by constant decay rates independent of
frequency as there are no available states to decay to. As the
decoherence is increased this gap gets smaller and finally is completely
suppressed causing the coherent fields to be strongly damped. In order
to describe this behaviour the decoherence processes have to be treated
self-consistently. The baths have to be averaged out in such a way that
the essential interactions and thus the gap in the density of states is
taken into account.

The equations of motion with decay constants independent of time and
frequency, although perfectly correct in describing the laser where the
decoherence processes are very large, cannot be used to study the regime
with a small decoherence when the gap in the density of states is
present nor to establish a connection between an isolated condensate and
a laser.

In the next chapter we present an alternative method which takes all
this essential physics into account. By analogy with superconductivity
we use Green function methods similar to the Abrikosov and Gor’kov
theory of gapless superconductivity and treat the decoherence in a
self-consistent way which allow us to move smoothly between an isolated
condensate and other regimes driven by the decoherence.

### Chapter 3 Self-consistent Green’s-Function Approach

We study the behaviour of a system which consists of a photon mode
dipole coupled to a medium of two-level oscillators in a microcavity in
the presence of the decoherence. We consider two types of decoherence
processes which are analogous to magnetic and non-magnetic impurities in
superconductors. We study different phases of this system as the
decoherence strength and the excitation density is changed. For a low
decoherence we obtain a polariton condensate with comparable excitonic
and photonic parts at low densities and a BCS-like state with bigger
photon component due to the fermionic phase space filling effect at high
densities. In both cases there is a large gap in the density of states.
As the decoherence is increased the gap is broadened and suppressed,
resulting in a gapless condensate and finally a suppression of the
coherence in a low density regime and a laser at high density limit. A
crossover between these regimes is studied in a self-consistent way
similar to the Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory of gapless superconductivity
[ 8 ] .

#### 3.1 Model

The model we consider in this work is schematically shown in Figure 3.1
.

It consists of a system of two-level oscillators dipole coupled to one
confined cavity mode as described in the Section 1.4.2 . This system is
then subject to various decoherence, pumping and damping processes
described, as in laser theory (Section 1.5 ), as baths of harmonic
oscillators coupled to the system in a way that gives the same effect as
the original interactions.

This model includes:

-   major Coulomb interaction between the electron and hole within
    exciton,

-   phase space filling effect,

-   disorder in the material (inhomogeneous broadening of excitonic
    energies),

-   various types of decoherence effects,

and does not include:

-   screening,

-   Coulomb interactions between excitons.

Thus this model:

-   gives a very good description of tightly bound, Frenkel - type of
    excitons localised by disorder or bound on impurities, molecular
    excitons in organic materials or atoms in the solid state,

-   gives a qualitative description within a mean-field approximation
    for other types of excitons like Wannier excitons or excitons
    propagating in a sample.

The second application follows from the fact that the dipole interaction
between excitons and photons is a dominant interaction at high
excitation densities (large photon fields). In the case of a driven
excitonic system Schmitt-Rink at al [ 24 ] pointed out that for a very
large pumping, and thus high excitation densities, the Coulomb
interaction is just a very minor correction to the dominant dipole
coupling. They also state that in the absence of the Coulomb interaction
their results for propagating electrons and holes are equivalent to
those obtained for an ensemble of independent two-level oscillators as
optical transitions with different k decouple. In the case of low
densities the dominant Coulomb interaction, that between an electron and
hole within the same exciton, is taken into account in our model. All
other Coulomb interactions are much weaker and in any case are found
within the mean-field techniques of Keldysh [ 3 ] - [ 5 ] for exciton
condensation to give rise to a formation of a coherent excitonic
insulator phase and thus would only enhance the dipole coupling.
Therefore the localised two-level oscillator model can be applied to
obtain a qualitative description of the physical behaviour even for the
propagated or weekly bound excitons. It would give similar predictions
to the model based on propagating electrons and holes with Coulomb
interactions treated within mean-field approximations. It does not
include screening and other non mean-fields effects.

We would like to stress that in this work we intend to study a very
general model of the media and consider in details the influence of
various types of decoherence processes in microcavity and different
phases induced by the decoherence and the excitation density. At this
stage we do not want to model any particular media with its complex
interactions which would only make the general picture less clear. The
specific details of the particular media could however be easily
included into our model, we will discuss this possibility in the
Sections 4.1.3 and 4.1.4 .

We consider the following Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath describes an ensemble of two-level oscillators dipole coupled to
one cavity mode and is exactly the same as the Hamiltonian ( 1.14 )
studied for an isolated condensate by Eastham and Littlewood [ 40 , 38 ]
. For the detailed description of this Hamiltonian see Section 1.4.2 .
@xmath , similarly as in the laser theory described in the Section 1.5
(equation ( 1.17 )), contains all interactions with an environment. In
our work we include a more general coupling to the environment than in
the laser theory, allowing the interactions with an upper level to be
different that with a lower level (the fourth and the fifth terms in the
equation ( 3.3 ) instead of the fourth term in the equation ( 1.17 )):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The total number of excitations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the sum of photons and excited two-level oscillators, is
conserved in a steady state. The @xmath is a Hamiltonian for the baths
as in the equation ( 1.18 ). In the Hamiltonian ( 3.1 ) we have not
included terms that couple different sites (i.e. @xmath with @xmath ) as
their influence would be small in comparison to the coupling within the
same site.

The second term in equation ( 3.3 ) describes an incoherent pumping of
two-level oscillators. The third term contains all the processes which
cause the transition from the upper to the lower level and thus destroy
the electronic excitations such as the decay to photon modes different
to the cavity mode. Finally, the fourth and the fifth terms describe all
the decoherence processes which act on upper and lower levels
respectively but do not change the total number of excitations in the
cavity, for example collisions and interactions with phonons and
impurities. Thus these four terms contain all the essential groups of
decoherence processes in the media. The first term gives rise to the
decay of the photon field from the cavity.

The fourth and the fifth term in equation ( 3.3 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term in expression ( 3.5 ) with the second and the third terms
in the equation ( 3.3 ) describe the part of a total interaction which
acts on the upper and lower levels with opposite sign. It can be shown
that these processes are analogous to the pair-breaking, magnetic
impurities in superconductors. We will refer to them later as the type 1
decoherence processes. The exact origin of these interactions depends on
the details of the media. Physically these processes correspond to
potentials which vary rapidly in space (on the lengthscale of excitons)
or in time. They can be high energy phonons, collisions or impurities.
In the case of electrons and holes even the normal impurities could be
pair-breaking processes as the electric charge of the impurity acts with
the opposite sign on the electron and the hole [ 7 ] .

The second term in expression ( 3.5 ) contains interactions which are
the same for both levels and are analogous to normal, non-magnetic,
impurities in superconductors. We will call them type 2 processes. This
processes correspond to potentials which vary very slowly in space in
comparison to the size of excitons or in time. They do not have any
pair-breaking effects and lead only to a broadening of energies.

Since the upper and the lower level are different and contain fermions
with an opposite charge both kinds of interactions would always be
present. In addition to these two types of processes the energies of the
two-level oscillators, @xmath , can be inhomogeneously broadened due to
fluctuations in the thickness of quantum well and alloying concentration
or presence of impurities inserted at non-equivalent lattice sites.

The second and the third terms in equation ( 3.3 ), describing the
incoherent pumping and dumping respectively can, in addition to having
the pair-breaking effect, change the number of electronic excitations in
the cavity and together with the decay of the cavity photon mode cause
the flow of energy through the system. In the steady state, despite this
energy flow, the total number of excitations is constant in time and
proportional to the ratio between the pumping and the damping processes
while the absolute magnitude of all the processes gives the decoherence
strength. For very big pumping and photon decay rates the system would
be out of equilibrium.

In this work we present only the influence of the decoherence on the
system. The implications of a non-equilibrium system is work in
progress. The equilibrium assumption can be completely justified if the
system is pumped slowly, with a rate slower than the thermalisation
rate. This does not put any restrictions on the strength of the
decoherence nor the density of excitations. The pair-breaking processes
described by the first term in expression ( 3.5 ) give exactly the same
decoherence effects as the pumping and damping of two-level systems
preserving equilibrium for any strength of the interaction. The ratio
between the pumping and all the damping processes which can be arbitrary
big even for small absolute values of both will be expressed in terms of
the excitation density @xmath . For rapidly pumped systems, where the
thermal distribution of quasiparticles cannot be assumed, we study only
the influence of the decoherence. Non-equilibrium techniques would have
to be applied to describe all the physics. We will address this problem
later.

The analogy between superconductivity and an excitonic insulator was
noticed and used in a pioneering work of Keldysh [ 3 , 4 ] and explored
later on by others. This analogy was also stressed by Eastham and
Littlewood [ 40 , 38 ] in their work on polariton condensation. The
analogy to superconductivity appears to be useful also in our study of
the influence of the decoherence on the polariton condensate. We can
easily show that the type 1 decoherence processes acting on the
microcavity condensate are analogous to the magnetic impurities in
superconductors while the type 2 processes to the non-magnetic ones.
Thus we can use similar methods to that used by Abrikosov and Gor’kov in
their theory of gapless superconductivity [ 8 ] .

#### 3.2 Green’s-Function Formulation

We use the self-consistent Green’s function techniques similar to the
Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory of gapless superconductivity [ 8 , 50 , 51
] . Introducing the Nambu notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

all the Green functions are 2 x 2 matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in the BCS theory. @xmath and @xmath are the normal, diagonal Green’s
functions which give the population distribution of the two-level
oscillators while @xmath and @xmath are the anomalous, off-diagonal,
ones which give the coherent polarisation of the media and are non-zero
only in a coherent state.

Since the overall phase of a coherent state is arbitrary, we can choose
the @xmath to be real and thus the Fourier transform of the zero order
Green’s function, which is the Green’s function for the Hamiltonian
@xmath (equation ( 3.2 )) is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the usual Pauli spin matrices. We can introduce the
self-energy @xmath through the Dyson equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Green’s function for the whole Hamiltonian @xmath ,
equation ( 3.1 ). Now we can write the total Green’s function @xmath in
the same form as the zero-order Green’s function @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

using the frequency dependent, renormalised @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

In this work we consider the decoherence processes given by the
expression ( 3.5 ). The self-energy for the type 1 processes (the first
term in the expression ( 3.5 )) in a Born approximation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

while for the type 2 processes (the second term in the expression ( 3.5
)) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the Markov approximation and assuming that all coupling constants
of the system to the baths, as well as the baths density of states, are
very broad slowly varying functions of frequency we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . @xmath are densities of states for the
respective baths.

Substituting equations ( 3.10 ) or ( 3.11 ) into equation ( 3.6 ) and
then comparing with the equation ( 3.7 ) we can obtain for both cases
three equations determining the renormalised frequency, energy and
coherent photon field

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We then have a self-consistency equation for the off-diagonal part of
the Green’s function @xmath which is equal to the average coherent
polarisation of the media

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both order parameters, the coherent polarisation and the coherent photon
field, are connected through equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From equation ( 3.16 ) we can see that the ratio between the two order
parameters is essentially determined by the chemical potential, which in
the steady state can be calculated from the equation ( 3.4 ). A number
of electronic excitations refered to later as inversion can be obtained
from the diagonal elements of the Green’s function and is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the equations ( 3.12 ) - ( 3.14 ) we can determine the
renormalised @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as a functions of bare @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In the case of the type 1 decoherence
processes we obtain for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

while for the type 2 decoherence processes we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where for both cases

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the equations ( 3.18 ) - ( 3.20 ) or ( 3.21 ) - ( 3.23 )
into equation ( 3.15 ), summing over the Matsubara frequencies and using
equation ( 3.16 ) we can determine the coherent polarisation @xmath and
the coherent photon field @xmath as functions of the system parameters
@xmath , @xmath , decoherence parameter @xmath and chemical potential
@xmath . The chemical potential can be then obtained from the equation
for the number of excitations ( 3.4 ). The integrals over the Matsubara
frequencies at zero temperature in the equations ( 3.15 ) and ( 3.15 )
as well as the determination of the chemical potential from the equation
( 3.4 ) have to be performed numerically.

Using the above method we could determine the ground state properties of
the system such as the ground state average of the coherent field, of
the coherent polarisation and of the inversion as well as the chemical
potential. Also the excitation spectrum, i.e the density of states, can
be obtained from the diagonal part of the Green function of a real
frequency. Considering the analytical continuation of @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are the Matsubara and the real frequencies
respectively, and thus using the usual substitution @xmath , we obtain
the relationship between the Green function @xmath and the density of
states @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in our case would take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath which can be obtained from the equations ( 3.18 ) - ( 3.20 ) or (
3.21 ) - ( 3.23 ) by the following substitution @xmath . It can be shown
by analysing equation ( 3.26 ) that the system of two-level oscillators
with uniform energies, @xmath , in the presence of the type 1 processes
has a gap, @xmath , in the density of states of magnitude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The major difference between our calculations and the Abrikosov and
Gor’kov theory [ 8 ] is that we have two order parameters connected
through the chemical potential which needs to be determined. We use a
different form of the density of states for the two-level oscillators
than in their theory. Instead of a flat distribution of energies from
@xmath to @xmath used in the Abrikosov and Gor’kov method we first
perform the calculations for the degenerate case where all two-level
oscillators have the same energy @xmath and then we use a realistic
Gaussian distribution of energies, present in the real microcavities. To
account for these differences we need to include the additional, third
equation for renormalised @xmath not present in the original Abrikosov
and Gor’kov method and the constraint equation for @xmath . In the
Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory they consider free propagating electrons
with momentum k over which all the summations are performed and the
external impurities mix these k states. In our model of the localised
two-level systems the summations are performed over the sides where the
two-level oscillators can be present and it is assumed that the
interactions with the environment do not mix these sides.

To perform the calculations we rescale the coherent fields by @xmath and
consequently the inversion and the number of excitations by @xmath
introducing the excitation density @xmath . In this terminology the
minimum @xmath corresponds to no photons and no electronic excitations
in the system. The condition @xmath in the absence of photons would
correspond to all two-level oscillators in excited states, thus to the
maximum inversion.

#### 3.3 Results

We calculate first the ground state coherent field @xmath , the coherent
polarisation @xmath , the inversion and the chemical potential as
functions of the decoherence strength @xmath and the excitation density
@xmath . Then we study the excitation spectrum of the system for
different regimes. The ground state properties and the excitation
spectrum allow us to obtain a phase diagram for different excitation
densities and decoherence strengths. We consider the influence of the
type 1 and the type 2 decoherence processes and the inhomogeneous
broadening of exciton energies.

##### 3.3.1 Type 1 (Pair-Breaking) Decoherence Processes

We first consider in detail the influence of the type 1 decoherence
processes on the system of two-level oscillators with uniform energies
@xmath .

###### The Ground State - Coherent Fields

To examine the ground state properties of the system we first study the
mean value of the annihilation operator of the field and the
polarisation. This mean is non-zero only in a coherent state. Figure 3.2
(upper panel) shows the behaviour of the coherent part of the photon
field @xmath as the decoherence strength @xmath is changed for different
excitation densities @xmath .

For small values of @xmath , up to some critical value @xmath , @xmath
is practically unchanged while for @xmath the coherent field is damped
quite rapidly with the increasing decoherence strength. This critical
value of the decoherence strength, @xmath is proportional to @xmath ,
suggesting that for higher excitation densities the system is more
resistant to the decoherence processes. At low excitation densities,
where @xmath , there is a second critical value of the decoherence
strength, @xmath , where both coherent fields are sharply damped to
zero. As the excitation density is increased, precisely at @xmath ,
@xmath moves to infinity and it does not exist for @xmath - coherent
fields although damped are never completely suppressed.

The behaviour of the electronic inversion, given by the equation ( 3.17
), is presented in Fig. 3.2 (middle panel). In this region of the
decoherence strength where @xmath is damped the inversion increases. At
low excitation densities ( @xmath ) the inversion approaches @xmath for
@xmath and stays constant as @xmath is further increased. At high
excitation densities ( @xmath ) the inversion asymptotically approaches
zero with increasing decoherence strength.

The ratio of coherent polarisation to coherent field @xmath is presented
in Fig. 3.2 (lower panel). For an isolated system, where @xmath , this
ratio depends on the excitation density. The condensate becomes more
photon like as @xmath is increased due to the phase space filling
effect. For finite @xmath , at a given excitation density, this ratio
decreases with increasing @xmath meaning that the coherent polarisation
is more heavily damped than the coherent photon field by the type 1
decoherence processes. At @xmath this ratio becomes undefined for @xmath
when both coherent fields vanish.

###### Excitation Spectrum and the Phase Diagram

Now we examine the density of states for the system in different regimes
for different values of @xmath and @xmath . In Fig. 3.3 we present the
density of states for @xmath and six different values of @xmath .

In the absence of decoherence (Fig. 3.3 a) we have two sharp peaks at
two quasi-particle energies, @xmath , given by equation ( 3.24 ) for the
uniform case ( @xmath ). As @xmath increases these two peaks broaden,
which causes the decrease in the magnitude of the energy gap (Fig. 3.3 b
and c). The magnitude of the energy gap in the uniform case is equal to
@xmath , which is given in more detail in equation ( 3.27 ). Finally,
precisely at @xmath (shown in Fig. 3.2 ), these two broadened peaks join
together and the gap closes (Fig. 3.3 d). When the decoherence strength
is increased further (Fig. 3.3 e) these two peaks overlap more and the
shape of the gapless density of states changes. For @xmath the coherent
fields are suppressed, thus Fig 3.3 f shows the normal state density of
states in the absence of coherence.

There are clearly three different phases depending on the decoherence
strength @xmath and the excitations density @xmath . In the Fig. 3.4 we
present a phase diagram for the system.

The phase boundaries are defined by @xmath and @xmath for different
values of @xmath .

Below the solid line, for small decoherence, we have a phase in which
both coherent fields and the energy gap in the density of states are
present. In this region coherent fields are protected by the energy gap
and remain practically unchanged while the energy gap narrows as the
decoherence is increased. At low densities within this phase we have a
BEC of polaritons with the electronic and photonic parts comparable in
size. At high densities we have a BCS-type of condensate with photon
component increasing with the excitation density. Despite the
predominantly photon-like character of this phase at very high
densities, the coherence of the media is still large and this phase can
be distinguish from a laser by the presence of a gap in the density of
states (Fig 3.5 - right panel). The crossover between high and low
densities is a smooth evolution and there are no rapid phase
transitions.

Between the solid and dashed lines there is a phase where the coherent
fields are present without the energy gap in the density of states. This
phase exists for all values of the decoherence parameter at the
excitation densities @xmath . The coherent fields are no longer
protected by the gap and get damped as the decoherence is increased. The
coherent polarisation is more heavily damped than the coherent field.
Within this phase we have at low densities a gapless, light-matter
condensate, analogous to gapless superconductivity whilst at very high
densities we have essentially the laser system.

Finally, above the dashed line there is a phase where the coherent
fields are completely suppressed.

###### Crossover to Laser

The features of the second phase (between the solid and the dashed
lines) in Fig. 3.4 at high @xmath are essentially the same as those of
the laser system. The laser operates in the regime of a very strong
decoherence, comparable with the light-matter interaction itself. For a
sufficiently large ratio of pumping and damping processes, which sets
the excitation density in the cavity, even in the presence of such a
large decoherence the laser action can be observed. The coherent
polarisation in a laser system is much more heavily damped than the
photon field and the gap in the density of states is not observed. Thus
the laser is a regime of our system for very large @xmath and @xmath .

Laser theories, due to the approximations on which they are based, can
only be valid in a regime where the gap in the density of states is
suppressed and thus for a large decoherence. At the time when these
theories were proposed they were deemed sufficient as most lasers
operate in such a regime. Miniaturisation and improvements in the
quality of optical cavities in recent years can lead to a large
suppression of decoherence in a laser media. For small decoherence and
very small pumping in comparison to decay processes, when @xmath is much
smaller then @xmath , the laser theories would predict a lack of
coherence while the real ground state of the system would be a more
matter-like condensate. Thus an extension of laser theories to account
for the gap in the excitation spectrum and coherence in a media is
necessary.

When both the gap and the coherence in a media are taken into account,
in contrast to a traditional laser, the coherent photon field can be
present without the population inversion in the media. The polariton
condensate is thus an example of a laser without inversion.

It has to be pointed out that the distinction between a laser and a Bose
condensate of polaritons is not a particularly clear one. In the laser,
coherence in the media (manifested by the coherent polarisation)
although small, is not completely suppressed so the laser can be seen as
a gapless condensate with a more photon-like character. One of the
possible distinctions between BEC and laser could be an existence of an
energy gap in the excitation spectrum.

##### 3.3.2 Type 2 (Non-Pair-Breaking) Decoherence Processes

We have also studied the type 2 decoherence processes, analogous to the
non-magnetic impurities in superconductors, which act in an exactly the
same way on the upper and the lower levels of the two-level oscillator
(the second term in the expression 3.5 ). We found that these processes
give rise to the broadening of energies of the two-level system and do
not have any pair-breaking effects. In the Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory,
due to the flat density of sates used in the calculations, the
non-magnetic impurities do not influence the superconducting state at
all. In the case of uniform or realistic, Gaussian distributed energies
of the two level oscillators the type 2 processes have some quantitative
influence on the coherent fields and the gap but cannot cause any phase
transitions. We now perform the self-consistent method described in
Section 3.2 for the type 2 decoherence processes. The results are shown
as dotted lines in onset of Fig. 3.2 and in Fig. 3.3 .

###### The Ground State - Coherent Fields

In the inset of Fig. 3.2 we present for comparison the coherent photon
field (upper panel), the inversion (middle panel), and the ratio between
the coherent polarisation and the coherent photon field (lower panel) in
the presence of the type 1 (solid line) and the type 2 (dotted line)
decoherence processes for two excitation densities @xmath and @xmath .
It can be noticed that the sharp phase transitions at @xmath and @xmath
discussed for the type 1 decoherence processes are not present for the
case of the type 2 processes. With the increase of the decoherence
strength from zero the coherent fields are slightly damped and they
slowly decrease, asymptotically approaching zero at low excitation
densities ( @xmath ) or a constant value at high densities ( @xmath ).
Although both coherent fields are damped the behaviour of their ratio
strongly depends on the excitation density. Since the type 2 processes
give rise to the broadening of energies, the behaviour of the ratio
@xmath depends on the position of the chemical potential with respect to
the energy distribution. Thus the type 2 processes can make the
condensate more photon or more exciton like depending on the parameters
of the system. The two different cases are presented in Fig. 3.2 .

###### Excitation Spectrum

The density of states in the presence of type 2 processes is shown in
Fig 3.3 (dotted lines) for the same parameters as were used in Section
3.3.1 for studying the influence of type 1 decoherence processes. It can
be noticed that, although the two quasiparticle peaks get very broad,
the gap is only slightly affected by the type 2 processes and is always
present. Even for much larger values of @xmath than presented in Fig 3.3
the gap is not suppressed. The gap in the density of states is present
until the coherent fields get completely suppressed. At high excitation
densities ( @xmath ) coherent fields are always present and thus the
density of states will have a gap for all values of the decoherence
strength.

Despite a different physical origin the type 2 processes give similar
effect as the inhomogeneous broadening of energy levels in the case of
an isolated system (see [ 40 , 38 ] ).

##### 3.3.3 Inhomogeneous Broadening of Energies

Finally, we study the influence of the type 1, pair-breaking processes
on the system of realistic, inhomogeneously broadened two-level
oscillators. We replace the summations over sites with integrals over
the energy distribution. We assume this distribution to be a Gaussian
with mean @xmath and variance @xmath .

Our results show that the Gaussian broadening of energies does not add
any qualitative difference to the uniform case. The coherent fields are,
as expected, slightly smaller than in the degenerate case but all the
regimes and transitions described in the Section 3.3.1 are also present
here. The critical values of decoherence strength, @xmath and @xmath are
slightly smaller and the energy gap narrower than in system without
energy broadening for the same parameters. Fig 3.5 shows the density of
states for the system of the inhomogeneously broadened two-level
oscillators with standard deviation @xmath for different values of the
type 1 decoherence strength at two different excitation densities.

The broadening of the density of states and the suppression of the
energy gap can be observed as @xmath is increased. The last curve in the
Fig 3.5 (left panel) shows the normal state density of states where the
coherent fields are suppressed. In the Fig 3.5 (right panel) where the
coherent fields are present for all the values of @xmath the last curve
has no signs of the gap.

As we have pointed out in Section 3.3.2 the type 2 decoherence processes
give similar effects as the inhomogeneous broadening of energy levels.
The difference is that the density of states in the presence of the type
2 processes has sharp boundaries. This is a result of the method which
is used to perform the calculations. It can be noticed that if the bath
operators for the type 2 processes, @xmath ’s in expression ( 3.5 ),
were just numbers, the second term in expression ( 3.5 ) could had been
included into the first term in equation ( 3.2 ) and would had just
given a random @xmath . In our calculations the @xmath ’s are operators
and we use a self-consistent Born approximation, which is not exact, and
makes errors in the tail of the distribution. Thus, because of the way
the calculations are done, the density of states produced always has
sharp boundaries.

#### 3.4 Conclusions

In this work we have studied the influence of two kinds of decoherence
processes and energy broadening on the system of interacting two-level
oscillators (atoms or excitons) with the photon mode in the cavity. We
have noticed that the widely used Langevin equations with the decay
constants independent of frequency cannot be used for a small
decoherence when gap in the density of states is present. We propose a
self-consistent method similar to the Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory of
gapless superconductivity [ 8 ] which allow us to study all regimes of
the system as the decoherence is changed from zero to large values and
for a wide range of excitation densities. At low excitations and small
decoherence we obtain a coupled matter-light condensate with a gap in
the density of states. As the decoherence is increased at low excitation
densities we obtain a gapless condensate and finally a complete
suppression of coherence. With an increase in the excitation density the
condensate becomes more photon like, but a large gap in the density of
states is present for a small decoherence strength. In the limit of a
very large excitation density and a large decoherence we reach a
gapless, laser-like regime in which the coherent polarisation is very
small in comparison with the coherent photon field.

We have shown that the polariton condensate, even in the presence of the
interactions with an environment, is protected by the energy gap and
thus should be observable if the decoherence is not too large. This gap
increases with an increase in the excitation density and thus, in
contrast to excitonic insulator, polariton condensate should be present
at high densities.

Our results suggest that, in contrast to lasers, a coherent light can be
generated without a population inversion. This work generalised the
existing laser theories to include the gap in the excitation spectrum
caused by the coherence in a media in the low decoherence regime.

We have studied separately the two types of decoherence processes in
order to understand their different influence on the system. Although in
the real cavities both decoherence processes and inhomogeneous
broadening of energies will be present, only the pair-breaking, type 1,
processes are responsible for the phase transitions and the suppression
of the gap in the density of states. The type 2 processes and the
inhomogeneous broadening of energies cannot on its own lead to the phase
transitions. However they would make the amplitude of the coherent
fields smaller and thus, in the presence of the pair-breaking processes,
would cause these transitions to be present at smaller decoherence
strength. For the quantitative analysis and the comparison with
experiments all the decoherence processes should be included.

We have treated all the decoherence processes in a phenomenological way
to study their qualitative influence on the general system. In the case
of a particular example, when the origin and the density of states for
the environment is known, it would be possible to perform more detailed
calculations. In general the bath propagators in the equations ( 3.8 )
and ( 3.9 ) would be frequency dependent and thus @xmath would depend on
the frequency as well. This frequency dependence of the coherent field,
as in an Eliashberg theory of superconductivity [ 52 , 53 ] , would have
to be included in the calculations.

In this work we have studied the influence of the decoherence on an
equilibrium, incoherently pumped system. However, in the same way it
would be possible to examine the influence of an environment on
coherently driven condensates discussed in the Section 1.3 . The
coherent photon field in the driven system is an external, fixed,
parameter and not a self-consistent field satisfying equation ( 3.15 ).
In contrast the gap in the density of states, proportional to the
coherent field amplitude, is present exactly as for an equilibrium
condensate. Thus the decoherence processes in the coherently driven
system should be treated in the same way as for an equilibrium
condensate described in this Chapter. In a recent paper [ 49 ] authors
have ignored this fact and performed the Langevin equation method with
the constant decay rates to study the stability of the driven excitonic
condensate concluding that the condensed phase will be destroyed due to
an arbitrarily small decoherence. In our opinion this is not physical
and results only from the performed approximations.

### Chapter 4 Conclusions and Future Directions

In this work we have developed a method to include general decoherence
effects in the systems with an energy gap in the excitation spectrum. We
have shown that the widely used Langevin equations with the constant,
frequency independent decay rates are not valid in the regime where the
gap is present. The decoherence has to be treated in a self-consistent
way similar to the Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory of gapless
superconductivity. We studied the general form of the interactions,
introducing pair-breaking and non-pair-breaking processes and thus our
theory is applicable to a wide range of systems. For more detailed
results, the particular origin of the interactions and thus the
particular density of states for the baths have to be taken into
account.

This method allows us to study the stability of the polariton
condensate. For low decoherence strength the condensate is protected by
the gap in the density of states. This gap is proportional to the
amplitude of the coherent photon field and thus is larger for higher
densities. As the decoherence is increased the gap gets smaller and
finally is completely suppressed.

Experiments on cavity polaritons which report the stimulated scattering
into the lower polariton branch [ 32 ] - [ 37 ] (see Section 1.4 ) are
performed at low densities to avoid the fermionic phase space filling
effect, so that two clear polariton peaks could be seen. For such
densities the gap in the excitation spectrum would be very small and
easily suppressed by the decoherence processes in the sample. Indeed
such a gap is not observed in the photoluminescence spectrum. The
attempt to increase the density of polaritons in these experiments
results not in the formation of the condensate but in a switching into
the weak-coupling regime and lasing.

This is not surprising since the increase in the density of polaritons
in these experiments is obtained by increasing the pumping of excitons.
As we discussed in Chapter 3 , the incoherent pumping is a pair-breaking
decoherence process and thus the increase in the pumping intensity
results in the increase of not only the density of excitons but also the
decoherence strength. As shown by Eastham and Littlewood [ 40 , 38 ] ,
the fermionic structure of excitons does not prevent condensation, even
at very high densities. Thus, in the current experiments it is not a
phase-space filling effect which lead to a laser as the pump intensity
is increased, but the increase in the decoherence strength. If the
polariton condensate is ever to be observed an increase in density
without an increase in decoherence is necessary.

The density of excitons is proportional to the ratio between the pumping
and the cavity decay rates. This ratio can be large even for small
values of both rates. Thus, in order to achieve high densities without
large decoherence the cavity decay rate must be small, which suggests
that experiments should concentrate on improving the quality of the
mirrors in microcavity systems.

The localised and tightly bound excitons, like excitons in disordered
quantum wells or Frenkel-type excitons in organic compands, seem to be
better candidates for observing the polariton condensate than the
high-quality GaAs quantum wells with weakly bound, delocalised excitons.
Static disorder is not a pair-breaking effect and would have a weaker
influence on the condensate than screening and ionisation in the case of
delocalised or weakly bound excitons.

Our method allows us to study different regimes as the decoherence and
the excitation density is changed and thus to examine the crossover from
a polariton condensate to a laser. The laser emerges from the polariton
condensate at high densities when the gap in the density of states
closes for large decoherence and thus is analogous to a gapless
superconductor. Our work generalises the existing laser theories to
include coherence effects in the media. When this coherence is included
the generation of a coherent photon field without population inversion
becomes possible.

In the case of coherently driven systems, in which a gap in the density
of states would be present, the decoherence processes have to be also
treated in a self-consistent way, similar to that described in this
work.

Our method is not limited to semiconductor excitons and can be applied
to any bosonic excitations which can be described as two-level
oscillators, like two electronic levels in atoms or molecules.

There are many directions in which our work could be further extended.
In the next Section we will review this possible directions and indicate
the work being undertaken at the moment.

#### 4.1 Future Work

##### 4.1.1 Finite Temperatures

The results presented in this work are performed at zero temperature for
which the summations over the Matsubara frequencies in equations ( 3.15
) and ( 3.17 ) become integrals and are performed numerically. The
extension to finite temperatures is straightforward. At finite
temperatures the summations over a discrete @xmath , which in the case
of fermions would be @xmath can be performed using the standard
techniques [ 54 , 51 ] and thus finite temperatures could be easily
studied.

##### 4.1.2 Non-Equilibrium

A much more important extension that the finite temperature case is the
problem of non-equilibrium systems. For a system with very strong
pumping and decay processes the thermal distribution of the relevant
quasiparticles cannot be assumed. It would be of a great interest to
examine the influence of non-equilibrium on the behaviour of this
system. This would also allow us to directly compare our theory to
experiments on stimulated scattering of polaritons which are mainly out
of equilibrium. We would also be able to directly apply our theory to
coherently driven systems which are also out of thermal equilibrium.
This work is currently in progress.

In this work we included the pair-breaking effect of pumping by studying
the processes described by the first term of expression ( 3.5 ), which
has the same decoherence effect as pumping but do not cause the system
to be in a non-equilibrium state. The ratio between the pump and the
decay rates was introduced in terms of the excitation density @xmath .
To study the influence of the system being out of equilibrium we fully
include the decay of the cavity field and the pumping (the first, second
and third terms in equation ( 3.3 )) which would cause a flow of energy
through the system. We do not need to consider the constraint ( 3.4 )
now, as the density of the system would get fixed in a steady state by
the relative strength of the pumping and the decay processes. The photon
field @xmath in this case becomes a function of frequency in a similar
way to an Eliashberg theory of strong coupling superconductors [ 52 , 53
] . All the external decoherence processes need to be included in a
similar way as presented in this work so that the gap in the density of
states is taken into account. The non-equilibrium Keldysh techniques
need to be applied to obtain the distribution of particles in the steady
state. Thus, using the analogy to superconductivity, we need to include
the decoherence processes as in the Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory of
gapless superconductivity, the frequency dependent photon field as in an
Eliashberg theory of strong coupling superconductor and the flow of the
energy through the system in a non-equilibrium state in the same
framework. It is not surprising that it is very difficult, if not
impossible, to treat such a complex problem within the Green’s functions
techniques presented in this work. We think that the more powerful field
theoretical methods, like a non-linear sigma model, would be more
suitable here. The implementation of this method for our model is still
in progress.

##### 4.1.3 Microscopic Details of the Decoherence Processes

If the microscopic origins of the decoherence processes are known for a
particular experimentally studied system, the theory could be extended
to include this information. The detailed account of the coupling
constants and the density of states for the environment can be easily
included within this framework. In general the baths propagators in the
equations ( 3.8 ) and ( 3.9 ) would be frequency dependent and thus
@xmath would depend on frequency as in the Eliashberg theory of gapless
superconductors [ 52 , 53 ] . The phenomenological constants @xmath and
@xmath can thus be, in principle, obtained from this microscopic
calculation for a particular system.

##### 4.1.4 Generalisation of the Model

Finally, we can generalise the model itself to account for a different
level of disorder and a binding energy of excitons in a material. As we
discussed in the Section 1.4.2 , the samples are characterised by a
different level of fluctuations in the thickness of the quantum well,
alloying concentration or presence of impurities. The spatial extent of
the excitons also depends on the materials being used and vary from
tightly bound, Frenkel-type excitons to weakly bound, extended Wannier
excitons. Although in light of recent experiments [ 41 ] - [ 45 ] , the
localised exciton picture seems the most relevant the theory could be
extended to account for different situations.

In the absence of disorder, when the exciton centre of mass wavefunction
would propagate through the sample, the direct Coulomb interactions
could be incorporated at a mean-field level in a similar way as in the
case of a coherently driven excitonic insulator [ 24 ] . As we discussed
in the Section 3.1 , adding the direct Coulomb interactions between
excitons within a mean-field would only give small corrections to the
theory presented in this work. At high densities the Coulomb interaction
is very small in comparison to the dominant dipole interaction while at
low densities the dominant part of the Coulomb interaction is the one
between an electron and a hole within the same exciton, which is
included in our model. But for qualitative analysis of a particular
media this correction could be included.

For materials with Frenkel excitons the theory could be extended to
include several localised exciton states on each site rather that just
the one assumed in this work. In the case of a narrow disorder quantum
well such a generalisation would also be possible in principle but the
electronic structure of these systems is not yet well studied and thus
quantitative description would be difficult.

#### 4.2 Summary

We have studied the equilibrium Bose condensation of cavity polaritons
in the presence of decoherence. We have shown

-   That the widely used Langevin equations with the constant, frequency
    independent decay rates are not valid for systems in which the gap
    in the density of states is present.

-   That in the regime of weak decoherence the decoherence processes
    have to be treated self-consistently, in a way that the gap in the
    density of states is taken into account.

We use self-consistent Green’s function techniques, similar to the
Abrikosov and Gor’kov theory of gapless superconductivity [ 8 ] , to
study different regimes in microcavity as the decoherence strength and
the excitation density is changed. We have shown

-   That at small decoherence the polariton condensate is protected by
    the energy gap in the excitation spectrum. The gap is proportional
    to the coherent field amplitude and thus the excitation density, so
    the condensate is more robust at high densities.

-   That this gap gets smaller and eventually is completely suppressed
    as the decoherence is increased.

-   That there is a regime, analogous to the gapless superconductor,
    when the coherent fields are present without an energy gap. This
    regime, at very high excitation densities, have all the features of
    a photon laser.

We study the influence of the two different types of processes, a
pair-breaking and a non-pair-breaking ones as well as the inhomogeneous
broadening of the energies. We have shown

-   That only the type 1, pair-breaking processes can lead to phase
    transitions.

-   That the type 2, non-pair-breaking processes and the inhomogeneous
    broadening of energies can give only quantitative influence to the
    behaviour of the system and can not prevent the condensation.

We have

-   Studied the phase diagram of the system given by the Hamiltonian (
    3.1 ) for different values of the decoherence strength and the
    excitation densities.

-   Established the crossover between an isolated polariton condensate
    and a photon laser as the decoherence strength is increased.

-   Generalised the existing laser theories to include coherence effects
    in the media and the energy gap in the excitation spectrum.

-   Shown that, unlike in the traditional laser, the coherent photon
    field can be present without a population inversion when the
    coherence effects in the media are taken into account.
