Foundations of quantum theory and

quantum information applications

Thesis submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy.

Ernesto Fagundes Galv√£o

Wolfson College, University of Oxford

Trinity Term 2002

This thesis establishes a number of connections between foundational
issues in quantum theory, and some quantum information applications. It
starts with a review of quantum contextuality and non-locality,
multipartite entanglement characterisation, and of a few quantum
information protocols.

Quantum non-locality and contextuality are shown to be essential for
different implementations of quantum information protocols known as
quantum random access codes and quantum communication complexity
protocols. The simplest versions of these protocols are shown to be
equivalent to tests of two- and multi-party contextuality and
non-locality. From them I derive sufficient experimental conditions for
tests of these quantum properties.

I also discuss how the distribution of quantum information through
quantum cloning processes can be useful in quantum computing. Regarding
entanglement characterisation, some results are obtained relating two
problems, that of additivity of the relative entropy of entanglement,
and that of identifying different types of tripartite entanglement in
the asymptotic regime of manipulations of many copies of a given state.

The thesis ends with a description of an information processing task in
which a single qubit substitutes for an arbitrarily large amount of
classical communication. This result is interpreted in different ways:
as a gap between quantum and classical computation space complexity; as
a bound on the amount of classical communication necessary to simulate
entanglement; and as a basic result on hidden-variable theories for
quantum mechanics. In this case, the resource behind the quantum
advantage is simply the real nature of the set of quantum pure states. I
also show that the advantage of quantum over classical communication can
be established in a feasible experiment.

\college

Wolfson College \degree Doctor of Philosophy, University of Oxford
\degreedate Trinity Term 2002

{romanpages}
