Computers built on the physical principles of quantum theory offer the
possibility of tremendous computational advantages over conventional
computers. To actually realize such quantum computers will require
technologies far beyond present day capabilities. One problem which
particularly plagues quantum computers is the coupling of the quantum
computer to an environment and the subsequent destruction of the quantum
information in the computer through the process known as decoherence. In
this thesis we describe methods for avoiding the detrimental effects of
decoherence while at the same time still allowing for computation of the
quantum information. The philosophy of our method is to use a symmetry
of the decoherence mechanism to find robust encodings of the quantum
information. The theory of such decoherence-free systems is developed in
this thesis with a particular emphasis on the manipulation of the
decoherence-free information. Stability, control, and methods for using
decoherence-free information in a quantum computer are presented.
Specific emphasis is put on decoherence due to a collective coupling
between the system and its environment. Universal quantum computation on
such collective decoherence decoherence-free encodings is demonstrated.
Along the way, rigorous definitions of control and the use of encoded
universality in the physical implementations of quantum computers are
addressed. Explicit gate constructions for encoded universality on ion
trap and exchange based quantum computers are given. The second part of
the thesis is devoted to methods of reducing the decoherence problem
which rely on more classically motivated reasoning for the robust
storage of information. We examine quantum systems that can store
information in their ground state such that decoherence processes are
prohibited via considerations of energetics. We present the theory of
supercoherent systems whose ground states are quantum error detecting
codes and give examples of supercoherent systems which allow universal
quantum computation. We also give examples of a spin ladder whose ground
state has both the error detecting properties of supercoherence as well
as error correcting properties. We present the first example of a
quantum error correcting ground state which is a natural error
correcting code under reasonable physical assumptions. We conclude by
discussing the radical possibility of a naturally fault-tolerant quantum
computer. \abstractsignature

\degreeyear

2001 \degree Doctor of Philosophy \chair Professor K. Birgitta Whaley
\othermembers Professor Raymond Chiao
Professor Dan Stamper-Kurn
Professor Umesh Vazirani \numberofmembers 4 \prevdegrees Double B.S.
with Honors, (California Institute of Technology) 1997 \field Physics
\campus Berkeley

\approvalpage \copyrightpage \ssp {dedication}

Dedicated to my parents

Nancy and Larry Bacon

“My home…I think I would be lost without it. I spend so much time in my
head, and what I do there is so different…so bizarre to most people. If
I didn’t have a center, a place to return to, I’d get lost.”
