We investigate a proposal to address several outstanding shortcomings of
the perturbative Standard Model (SM) of particle physics, specifically a
common, dynamical origin for the number of fermion generations, the
spectrum of fermion masses and for Charge-Parity (CP) violating
processes. The appeal of this proposal is that these features are a
manifestation of the non-perturbative sector of the SM, requiring no
assumptions about new physics beyond presently attainable experimental
limits.

In this thesis we apply non-perturbative techniques, which have been
used to investigate dynamical symmetry breakdown in other quantum field
theories, to two complementary models: a toy 4-fermion model containing
explicit chiral symmetry-breaking terms (of an anomalous origin) and the
quenched hypercharge gauge interaction. The key difference from
“conventional” studies of dynamical breaking of chiral symmetry
breakdown in field theories is the possibility that scalar
fermion-pairing terms are a necessary but not sufficient requirement for
dynamical mass generation, analogous to the pseudogap phenomenon
observed in systems of strongly-correlated electrons.

Understanding of how the mass, generations and CP-violation might arise
are first investigated in the toy 4-fermion model. It is shown that
different scale-invariant 4-fermion operators are present for the three
subspaces of the full theory, enabling self-consistent introduction of
three fermion generations.

The second part of the thesis is concerned with dynamical fermion mass
generation in the quenched hypercharge interaction. In particular we
follow the successful procedure developed for QED, developing a 1-loop
renormalisable vertex ansatz for solution of the fermion self-energy
Dyson-Schwinger equation. In the absence of dynamical
fermion-antifermion bound states it is found there exist two mass
“gaps”, potentially corresponding to two types of scalar 4-fermion
pairing. These “gaps” cannot, however, be interpreted as physical
fermion mass. It is suggested that only after the incorporation of the
composite scalars does the self-energy equation admit multiple
(physical) solutions. An alternative possibility, that of a
rearrangement of fermionic degrees of freedom analogous to spin-charge
separation (SCS) in condensed matter physics, is also briefly outlined.
