##### Contents

-    0.1 Statement
-    0.2 Acknowledgements
-    1 Introduction
-    2 Preliminary
    -    2.1 Chiral symmetry
    -    2.2 Chiral anomalies
    -    2.3 Effective action
    -    2.4 Schwinger-Dyson equations
    -    2.5 Renormalisability and triviality
        -    2.5.1 Wegner-Houghton RGE
-    3 Models
    -    3.1 Electroweak model
        -    3.1.1 Generations and anomaly cancellation
        -    3.1.2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking and mass
        -    3.1.3 Flavour mixing and CP violation
        -    3.1.4 Non-perturbative aspects
    -    3.2 The NJL model
    -    3.3 @xmath : dynamical chiral symmetry breaking
        -    3.3.1 Quenched rainbow approximation
        -    3.3.2 Improved quenched approximations
        -    3.3.3 Unquenched approximations
    -    3.4 Gauged model
-    4 Four-fermion model of generations
    -    4.1 Digression
    -    4.2 Mass generation
        -    4.2.1 Conventional chiral symmetric phase
        -    4.2.2 Explicitly broken phase
        -    4.2.3 Anomalous phase
    -    4.3 Fermion generations
    -    4.4 CP-violation
        -    4.4.1 Triviality
        -    4.4.2 Summary
    -    4.5 Four-fermion model
        -    4.5.1 Mass generation
-    5 Quenched hypercharge
    -    5.1 D @xmath SB in hypercharge @xmath
        -    5.1.1 Rainbow approximation
        -    5.1.2 Renormalisable vertex
    -    5.2 Role of composite scalars
        -    5.2.1 Anomalous vertex
-    6 Conclusion and outlook
    -    6.1 Chiral-breaking model
    -    6.2 Quenched hypercharge
    -    6.3 Outlook
-    A Fierz transformations
-    B 1-loop running couplings
-    C Transverse boson propagator

### 0.1 Statement

This work contains no material which has been accepted for the award of
any other degree or diploma in any university or other tertiary
institution and, to the best of my knowledge and belief, contains no
material previously published or written by another person, except where
due reference has been made in the text.

I give consent to this copy of my thesis, when deposited in the
University Library, being available for loan and photocopying.

Jim Bashford

### 0.2 Acknowledgements

@xmath First and foremost, I wish thank to my supervisor Tony Thomas,
for his unfailing support and enormous patience.

@xmath To my wonderful partner Virginia and also to Hayden and Emily for
their continuing insights into the equation-free world at large. And to
Lydia for providing the necessary impetus to finally finish.

@xmath To my parents and sisters for their moral support.

@xmath To Stuart Corney for friendship and bravely trusting me with the
run of his machine at the University of Tasmania when facilities in
Adelaide were incapacitated.

@xmath To Peter Jarvis, for encouragement, friendship and several
helpful discussions.

@xmath To my friends Natalie, Michael and Sam, who made life in Adelaide
enjoyable.

@xmath I wish to acknowledge financial support from the University of
Adelaide through an APRA scholarship, and a generous extension from the
Centre for the Subatomic Structure of Matter.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics has had remarkable success
describing the behaviour of subatomic matter (for a review see [ 1 ] ).
The scalar sector of the SM, however is constructed to accommodate,
rather than explain, certain phenomenological features which, therefore,
must be regarded as poorly understood. Chief among these are the
Charge-Parity (CP)-violating electroweak processes, the origin and
magnitude of mass and the number of fundamental fermion species.

In this thesis we investigate a proposal [ 2 ] which suggested a common,
dynamical origin for the mass and fermionic generations without the
requirement of additional gauge unification. The nature of electroweak
flavour mixing - and more specifically, CP-violating processes - is
known to be sensitive to both the ratios of quark mass eigenstates and
the number of quark flavours. Therefore the origin of CP violation could
also reasonably be expected to lie within the hypothesis [ 2 ] .

The known fundamental fermions are naturally classified into 3 families
or “generations”, each consisting of two quarks (colour degrees of
freedom are largely irrelevant to this thesis and shall be omitted here)
@xmath , @xmath , a charged lepton @xmath and its associated neutrino
@xmath . The weak isospin @xmath , electromagnetic charge @xmath and
mass @xmath of each generation are summarised in the columns of Table
1.1 below.

Within current experimental limits, for example, for lepton universality
[ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , the fermions of one generation are identical to those of
another in terms of gauge interactions, being distinguished only by
their orders-of-magnitude mass difference. Essentially the two more
massive generations behave as unstable and largely redundant copies of
the lightest, of which the vast majority of stable matter in the
observed universe is composed.

An important experimental limit on fermion numbers comes from the LEP
measurements of partial invisible @xmath -decay width [ 5 ] , where the
number of light (with mass @xmath ) neutrinos is determined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it is inferred - if the cancellation of anomalous electroweak
processes is to occur - that there are only three fermion generations.
The existence of extra half generations of quarks has been considered,
e.g., [ 6 ] ) however a new confining gauge interaction is needed to
form composites which mimic the absent leptons.

A number of theories explaining the number of generations exist, for
example, new horizontal flavour gauge interactions. Variations within
this theme include gauge interactions underlying composite quarks and
leptons [ 7 ] , [ 8 ] or linking the number of generations to the mass
hierarchy problem via spontaneously-broken @xmath (see [ 9 ] and
references contained within). The simplest horizontal SM extension - an
Abelian interaction - taken to be non-anomalous [ 10 ] or anomalous [ 11
] , [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] at the level of the supersymmetric standard model
readily reproduces the required mass hierarchy. Here it should be noted
that for the latter case [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] anomaly cancellation is
restored at the string-unification scale via the Green-Schwartz
mechanism [ 14 ] .

While dynamical chiral symmetry breaking (D @xmath SB) has been used for
decades to study the origin of mass in relativistic quantum field
theories such as the Nambu Jona Lasinio (NJL) model [ 15 ] and
strongly-coupled quantum electrodynamics (QED) [ 16 ] (for reviews see [
17 ] or [ 18 ] ), the possibility of a dynamical origin for fermion
generations has a smaller and relatively recent literature. Some recent
theories requiring interesting gauge interactions include broken
discrete chiral symmetry [ 19 ] and the @xmath colour analogue of
electromagnetic duality [ 20 ] .

The possibility that fermion generations could arise dynamically from
interplay of scalar fields and elementary fermions without new gauge
interactions has also recently been explored in several contexts [ 21 ]
, [ 22 ] . In the former [ 21 ] , the multiple generations are a
manifestation of a specially-constrained Higgs potential possessing a
discrete symmetry of degenerate vacuum minima, while in the latter [ 22
] higher generations effectively appear as a bound state of some
elementary fermion with excitations of the Higgs scalar. However both
mechanisms make use of at least one elementary Higgs field and in both
cases the number of generations is still a parameter to be put in by
hand. A motivation for the former has been outlined in [ 23 ] .

In contrast, an earlier paper [ 2 ] based upon the non-perturbative
@xmath hypercharge interaction suggests the existence of 3 families and
the absence of a fundamental Higgs. The hypothesis, which is the main
theme of this thesis, is based upon two observations:

1) Analysis of strong-coupling QED in a quenched approximation (as in,
e.g., citeMaskawaNakajima), suggests vector Abelian theories have 2
phases separated by a second-order transition associated with breakdown
of chiral symmetry. The possibility of a non-trivial ultraviolet
(UV)-fixed point is interesting for several reasons, firstly because the
total charge-screening of perturbative QED at large scales fails to
eventuate, facilitating a consistent definition of non-perturbative QED.
Moreover a self-consistent treatment of this non-perturbative QED may
dynamically generate fermion mass, abolishing the requirement for
undetected elementary Higgs scalars.

2) Assuming no further unification physics, the large momentum limit of
the Standard Model is dominated by the chiral @xmath (hypercharge)
sector, with interaction Lagrangian term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the weak coupling constant, and @xmath is the Weinberg
angle. The key feature is that, unlike QED, the coupling is dependent on
fermion chirality. The hypercharge theory is special amongst chiral
gauge theories in that the same gauge field couples to both chiralities.
In particular integration of the gauge-boson field from the lagrangian
Eq.( 1.1 ) leads to effective 4-fermi interactions of the form (with the
perturbative boson propagator)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Upon application of Fierz identities (see Appendix A ) the terms @xmath
, @xmath are seen to provide the conventional chiral result, i.e., upon
integration over separate left- and right- gauge fields, the vector,
axial and anomalous 4-fermi terms are obtained. The “cross” terms @xmath
, peculiar to the hypercharge theory provide scalar 4-fermi interactions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

familar to D @xmath SB studies of QED or the gauged NJL (GNJL) [ 24 ]
theory. In principle there are three running couplings (right-right,
right-left and left-left) and the theory could be anticipated to have a
more complicated phase structure than QED.

The stability of non-asymptotically free (NAF) @xmath vector theories
has been studied extensively ( see, e.g. [ 25 ] , [ 26 ] ). While the
question of whether the two-phase structure of strongly-coupled QED
carries over into the unquenched sector has yet to be fully resolved,
even less is known about the nature of the corresponding chiral theory,
although a preliminary lattice study [ 27 ] suggests it suffers from the
same charge-screening problem. In the absence of any consensus, if one
assumes the above phase structure, the features of fermion mass and
generations arise in the qualitative picture of [ 2 ] as follows:

Fermion masses arise in analogy to the QED case. In quenched rainbow QED
[ 24 ] , it was suggested that at large momentum scales attractive
scalar fermion couplings became strong and offset the total
virtual-pair-screening of a point-like fermion charge [ 28 ] . In the
renormalisation group picture non-renormalisable (at “low” momentum)
4-fermi operators acquire a large anomalous dimension, mixing with the
gauge interaction. At a critical coupling value the vacuum undergoes a
transition and the fields must be re-quantised with respect to the
strong-coupling ground state. The difference in zero-point energies of
the two phases is manifested as a scalar potential in the
chirally-symmetric phase and thus a fermion mass is dynamically
generated [ 2 ] .

For the more complicated chiral case, which has three couplings, three
such phase transitions are suggested [ 2 ] to occur, each contributing
to the scalar potential.

If the SM couplings evolved to high momentum scales are used ( @xmath )
the right-right coupling is first to become critical. In the
neighbourhood of the critical point attractive scalar pairing between
right-handed fermions comes to dominate over the gauge interaction. If
there is a vacuum decay, it will be associated with a (parity-violating)
scalar condensate of right-handed fermions. The (dynamical) left-handed
fermions are highly excited with respect to the condensed right sector.
The Adler-Bell-Jackiw (ABJ) anomaly [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] causes a nett
production of right-handed states (which, being supercritical condense)
at the expense of left ones, leading to the vacuum decay of the left
sector. It is in this way that both chiralities of the lightest
generation “freeze out” at the right-right critical coupling, leading to
the requisite scalar potential at lower scales. At this stage the
right-handed components of the heavier generations exist as resonances;
right-handed bound states of a heavy fermion and light antifermion.
These generations are anticipated to condense at the right-left and
left-left critical couplings respectively. The ABJ anomaly, once again
ensuring that the condensation of left- and right- fermions occurs on an
equal footing. In this picture a single dynamical fermion behaves as
three “quasi-particles” of different masses at distinct scales, leading
to the appearance of generation structure.

Gauge-boson mass is generated by the same dynamical chiral symmetry
breaking via the mechanism outlined in [ 31 ] , [ 32 ] : Massive
fermions automatically generate a mass term for axial fields through the
vacuum polarisation [ 32 ] , which to be unitary, requires the existence
of non-transverse degrees of freedom [ 33 ] . The nature of these
(composite) pseudoscalars has been discussed in [ 31 ] .

The structure of this thesis is as follows. In chapter 2 we review the
relevant techniques required to investigate the phase structure of such
a theory, specifically the effective action and Schwinger-Dyson
formalism. The Schwinger-Dyson equations (SDEs) for the hypercharge
interaction are derived before the renormalisation group (RG) ideas of
Wilson [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] are introduced and a short discussion on
triviality of the vector and chiral NAF theories is presented.

Chapter 3 consists of two sections, the first dealing with the
incorporation of a scalar sector in the electroweak interactions
illustrates the conventional mechanisms for including mass and CP
violation. The second reviews the progress made in understanding D
@xmath SB of the gauged NJL model, the motivation being to draw upon
these techniques for an analysis of our model.

The following two chapters present different, complementary approaches
taken towards understanding the problem. In chapter 4 we present a
simple model of fermion pairing interactions, the motivation being that
the 4-fermi Wilson potential [ 35 ] of the hypercharge theory could
contain explicit chiral-breaking terms due to the anomaly. Specifically
fermion pairings of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are dimensionful couplings. Denoting
the renormalisation scale by @xmath and writing the dimensionless
couplings @xmath , @xmath , their running is investigated at 1-loop
level by renormalisation group equations. It is found that there are
three renormalised null-trajectories through different subspaces of the
@xmath coupling-constant space, depending on whether one or both of the
@xmath and @xmath terms are present, corresponding to three scalar
four-fermi operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The potential emergence of three scalar condensates associated with
these operators provides further [ 23 ] motivation to consider a
dynamical mechanism like that of the special 3-Higgs potential of [ 21 ]
. Here the Higgs would be composites bound by the underlying attractive
fermion couplings which are required to prevent the total
charge-screening scenario, in direct analogy to the GNJL augmentation of
QED. That is, in the language of the renormalisation group, the above
4-fermi interactions are non-renormalisable at low momenta, however
close to a UV fixed point they are expected to obtain a large anomalous
dimension, becoming strictly renormalisable (marginal) and thus mixing
with the gauge interaction.

In contrast to what is found for chirally-symmetric matter-only
theories, the auxilary method requires our composite fields to be, in
general complex, chiral objects. With the self-consistent introduction
of a “fundamental” fermion with a component living in each of the three
coupling subspaces and an extended vacuum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a range of CP-violating terms are possible. It is noted that with the
imposition of a discrete symmetry ( @xmath , in constrast to [ 21 ] ,
where @xmath is used; here @xmath is the permutation group of order
@xmath ) this number is reduced to one and the calculation [ 21 ] of the
CKM matrix elements to tree-level accuracy could be reproduced.

Chiral symmetry breakdown in three potentials defined by the operators
@xmath - @xmath , presumably corresponding to different critical scales
is then studied. All dimensionful couplings were found to have the
critical value @xmath with the respective couplings @xmath , @xmath and
the combination

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Here @xmath is the ultraviolet momentum cutoff for the
fermion loop. Dimensionless couplings, with the critical value @xmath
are finite at large scales if @xmath and @xmath in such a way that their
ratio is finite. It turns out moreover, that the null trajectory for the
operator @xmath in Eq.( 1 ), flows to a finite (nonzero) IR limit,
making this a suitable candidate for the effective theory at
intermediate or higher scales.

In summary the model is seen to have all the desirable features; the
dynamical mass generation at different scales, the phase structure and
the existence of three scalar condensates, amenable to a Kiselev-type [
21 ] model of generations and CP violation. It is not clear, however,
how these parity- and chiral-breaking scalar terms arise in the context
of hypercharge: in the Fierz-reordering above they are cancelled
separately in the right-right and left-left terms, and also in the
combination of left-right with right-left terms (see Appendix A ). The
only possibility, therefore, seems to be some dynamical effect leading
to a mismatch between the latter, cross terms encountered when
unquenching the boson propagator. Thus in the second part of the chapter
we consider the Dyson-Schwinger equation for the fermion self-energy in
the chirally symmetric, P-violating Wilson potential associated with the
anomaly-free hypercharge theory.

Chapter 5 discusses the question of criticality in the hypercharge
theory. In [ 2 ] it was suggested that at the lowest (right) critical
scale the lightest generation “froze out” of the theory; fermions with
right chirality formed a condensate @xmath . The left-handed vacuum was
highly excited relative to its right counterpart and via gauge
transformations the ABJ anomaly caused a flux of (dynamical) left
fermions over into the condensed phase. It is for this reason that both
chiralities are expected to feel the same scalar potential far away from
the critical point, the manifestation of which is the appearance of a
mass term.

In 5.1.1 in the (non-anomalous) quenched rainbow approximation we find
some indication of the effects of different dynamics of the left and
right fermion chiralities in that they acquire different form factors
@xmath , @xmath . As in the case for quenched rainbow QED, we find above
a critical coupling strength that chiral symmetry is dynamically-broken,
@xmath , but here seperate left- and right- gaps are found,
corresponding to chirality-dependent scalar pairings of fermions. A
physical fermion mass, in the context of Lorentz symmetry and
Hermiticity, is unable to be constructed. The effect is found to
disappear in the Landau gauge whereupon we require more a more
sophisticated approximation for the vertex appearing in the fermion SDE.
We repeat the analysis with an improved, naively 1-loop renormalisable
vertex and find the effect, although considerably reduced, persists in
arbitrary gauge.

The anticipated role of composite scalars in enabling physical fermion
mass generation is then investigated. In order to have a low-energy
effective theory with a unitary perturbative limit it is necessary to
include the dynamically-generated Goldstone boson loop. The effect upon
the fermion self energy SDE is found to be that scalar form factors
@xmath are now found to have terms depending upon three couplings,
suggesting distinct behaviour at three separate scales, paving the way
for self-consistent introduction of three fermion generations as
outlined in [ 2 ] . For completeness we also attempt to include the
anomalous corrections to the Goldstone vertex, however these are found
to dominate the equations, causing all scalar form factors to vanish.
Possible reasons for failure are discussed, in particular it is pointed
out that correct implementation would involve moving beyond the quenched
approximation.

In chapter 6 we present our conclusions, and noting superficial
similarities between the problem at hand and strongly correlated
electrons in 1+1 dimensions, outline an alternative mechanism for an
origin of the fermion generations consistent with existing theories.
See, for example, [ 81 ] .

## Chapter 2 Preliminary

In this chapter we introduce the formalism for non-perturbative analyses
of a Quantum Field Theory which we shall need in later chapters. The
material is largely standard and in particular we follow [ 37 ] for the
Schwinger-Dyson formalism, [ 17 ] for the discussions of effective
action technique and gauge anomalies and [ 38 ] for renormalisation
group.

### 2.1 Chiral symmetry

Consider the Lagrangian for N species of free fermions in 4 dimensions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Defining the matrix @xmath via [ 37 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

the fermion Lagrangian is invariant under the global @xmath chiral
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an N-dimensional constant vector and @xmath are the
@xmath group generators. Now @xmath is also invariant under the global
@xmath transformation

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

and has the corresponding conserved Noether currents

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Equivalently @xmath can be rewritten in terms of the chiral spinors

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath are the projection operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, left-handed and right-handed components commute and the theory
has chiral symmetry @xmath , with corresponding Noether currents

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

However a mass term @xmath destroys the invariance under the
transformations Eq.( 2.2 ), mixing left and right currents:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the chiral symmetry group is broken to its diagonal subgroup.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here only the vector current is conserved

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

while due to Goldstone’s Theorem (see chapter 3 of [ 17 ] ), the global
symmetry breaking Eq.( 2.7 ) is accompanied by the production of @xmath
massless scalar particles - one for each broken group generator - or
Goldstone bosons. For the more useful instances of interacting theories,
models of scalar interactions (such as the NJL model in section 3.2 )
respecting global chiral symmetry may be constructed. Moreover vector
and axial gauge-interactions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

necessarily preserve global chiral symmetry as they anticommute with
@xmath . The case of local chiral symmetry is more subtle, due to a
non-vanishing surface term in the computation of the associated Noether
current. Chiral gauge anomalies will be dealt with below in section 2.2
.

### 2.2 Chiral anomalies

Gauge anomalies arise in a quantum field theory from the violation of a
classical symmetry by the second-quantisation procedure. The chiral
gauge anomaly, which is violation of local chiral symmetry in gauge
theories, was originally discovered [ 39 ] as a lack of gauge-invariance
in the computation of the @xmath decay “triangle” diagram @xmath with
one axial and two vector vertices, as shown in Figure 2.1 .

Since the definitive analyses of Adler [ 29 ] , Bell and Jackiw [ 30 ]
(ABJ) in 1969 illustrating the lack of a chiral-invariant regularisation
procedure, the anomaly has been interpreted and derived in a number of
ways. Perhaps the most intuitive picture is provided by the Dirac sea
picture ( [ 40 ] , [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] ). Here second-quantisation is
achieved by filling the (infinite) negative-energy states. On
introducing a regularisation, that is, giving the sea a finite “depth”,
anomalies appear as an exchange of degrees of freedom (such as charge,
chirality or spin) across the cut-off momentum scale. In this thesis the
path-integral approach of Fujikawa [ 43 ] will be the most convenient
method of computation. As outlined below, here the anomaly arises from
the failure of the path-integral measure to be invariant under local
chiral symmetry transformations.

Consider the @xmath gauge theory of massless fermions with Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It has the classical conserved currents Eqs.( 2.1 , 2.4 ) (with @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The generating functional of the theory is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To rigorously define the path-integral measure, the fermion fields are
expanded in terms of complete eigenfunctions @xmath of the Dirac
operator @xmath , which are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath            @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are Grassmann numbers. The fermion integral
measure is invariant under the transformation Eq.( 2.11 ) and the
generating functional @xmath becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where here the Grassmann measures are defined as the left-derivative.

Under the local chiral transformations

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

the Lagrangian and path integral measure transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

That is, neither the action nor the path-integral measure are invariant
under chiral transformations. If the path integral is to remain
invariant Eq.( 2.13 ) must compensate for Eqs. ( 2.14 , 2.15 ). For
small @xmath the determinant is computed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The compensation condition is then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the trace is understood to contain path integrals. Performing the
@xmath integration by parts on the right-hand side and neglecting an
inessential surface term, we see the classical axial current Eq.( 2.4 ).
is no longer conserved (cf Eq.( 2.10 ))

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After regularisation of @xmath , for example, as discussed in [ 44 ] , a
lengthy expansion in plane waves yields the expression [ 45 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

While, conventionally, gauge theories (such as the Standard Model)
require anomaly cancellation in order to define renormalisable
perturbations, recent study of anomalous gauge theories in 2 dimensions
[ 46 ] , [ 47 ] , [ 48 ] , [ 49 ] should be briefly mentioned. It has
been shown for the chiral Schwinger model

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

either the introduction [ 48 ] , [ 49 ] of Wess-Zumino [ 50 ] , [ 51 ]
fields, or non-gauge-invariant quantisation [ 46 ] , [ 48 ] , enables
construction of a unitary, perturbatively renormalisable theory. Little
work, aside from [ 47 ] , has been done in higher dimensions.

### 2.3 Effective action

The effective action is a standard method by which to study the
behaviour of vacuum degrees of freedom in quantum field theories.
Specifically, from the point of view of dynamical chiral symmetry
breaking it enables calculation of permissible non-vanishing
vacuum-expectation values of scalar condensates. Historically concepts
such as the classical order parameter were borrowed from superfluidity
and since Coleman and Weinberg [ 52 ] have been successfully applied to
relativistic theories.

Given a scalar theory with fields @xmath and Lagrangian density @xmath
(we shall discuss the generalisation to fermions presently), the
generating functional @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath a classical external source term
coupling to field @xmath . @xmath is a bilocal source. It is clear that
these sources require the same statistics, thus the sources coupling to
fermion fields are Grassmann numbers. Eq.( 2.17 ) has an series
expansion in terms of Greens functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath -point Greens function @xmath in the presence of source
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and care needs to be taken with minus signs arising from the
anticommutativity of Grassmann sources. The notation @xmath denotes a
functional derivative. For a discussion of Grassmann differentiation and
integration. See, for example, [ 44 ] .

The connected generating functional, so named because it is expanded in
terms of Greens functions @xmath which have connected Feynman diagrams
in the corresponding perturbation theory, is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, in terms of connected Greens functions,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is readily determined by comparison of Eqs.( 2.17 , 2.19 )

With the restriction to one-particle-irreducible amplitudes, the vacuuum
expectation value of operator @xmath in the presence of current @xmath
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If @xmath has the value @xmath for the particular currents @xmath ,
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the 2-point Greens function in Eq.( 2.18 ), then the
effective action is defined as the double Legendre transform

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The physical significance of this is that, analogous to the action of a
classical theory, in the absence of fictitious external currents the
permissible values of @xmath are given by the stationary points of
@xmath . Taking a functional derivative of Eq. ( 2.20 ) with respect to
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

the right-hand side vanishes readily when @xmath . Note that the other
stationarity equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponds to the Schwinger-Dyson equation for propagator @xmath ,
discussed in section 2.4 below.

### 2.4 Schwinger-Dyson equations

The Schwinger-Dyson equations (SDEs) of a quantum field theory determine
relations between its Greens functions. They are derived from the fact
that the total functional derivative of a path integral, given
appropriate boundary conditions, vanishes. For example, consider the
generating functional for the @xmath theory with Lagrangian Eq. ( 2.8 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and the Grassmann-valued functions @xmath , @xmath
are external sources coupling to the gauge bosons and fermions
respectively. The conventional covariant gauge-fixing prescription is
used, with @xmath and @xmath the gauge parameters for vector and axial
fields respectively. In the renormalisation group (RG) picture outlined
below, @xmath is a regulated, low energy effective action and @xmath has
a cutoff dependence via the running couplings, however this shall be
taken as implicit. While the ABJ anomaly is present the theory is
unregulated, and several of the results below are defined at a formal
level, further refinement is needed for well-defined quantities.

The SDEs for the two-point Greens functions follow from the four formal
equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with corresponding source @xmath ranges over the fields
@xmath . Following the previous section, the connected generating
functional is defined, formally at least, by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is customary to decompose @xmath into parity-even and -odd parts

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the even part @xmath is understood to be regularisable and its
computation follows the standard procedure used for vector theories.
Calculation of the @xmath term, which may also be rendered finite [ 53 ]
contains the ABJ anomaly and a @xmath multivaluation, will be considered
in a later chapter. To illustrate the derivation of SDEs simply we shall
consider only the parity-even part below.

The effective action corresponding to @xmath is obtained from the
Legendre-transform (c.f. Eq.( 2.20 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With vanishing external currents Eq.( 2.23 ) with @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has been used. Taking the functional derivative of Eq.( 2.25 ) with
respect to @xmath and setting all fields to zero, the SDE for the
inverse two-point vector Greens function is obtained:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes the bare vector boson propagator and @xmath is the
vacuum polarisation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here the trace includes integration over fermion loops , while @xmath
and @xmath are the inverse 2-point fermion and irreducible
vector-fermion vertex Greens functions respectively. The latter is
distinguished from the effective action @xmath by the presence of a
Lorentz index. These functions are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and may be computed from Eq.( 2.24 ) accordingly. The propagator for the
axial boson, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is computed analogous to the vector propagator above. With the
irreducible axial-fermion vertex defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the full set of (unrenormalised) 2-point SDEs for the theory Eq.( 2.8 )
is now given, in momentum space by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note, that due to the presence of the 3-point functions @xmath the
system does not close and constitutes a countably infinite tower of
coupled equations. The standard computational procedure, which truncates
the set (typically at the 3-point level) with a set of approximations,
will be followed in chapters below.

### 2.5 Renormalisability and triviality

While QED is often cited as the most successful theory in terms of
experimental data, this is entirely within a perturbative framework. The
“zero charge problem” encountered at very short distances from a point
charge was first reported in 1955 [ 54 ] , and has remained
mathematically unresolved since. The effect is common to all NAF gauge
theories, where the bare coupling is allowed to run unchecked at short
distances leading to a total screening of the bare charge by the vacuum.
Such a screening renders the theory “trivial” or non-interacting. In
this section we briefly review the salient features of Wilson’s [ 34 ] ,
[ 35 ] renormalisation group (RG) as presented in [ 38 ] .

Consider an action on @xmath -dimensional spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are coupling constants and the operators @xmath are
local monomials of elementary fields, @xmath , with canonical dimension
@xmath . The standard definition of a perturbatively renormalisable
theory is one for which @xmath is composed of operators with @xmath .

Upon the introduction of a cutoff, the resulting action @xmath may be
considered as that of a low-energy (with respect to @xmath )
approximation to a “fundamental” theory @xmath . This requires the
(non-trivial) assumption that the fields appearing in the path integral
can be divided into high-and low energy parts

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath is obtained by integrating out the heavy degrees of
freedom:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Above the cutoff @xmath is nonlocal, but in the low energy region it may
be approximated by a local expansion of the form Eq.( 2.27 ) The
operators @xmath are classified in terms of their dimension; those with
@xmath correspond to relevant or superrenormalisable interactions, while
those with @xmath are called marginal. A perturbatively renormalisable
theory, composed of these types of interaction monomial contains only a
finite number of divergent diagrams and can be formulated independently
of a given cutoff value @xmath . Non-renormalisable interactions, those
for which @xmath lead to new divergences at each order of perturbation
are accommodated by the assumption [ 34 ] that their (dimensionless)
couplings @xmath are of the order of unity. Such a term,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is then suppressed by positive powers of @xmath . Its divergent diagrams
are now removed by relevant or marginal counterterms, or equivalently
absorbed into “running” bare quantities.

For large, i.e., non-perturbative) couplings this running may change the
dimension @xmath significantly, so that, e.g., perturbatively irrelevant
interactions become marginal (such as in the GNJL below)

The transformation of shifting renormalisation scale, readily
demonstrated to have semigroup properties, hence dubbed the
“renormalisation group” is the most suitable method for analysing such
running behaviour. The differential equations describing the response of
the Greens functions and couplings of a theory to a small shift in
renormalisation scale are known as renormalisation group equations
(RGEs). Consider a perturbatively renormalisable theory, such as four
dimensional QED with, for simplicity, a single fermion flavour:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the covariant gauge-fixing parameter and @xmath , @xmath
denote the bare mass and coupling respectively. The renormalisability
property means that the divergences may be removed order-by order upon
the field redefinitions

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

and vertex renormalisation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider now the 2-point fermion Greens function renormalised at an
arbitrary scale @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The statement that the unrenormalised function S is independent of the
renormalisation scale for fixed @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

can thus be rearranged, on inverting Eq.( 2.5 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The actual parameter-dependence of these functions varies with the RG
method used. For example, in the Gell-Mann Low scheme @xmath is fixed as
the physical fermion mass, @xmath , while @xmath , @xmath are defined in
terms of the off-shell subtraction @xmath . In this case @xmath , @xmath
and the two point function can be written in terms of dimensionless
variables as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a shift in scale @xmath the RG equation Eq.( 2.33 ) can be
re-expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the massless case, on setting @xmath , this may be solved (the result
coincides for a number of RG schemes) to give [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The second expression, Eq.( 2.35 ), gives the behaviour of the running
coupling in the following way: Any root of @xmath at the corresponds to
a fixed point of Eq.( 2.35 ). If @xmath for some coupling @xmath then
the behaviour at asymptotic scales is given by

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The point @xmath is then known as a UV or IR (Gaussian) fixed point
respectively. At such a point, scale invariance is recovered and the
solution of Eq.( 2.34 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, the fermion fields have dynamically acquired an anomalous
dimension @xmath , given by Eq.( 2.32 ), in the neighborhood of the
fixed point. It is apparent that at this scale operators in Eq.( 2.27 )
which are monomials in these fields have a different dimension than
expected from naive power-counting. It is in this way that, for example,
irrelevant 4-fermi operators become marginal and could mix with the QED
interaction close to such a point (see section 3.4 below).

If, however, there is no nontrivial root the coupling grows without
limit and the theory is described as being non-asymptotically free
(NAF). Finite answers are only obtained for the noninteracting limit,
@xmath , in which case the theory is said to be trivial. The running
behaviour of the coupling @xmath is readily computed via loop
corrections

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it is precisely the perturbative approximation which leads to
triviality of NAF theories. For example, substituting the one-loop QED
result @xmath into Eq.( 2.35 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has a singularity at the scale

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The singularity persists for higher loop calculations, moreover being
driven to lower scales. For example, in two loop perturbation theory the
“Landau pole” occurs [ 26 ] at

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, with the particle spectrum of the standard model gives @xmath
GeV. For “realistic” SUSY theories [ 26 ] the singularity may be pushed
as low as @xmath GeV, adding to the neccessity for resolution of the
Landau ghost problem in NAF gauge theories. The problem is of a
perturbative nature , therefore, in the absence of higher physics, the
solution must be non-perturbative. Göckeler et al. in a lattice study [
26 ] suggested that the singularity is avoided due to spontaneous
breakdown of chiral symmetry. Their results however were consistent with
triviality. Moreover [ 27 ] it was subsequently suggested that the
chiral @xmath suffers a similar fate.

As will be discussed in sec 3.4 there is growing evidence that the best
hope for nontrivial, singularity-free NAF theories such as the vector
and chiral @xmath gauge theories is the existence of a UV fixed point,
whereby marginal 4-fermi operators mix with the gauge interaction. In
this picture triviality is argued [ 28 ] to be averted due to the strong
fermi self-interactions, suppressing the charge-screening effect.

#### 2.5.1 Wegner-Houghton RGE

We conclude the discussion of RG methods with a brief summary of the
Wegner-Houghton [ 55 ] scheme, used to determine the variation of the
effective action @xmath appearing in Eq.( 2.28 ). Let us define the
dimensionless scale parameter as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where now @xmath denotes the cutoff of Eq.( 2.28 ) and explicitly write
the field-dependence @xmath . The scaling response of the effective
action to the infinitesimal shift in cutoff @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.36)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath denote the canonical and anomalous dimensions of
field @xmath respectively, while the trace appearing in the second line
is graded (for fermion fields the sign changes). The most common
simplification, the local potential approximation (LPA) corresponds to
keeping only the evolution of the potential part. That is, radiative
corrections to operators containing derivatives are ignored, as are
field renormalisations and anomalous dimensions. If the potential term
of the action is denoted @xmath , then in the LPA approximation the
Wegner-Houghton RGE Eq.( 2.36 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result shall be used to compute the @xmath functions of the 4-fermi
couplings in section 4.4.1 , for direct comparison with the GNJL result
[ 56 ] .

## Chapter 3 Models

Before introducing the model in the next chapter it is necessary to
describe the phenomena we seek to explain. The other purpose of this
chapter is to provide motivation for the model by discussing analogues
from other physical systems. Section 3.1 introduces the electroweak
sector of the Standard Model and briefly illustrates how @xmath
violation, mass and fermion generations are accommodated with a lack of
predictive power. The material presented is readily found in textbooks
and lecture notes, here we follow [ 1 ] and [ 57 ] . The second half of
the chapter, section 3.4 , is a review of the progress made in
understanding dynamical chiral symmetry breakdown, specifically within
QED and the GNJL.

### 3.1 Electroweak model

The Glashow-Weinberg-Salam (GSW) electroweak model [ 58 ] , [ 59 ] , [
60 ] is a chiral gauge theory which, at low energies, has its full
symmetry group spontaneously broken to an electromagnetic subgroup:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The gauge sector of the electroweak Lagrangian contains 4 boson fields,
three @xmath bosons @xmath plus the Abelian field @xmath . The kinetic
terms (without gauge-fixing) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The weak boson fields couple only to left-handed fermions, which
transform as @xmath isodoublets, one doublet each for quarks and
leptons, while right-handed fermions transform as isoscalars. In terms
of generic fermion isodoublets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath hypercharge @xmath , the fermion-gauge interaction term is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath are the @xmath isospin matrices, @xmath and @xmath are
respectively the @xmath and @xmath couplings. Here it is understood that
isospin indices are suppressed and that right-handed neutrinos @xmath
have @xmath . Note the Lagrangian @xmath contains a sum over isodoublets
and can in principle accommodate any number of fermions.

#### 3.1.1 Generations and anomaly cancellation

The importance of the generation structure becomes apparent when
considering anomalous processes [ 1 ] , which arise from contributions
of the triangle loop diagrams @xmath of Fig. 2.1 . The total sum of
anomalous contributions @xmath , @xmath is proportional to [ 44 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the group generators are @xmath , @xmath . The possible
combinations of @xmath ’s are

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where @xmath is the sum of electromagnetic charges of the contributing
internal fermions. If @xmath is summed over a generation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus the electroweak anomalies cancel precisely when quarks come in
3 colours. However while the requirement of anomaly cancellation
suggests a classification of fermions into families, the number of such
families is still a free parameter. The remarkable conspiracy of
fermions within a generation to have a vanishing sum of charges @xmath
is often touted as evidence for higher physics (for a recent review see
[ 61 ] ) although the problem of anomaly cancellation shall not concern
us here.

#### 3.1.2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking and mass

As seen in section 2.1 , bare fermion masses mix left- and right-handed
states, violating the chiral gauge-invariance and hence necessarily
remain absent from a renormalisable theory. Moreover the addition of
mass terms @xmath to the gauge-boson Lagrangian Eq.( 3.1 ) in order to
accommodate the massive @xmath and @xmath bosons also violates @xmath
gauge-invariance. In the pure SM gauge-boson and fermion masses are
accommodated via the Higgs-Kibble mechanism [ 64 ] , [ 63 ] of
spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB). That is, an extra @xmath isodoublet
@xmath of scalars fields is postulated

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the corresponding gauged scalar Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , @xmath the scalar potential terms have the famous “Mexican
hat” shape with a continuum of vacuum minima satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Upon choosing a single ground state, the electroweak symmetry is broken
to its QED subgroup Eq.( 3.1 ) and from Goldstone’s theorem (see section
2.1 ) three massless states @xmath appear. Rewriting @xmath in terms of
the real fields @xmath and the Higgs field @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath -invariance allows the unphysical (due to gauge invariance)
@xmath states to be rotated away, in which case @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.5)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where now, due to the symmetry breaking, it is more convenient
physically to rewrite the Lagrangian in terms of the intermediate gauge
fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Weinberg mixing angle. The SSB has been constructed
in such a way that these fields are identifiable with the photon of QED
and the experimentally observed massive intermediate vector bosons. That
is, the unphysical Goldstone particles have been transformed into
longitudinal gauge degrees of freedom and give rise to mass terms @xmath
and @xmath . In terms of the intermediate fields defined in Eqs.( 3.6 ,
3.7 ) the fermion Lagrangian @xmath (given by Eq.( 3.2 )) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.8)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and all that remains to extract QED from the @xmath terms is to impose

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By postulating the existence of a complex scalar isodoublet there is the
possibility for introducing a fermion mass via a gauge-invariant
scalar-fermion coupling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which for a generic fermion isodoublet @xmath , after SSB becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for arbitrary complex parameters @xmath . In particular if there are
@xmath identical generations @xmath is an @xmath matrix.

Thus, the electroweak model is seen to accommodate fermion and boson
masses in a gauge-invariant way, however the price to be paid for
multiple generations is the introduction of a proliferation of Yukawa
couplings @xmath . The main drawback of the Higgs-Kibble mechanism is,
however, the lack of experimental evidence for a physical Higgs particle
(for a recent review see [ 64 ] ). A number of alternative mechanisms
for generating gauge-invariant boson masses have been proposed, for
example, [ 65 ] , [ 66 ] , which do not suffer the shortcomings of
elementary scalar fields. Dynamical symmetry breaking mechanisms are
also used to generate fermion masses, for example, the technicolour [ 67
] , [ 68 ] or top-condensation [ 69 ] , [ 70 ] scenarios), and in
addition can generate gauge boson masses [ 31 ] .

#### 3.1.3 Flavour mixing and CP violation

A priori, the coupling matrix @xmath in Eq.( 3.9 ) may be non-diagonal
and complex, constrained by the requirement that it commute with the
charge operator @xmath of QED. To obtain the mass eigenstates, i.e., the
physical fermion basis, one must diagonalise @xmath by unitary
phase-redefinitions of the fermions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

however this phase-redefinition transforms fermion interaction terms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an @xmath unitary matrix. Essentially the mass and weak
eigenstates are incompatible, and thus flavour-changing charged currents
are predicted.

As pointed out by Kobayashi and Maskawa [ 71 ] , for @xmath generations
the number of complex elements @xmath which cannot be removed by unitary
redefinitions of fermion fields @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence for @xmath , complex couplings must remain, which lead to
Charge-conjugation- and Parity- (CP-)violating interactions. In fact the
existence of CP violating electroweak processes had been previously
confirmed in the decays of neutral kaons [ 72 ] . Hence the SM with
CP-violation provides a lower bound on the number of quark generations,
@xmath . From Eq.( 3.10 ), for @xmath there exists a single complex
phase in the quark sector. With @xmath and @xmath the isospin-changing,
i.e., @xmath -fermion) interactions in Eq.( 3.8 ) become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the Cabbibo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix is commonly
parametrised in terms of the angles @xmath , the mixing angle between
the @xmath and @xmath generations [ 5 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath denote @xmath and @xmath respectively. Note that
with recent experimental evidence for neutrino masses [ 73 ] , [ 74 ] a
CKM matrix and CP-violation potentially exist in the leptonic sector
also. As only one CP-violating parameter @xmath is predicted
considerable experimental focus is currently being placed on tests of
the CKM model (for a recent review see [ 75 ] , for a survey of
generalised CP violation in the SM see [ 76 ] ). Recently it has been
argued [ 77 ] that only three types of interactions in gauge theories
lead to CP violation, fermion-scalar interactions (as above),
scalar-scalar interactions, for example, [ 78 ] , [ 79 ] ) and gauge
terms @xmath as seen in e.g.,the strong CP problem. However it has also
been pointed out [ 81 ] that non-perturbative sources of flavour mixing
also exist as the SM fermion mass matrices also undergo rotation as a
result of scale changes.

#### 3.1.4 Non-perturbative aspects

With historical emphasis in theoretical physics on grand unification the
non-perturbative region of the SM has been largely ignored. As pointed
out in [ 2 ] , at large momenta the hypercharge sector dominates, due to
the asymptotic freedom of the colour and flavour interactions. Not only
is the @xmath hypercharge NAF, but numerical simulations [ 25 ] suggest
that for elementary Higgs the renormalised quartic scalar coupling also
vanishes. Indeed the fact that triviality can apparently be averted by
embedding the SM group in a higher semisimple group adds to the appeal
of higher physics. However, as demonstrated in the last chapter the GNJL
offers an alternative, in the case of NAF, or “pure”, QED.

In another paper Kiselev [ 23 ] postulated a strongly self-interacting
(SSIR) (composite) Higgs region intermediate to @xmath and a higher,
e.g., unification scale @xmath . Qualitatively, condensates of three
bilocal fermion composites (corresponding to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
) were found to acquire non zero VEV’s below the scale @xmath , breaking
EW symmetry. The masses of these three fermions may be predicted
accurately, e.g. @xmath GeV [ 23 ] , from the SSIR IR fixed point
conditions. The model is also consistent with [ 21 ] , where three Higgs
sharing a specially-constrained potential led to the assertion of an
extended vacuum with @xmath -symmetry. Here the existence of multiple
local vacuum minima was suggested to be an origin for the fermion
generations.

A realistic description of the fermion generations via this method
requires new symmetry breaking for the lighter fermion generations to
acquire masses, however the successes of [ 23 ] provide further
motivation for a study of the qualitative features of a hypercharge
equivalent of the GNJL.

In conclusion, this section has illustrated how the electroweak model
accommodates as arbitrary parameters the number of fermions (with some
constraint given by anomaly cancellation), the fermion masses, mixings
and CP violation. For three fermion generations, one Higgs isodoublet
and no lepton CKM matrix the poor understanding of the scalar sector
implies 14 ad hoc parameters (9 Yukawa couplings, 3 mixing angles, 1
phase and the Higgs VEV) are required.

### 3.2 The NJL model

Historically the Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model was the first relativistic
quantum field theory in which dynamical chiral symmetry breaking was
studied [ 15 ] . It is an important sector of contemporary theories
including top-condensation models. See, for example, [ 69 ] , [ 70 ] )
and the GNJL [ 24 ] . In this section we illustrate a number of its
qualitative features following Miransky [ 17 ] . The NJL Lagrangian is
obtained from the GNJL Lagrangian Eq.( 3.38 ) upon setting the gauge
coupling @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where the auxilary field @xmath satisfies the Euler-Lagrange equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e., the coupling @xmath has canonical dimension @xmath and in @xmath
we have suppressed all colour indices. The corresponding generating
functional is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalisation factor. Now the fermion fields simply
appear in Eq.( 3.12 ) as a Gaussian integral and may be formally
integrated out:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Upon substituting in Eq.( 3.12 ) the effective NJL action may then be
read off as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , the path integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is dominated by the stationary points of @xmath and the dynamics is
classical. Thus ignoring quantum fluctuations of @xmath , @xmath , we
approximate @xmath by its mean-field value @xmath . Using chiral
symmetry any vacuum solution may be transformed via chiral symmetry into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so in momentum space we consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Evaluating the trace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is immediately clear that the solution to this equation is constant
and the trivial solution @xmath exists. Rotating into Euclidean space
and computing the momentum integral yields the algebraic equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath both terms on the left-hand side of Eq.( 3.13 ) are negative
if @xmath and in this case only the trivial solution @xmath exists. It
follows then that to obtain a non-trivial real value of @xmath , @xmath
must exceed the critical value @xmath . Moreover this solution is
unique. It is clear that in the subcritical case the single zero
corresponds to a stable extremum and chiral symmetry is preserved.
However for the supercritical case this zero corresponds to a maximum,
while the nontrivial value is the stable vacuum solution. In this
supercritical phase then a mass term is dynamically generated,
spontaneously breaking the chiral symmetry of the bare Lagrangian.

### 3.3 @xmath: dynamical chiral symmetry breaking

A number of early studies [ 16 ] , [ 82 ] , [ 83 ] , [ 84 ] in massless,
quenched, rainbow QED indicated a 2-phase structure, with a critical
coupling value @xmath above which chiral symmetry was broken. Maskawa
and Nakajima [ 16 ] found this to be possible only for a finite cutoff.
In general [ 82 ] the supercritical solution is found to be proportional
to the cutoff, requiring judicious fine-tuning of the coupling constant
to render the solution finite.

The general strategy for studying dynamical fermion mass generation in
the literature has been to truncate the system of Schwinger-Dyson
equations at the stage of 2-point Greens functions. Typically only the
fermion propagator is retained and a test form is used for the photon
propagator. In QED @xmath the 2-point equations to be solved are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge-boson propagator, while @xmath and @xmath
denote the bare and dressed vertex functions respectively.

From Lorentz invariance and parity conservation the most general
decomposition of the inverse fermion propagator is, in Euclidean space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the (unrenormalised) bare mass, @xmath , @xmath are
scalar form factors and @xmath is the fermion self-energy. At this point
a number of simplifying assumptions must be made for the photon
propagator @xmath and the full vertex @xmath in order to obtain
approximate solutions.

#### 3.3.1 Quenched rainbow approximation

In this, and the following subsection the running of the coupling is
ignored (quenched approximation) and the photon propagator is
approximated by its bare counterpart:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge parameter. Further, approximating the full
vertex @xmath by the bare @xmath (rainbow approximation) and performing
the trace over Eq.( 3.16 ) yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are momentum-squared while @xmath is the
Heaviside step function. In the Landau gauge, @xmath , this system
reduces to a single integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which was extensively studied by Fukuda and Kugo [ 84 ] in its
differential form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the integration limits become the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The expression Eq.( 3.20 ) has no analytic solution, however analyses
via bifurcation techniques [ 85 ] , [ 86 ] have been performed, while
linearisation @xmath has been shown to be a good approximation in both
infra-red and ultra-violet regions [ 87 ] . Adopting the latter
approach, the solution in the UV regime is [ 17 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Substituting these into the UV boundary
condition Eq.( 3.22 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the chiral limit @xmath when @xmath in Eq.( 3.23 ) for finite
@xmath it is clear that @xmath is also trivial. For @xmath , @xmath
cannot naively be set to zero in a consistent way. The argument [ 17 ]
follows from the conservation of the (renormalised) axial current @xmath
, which is required for chiral symmetry-breaking

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon substituting Eq.( 3.24 ) into the subcritical solution of Eq.( 3.23
) it follows that only the trivial solution @xmath satisfies the
ultra-violet boundary condition Eq.( 3.22 ).

However when @xmath , infinitely many solutions of Eq.( 3.23 ) are
possible. For @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or re-arranging for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Miransky [ 88 ] showed that only the case @xmath corresponds to a stable
vacuum; solutions with higher values are interpreted as radial Goldstone
excitations.

#### 3.3.2 Improved quenched approximations

There are a number of general criteria that an ansatz for the vector
vertex function @xmath should address as outlined by Burden and Roberts
[ 89 ] . Despite being a useful first study for dynamical chiral
symmetry breaking, quenched rainbow QED @xmath fails to satisfy several
of these.

@xmath @xmath must transform in the same way as the bare vertex @xmath
under Lorentz transformations and satisfy charge conservation.

@xmath It must satisfy the vector Ward-Takahashi Identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the rainbow approximation, substituting Eq.( 3.16 ) and @xmath this
gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is satisfied only when @xmath , that is, in Landau gauge. However
the Ward-Takahashi Identity Eq.( 3.3.2 ) only defines a (“longitudinal”)
portion of the vertex @xmath ; a “transverse” piece remains
unconstrained. The full gauge covariance of QED is guaranteed by the
Landau-Khalatnikov transformations [ 90 ] . The strategy of making
vertex ansatze satisfying individual Ward-Takahashi identities provides
only approximate gauge-covariance However the LK transforms are
difficult to implement for many choices of @xmath and consequently much
of the literature for QED [ 91 ] , [ 92 ] , [ 93 ] is aimed at pinning
down the behaviour of the transverse piece by the other vertex
requirements. An alternative approach is to also consider the so-called
“Transverse Ward-Takahashi identity” [ 94 ] , [ 95 ] . Here, in addition
to the divergence @xmath , one considers the curl of the vertex @xmath .
In 2-dimensional QED the latter simply reduces to the axial
Ward-Takahashi Identity [ 96 ] and moreover the model is exactly
solvable [ 95 ] .

@xmath The vertex must reduce to @xmath when dressed fermion and boson
propagators are replaced by bare ones so that perturbation theory is
recovered in the free-field limit. The absence of kinematic
singularities guarantees a unique @xmath limit for the vertex. Such a
vertex is given in Feynman gauge to two loops [ 36 ] perturbation theory
while a 1 loop, singularity-free form in arbitrary covariant gauge was
given in [ 92 ] .

@xmath It must allow multiplicative renormalisation of the SDE it
appears in. The restrictions that this places on the transverse vertex
piece have been considered in quenched QED @xmath [ 91 ] . The most
general, non-perturbative, multiplicatively-renormalisable form for the
vertex has also been considered [ 93 ] .

The methods for applying these constraints to the case of QED will be
discussed in what follows. The most general Lorentz-invariant, spin-
@xmath vertex may be written as [ 97 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a parity-conserving theory the form factors @xmath vanish, and the
further constraint of charge-conjugation invariance

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

demands that each of the 12 terms be symmetric under @xmath .

The requirement that the vertex satisfy the vector-current Ward identity
Eq.( 3.3.2 ), and in particular as @xmath to avoid the appearance of
kinematic singularities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

was considered in [ 36 ] . Indeed a criterion for choosing the basis
vectors is that each of the 12 terms be independently singularity-free.
Substituting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

into Eq.( 3.26 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which may be rewritten in a @xmath , @xmath -symmetric way as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In addition to restricting three of the twelve form factors, the absence
of @xmath terms from Eq. ( 3.3.2 ) causes another to vanish. The
resulting (Ball-Chiu) vertex may now be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Ball-Chiu basis vectors for the transverse part of the vector
vertex are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To two loops in Feynman [ 36 ] gauge @xmath while if @xmath , @xmath
also. The analysis has been repeated to 1 loop in arbitrary covariant
gauge [ 92 ] and misprints in the coefficients @xmath , @xmath of [ 36 ]
corrected

Constraining the transverse vertex by requiring the self-energy Eq.(
3.15 ) be multiplicatively-renormalisable led to the well-known
Curtis-Pennington vertex ansatz [ 91 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting this into Eq.( 3.15 ) and tracing out the vector and scalar
form-factors as above one arrives at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.31)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Naturally the corresponding equations for the Ball-Chiu vertex are
obtained by dropping the terms containing @xmath . Numerical solutions
of this system of equations have yielded estimates of the critical
coupling in the range of @xmath in Landau gauge [ 98 ] and @xmath for
Landau, Feynman and Yennie gauges [ 91 ] . The gauge-dependence of the
critical coupling has been investigated both numerically [ 91 ] and
analytically [ 99 ] . Numerically the “Euclidean mass” [ 91 ] is
associated with the appearance of a fixed point of the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the latter study a bifurcation technique [ 85 ] , namely functional
differentiation of this self-mapping, was employed to locate the change
between the oscillatory and non-oscillatory behaviours of the mass
function. Differentiating Eqs.( 3.30 , 3.31 ) with respect to @xmath and
evaluating the system at the trivial point @xmath , the momentum
integrals may be performed [ 99 ] . Scale invariance is recovered for
the large cutoff limit, @xmath , with the solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

A bifurcation point occurs when 2 solutions of Eq.( 3.34 ) become equal,
and, in particular, criticality is reached when a nontrivial solution of
Eq.( 3.31 ) bifurcates away from the trivial one, @xmath . In Landau
gauge Eq.( 3.34 ) has two solutions, and the critical coupling was found
to be @xmath . More than 2 solutions exist in an arbitrary gauge and
only the solutions continuously connected to the Landau solutions are of
interest. Differentiating the right-hand side of Eq.( 3.34 ) w.r.t.
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving Eqs.( 3.34 ,( 3.35 ) simultaneously, Atkinson et al. [ 99 ]
found only 11 @xmath deviation from the Landau gauge result for gauge
parameter @xmath , while for @xmath the solution @xmath becomes
infra-red-divergent and the gauge-dependance of @xmath increases
markedly.

Further improvements upon the Curtis-Pennington vertex must ultimately
improve the gauge-dependance of the critical coupling, and include the
effects of unquenching the photon propagator.

#### 3.3.3 Unquenched approximations

The unquenched behaviour of the SDE equations in QED is of vital
importance: the running behaviour of the coupling leads problems such as
the Landau pole in perturbation theory, while removing the cutoff (
@xmath ) leads to the requirement that QED (and non-asymptotically free
theories in general) be trivial [ 25 ] . Including fermion loops
introduces an extra dimensionless parameter into the theory, N, the
number of flavours of contributing fermions, and is responsible for any
possible dynamically-generated photon mass. The effect that quenching
the photon propagator has upon the phase transition in the unquenched
theory has been investigated in massless, rainbow approximation in a
number of studies [ 100 ] , [ 101 ] , [ 102 ] , [ 103 ] . Qualitatively
the phase transition has been found to be pushed to larger coupling
scales, for @xmath estimates (to be compared with @xmath in quenched,
rainbow case) include @xmath [ 100 ] and @xmath [ 103 ] .

The simplest way to improve upon the quenched approximation of section
2.1 is to replace the photon propagator Eq.( 3.17 ) by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and re-derive the coupled equations for the fermion form factors @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.36)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The simplest non-trivial ansatz for @xmath is to take the large momentum
limit of the one-loop contribution of @xmath massless fermion species:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However the “Landau ghost problem” arises at large momenta: setting
@xmath an unremoveable singularity appears when

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e., when @xmath . In particular at the cutoff when @xmath can equal 4,
this constrains N to a few permissible values @xmath . Setting @xmath ,
@xmath it is clear that to avoid the singularity @xmath . Indeed one
study [ 102 ] found nontrivial solutions for only @xmath , @xmath . The
solution to Eqs.( 3.37 ) was found [ 101 ] , [ 102 ] to possess mean
field behaviour

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

compared with the exponential behaviour Eq.( 3.25 ) in the unquenched
case.

### 3.4 Gauged model

The suggestion that 4-fermi operators of the type contained in the NJL
could mix with the QED gauge interaction was first made by Bardeen et
al. [ 24 ] . In the quenched rainbow QED approximation in the
neighbourhood of the UV fixed point they showed that the naively
irrelevant (6-dimensional) operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

become marginal, i.e., acquire an anomalous dimension @xmath . In terms
of the Wilson RG, the GNJL can be thought of as a low-energy effective
action arising in the following way. Consider the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a chiral- and parity-invariant potential. In the local
potential approximation (LPA),i.e., in the absence of derivative terms,
the lowest order terms are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and chiral symmetry guarantees that the next terms in the expansion of
@xmath are of order eight in the fermion fields. Several analyses [ 24 ]
, [ 106 ] have shown that for quenched QED, the scalar term @xmath
becomes marginal while the vector couplings [ 56 ] remain irrelevant.

The GNJL (in covariant gauge) for N fermion flavours is therefore given
by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dimensionful four-fermion coupling constant,
identified with @xmath , while @xmath are global @xmath flavour
generators normalised by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the QED Lagrangian, Eq. 2.5 is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extra 4-fermi term contributing to the fermion self-energy is given
by Figure 3.1 .

In the quenched rainbow approximation this leads to the modification
(cf. Eq.( 3.19 ))

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.40)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the Landau gauge, @xmath , this system is equivalent to the the
differential equation Eq.( 3.20 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the 4-fermi coupling enters through the UV boundary condition Eq.(
3.43 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In this case the large @xmath , scale-invariant solution reveals a
critical curve in coupling constant space given by [ 85 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Beyond this approximation, progress is made upon introducing auxilary
@xmath and @xmath fields of the type used in the NJL. Recently it has
been argued in detail [ 28 ] that interactions of these scalar
composites with fermions suppress the charge screening fermion loops.

## Chapter 4 Four-fermion model of generations

The crucial point is to make an appropriate choice of variables, able to
capture the physics which is most important for the problem at hand.

Antonio Pich

You can use any variables at all to analyze a problem, but if you use
the wrong variables you’ll be sorry.

Steven Weinberg

In this chapter we construct a toy four-fermion model in order to
develop the qualitative discussion of [ 2 ] ). The key feature of the
proposal is for the interactions between fermion chiralities to occur at
separate momentum scales, specifically

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the scales for right-right,
left-right and left-left couplings respectively. This is anticipated to
lead to a rich set of phase transitions and fermion-antifermion
condensates. Under the proposal of [ 2 ] a “fundamental” fermion
consisting of three flavours corresponding to the observed generations
may then be self-consistently introduced

We begin with the large momentum-limit of the standard model where, due
to asymptotic freedom, the @xmath colour and @xmath isospin interactions
have become negligible. The dynamics is governed by the
non-asymptotically free hypercharge @xmath interaction. To this end we
consider the generating functional @xmath for a chiral Abelian theory
containing, for simplicity, a single charged, massless fermion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is a normalisation factor and @xmath is the inverse boson
propagator. In the absence of any anomaly-matching, strictly speaking
the parity-odd part of the action @xmath contains not only a @xmath
-multivalued chiral invariant remainder, but also a Wess-Zumino-Witten
functional which saturates the anomaly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall postpone treatment of the anomaly until the next chapter, with
the understanding that the following discussion holds for the
parity-even part of the action at a formal level.

Completing the square in @xmath and formally integrating out the
resulting Gaussian leads to the appearance of three effective
interactions, proportional to @xmath , @xmath ,and @xmath respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In order to proceed one must make an approximation to the quartic
fermion terms. In the conventional GNJL, the bosons acquire an effective
mass below the chiral symmetry breaking scale @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the various terms could be critical at separate scales, however the
simplest form for the massive boson propagator is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where it is understood that the couplings denoted with a “ @xmath ” have
absorbed the scale factor @xmath and hence have canonical dimension
@xmath .

Some ansatz must, in general be made for the separately-running SM
couplings @xmath , however we shall initially consider three independent
coupling constants. The effective Lagrangian density is now:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Using Fierz identities (see Appendix A ) the general effective quartic
interaction Eq.( 4.1 ) is arrived at:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The first two terms are just the extended NJL if we identify

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The third, anomalous term @xmath violates parity, chiral symmetry and
contributes to the odd part of the effective action. It is therefore
clear that an analysis of D @xmath SB of the even part would proceed
along the same lines as the extended NJL.

### 4.1 Digression

Due to the ABJ anomaly, chiral symmetry in the single-fermion
hypercharge theory would be broken by gauge transformations. In a first
attempt therefore to distinguish the current model from the extended NJL
we could add chiral-breaking 4-fermi interactions. These interactions
would be constrained by the requirement that the resulting Dirac
operator @xmath has non-negative eigenvalues in order for the theory to
be regularisable in Euclidean space. In computing the quantity @xmath ,
and in the absence of external vector and axial fields, the most general
expression for the mass matrix is (see, e.g,. appendix A of [ 104 ] ,)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, external scalar and
pseudoscalar flavour matrices. Here the first term is recognisable as
the chiral-invariant NJL terms, while the second and third are new. The
above expression is Hermitian in the limit of vanishing @xmath , however
recently it has been demonstrated [ 105 ] that Hermiticity, while a
sufficient condition for non-negativity is not necessary. Invariance
under PT transformations was conjectured [ 105 ] to be the fundamental
requirement.

Assuming a priori that there are no difficulties in regulating @xmath
,e.g., via the @xmath -function approach [ 104 ] ), our toy model will
have 4-fermi interactions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where couplings @xmath and @xmath are taken to be real.

Since chiral symmetry is explicitly broken a chiral rotation

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

has the effect of transforming the anomalous coupling into a complex
quantity

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is some renormalisation scale, which we set to the scale of
chiral symmetry breaking. As in the case without explicit chiral
symmetry breaking, progress is made via the mean field approximation,
however here the choice of auxilary field varies differs for both
couplings @xmath , @xmath nonzero.

When @xmath , @xmath we encounter the familiar NJL auxilary field

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , @xmath the choice will be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

while for @xmath it is the complex, chiral matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For convenience of analysis, let us consider the general case by
introducing fermions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , with respective coupling
values

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The general 4-fermi terms in Eq.( 4.1 ) may then be rewritten as a
(Hermitean) mass matrix as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.11)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.2 Mass generation

Although chiral symmetry is explicitly broken in the model Eq.( 4.5 ),
we shall now investigate the case where the magnitude of this effect is
small. An analysis of dynamically-generated mass associated with the
breaking of the chiral-symmetric component can still be legitimately
compared to that in other quantum field theories. Meanwhile the other
two features of the toy model, fermionic generations and CP violation
are entirely dependent on the possiblity of mass generation.

We consider the theory with three introduced fermion species with the
coupling constants specified in ( 4.10 ). With the mass terms of Eq.(
4.11 ) the Lagrangian density is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given by Eq.( 4.12 ). From the corresponding generating
functional

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one formally integrates out the fermions to obtain the effective action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the Dirac operators @xmath are, as discussed previously, assumed
non-negative in Euclidean space and therefore regularisable. If this
action is dominated by the stationary points

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

there are three pairs of coupled NJL-like equations, which in momentum
space are found to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Neglecting the momentum dependence of the couplings, in the mean field
approximation this system has a constant solution. The momentum
integrals are evaluated in polar coordinates and it is convenient to
define the integrand function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Euclidean squared momentum. Given that @xmath is in
general a complex quantity, @xmath , we shall frequently express this
function as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where for the complex logarithm the usual branch cut along the negative
imaginary axis has been made and it has been assumed that @xmath .

The mean-field expectation values thus obtained are complex, however in
the results obtained below it is understood that a suitable unitary
redefinition of the fermion field in question enables the phase to be
eliminated. For the question of mass generation it therefore suffices to
seek non-trivial real values @xmath , which minimise the effective
potential.

#### 4.2.1 Conventional chiral symmetric phase

Let us first consider the chiral-invariant limit of the model, @xmath ,
where the behaviour should emulate that of the conventional NJL. That
is, above a critical coupling value the chiral-symmetric vacuum becomes
unstable and undergoes a phase transition to a configuration where
chiral symmetry is dynamically broken. Integrating Eqs.( 4.14 , 4.15 )
up to the UV cutoff @xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In terms of real and imaginary parts @xmath there are two “gap”
equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the case of real fermion mass, @xmath , @xmath and Eq.( 4.20 ) is
just the mean-field NJL equation ( 3.13 ). Hence nontrivial solutions
exist for the former equation when both sides have the same sign, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, in terms of the dimensionless couplings defined in Eq.( 4.1 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The trivial solution @xmath also exists for both phases, but it
corresponds to a vacuum maximum when @xmath (see section 3.2 ).

#### 4.2.2 Explicitly broken phase

Consider now the purely explicit chiral-breaking interaction.
Integrating over the fermion loop, Eqs.( 4.16 , 4.17 ) give

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Writing the coupling as @xmath , the real and imaginary gap equations
then read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Real, nontrivial solutions are therefore obtained when the imaginary
component of the coupling @xmath vanishes. The NJL equation ( 3.13 ) is
obtained again, with the explicit chiral-breaking coupling @xmath having
the critical value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.2.3 Anomalous phase

Finally we integrate the equations for @xmath up to scale @xmath
yielding

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In this case when @xmath =0, @xmath the NJL gap equation is found where
the critical coupling curve is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is given by Eq.( 4.12 ).

### 4.3 Fermion generations

It was seen in the previous section that the three fermion species
introduced in Eq.( 4.11 ) each, living in their own 4-fermi potential,
experience a two-phase vacuum structure analogous to the NJL. Moreover
there are three phase transitions in the theory, corresponding to the
scales where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath each attain the critical value
@xmath . This is the behaviour envisaged in [ 2 ] and fermion
generations can be introduced as the components of a self-consistently
defined fundamental fermion @xmath via the mechanism of Kiselev [ 21 ] ,
which we now briefly outline.

In the original study [ 21 ] 3 Higgs scalars were introduced into a
specially-constrained potential leading to the possibility of an
extended @xmath -degenerate vacuum. Fermionic fields with @xmath
components corresponding to fermion generations are then
self-consistently introduced into the theory.

For the model under consideration we can rewrite the three “masses” as
rewritten in the polar form

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.27)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath are understood to be (real) Yukawa constants. These
quantities could replace the three complex VEVs in [ 21 ] if we
anticipate the full gauged version of the toy model in the following
chapter. Without loss of generality the quantities @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath could be eliminated in the unitary gauge with the remaining
phases @xmath , @xmath potentially leading to observable mass effects.
The fermion “mass” terms could be recast in terms of auxilary fermions,
for example, @xmath (c.f. [ 21 ] , where @xmath ) given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and similarly for the conjugate term @xmath . As Kiselev pointed out,
all @xmath -dependence is removed from the mass matrices if @xmath .
More generally it is clear that if in addition @xmath , the above mass
matrix is also scalar.

In [ 21 ] the discrete @xmath phase values result from a special choice
of Higgs potential, whereby the vacuum configuration has a @xmath
degeneracy. With the extended vacuum state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a @xmath symmetric model of fermions @xmath , @xmath can be
self-consistently defined. See [ 21 ] for full details of the scalar
potential. Once the chiral phase is also allowed, the required symmetry
here is @xmath . Although we have not yet considered internal fermionic
degrees of freedom the @xmath factor could be relevant to the isospin
structure of leptons or quarks, particulary in the context of left-right
symmetric models (see section 6.3 for further discussion).

We have outlined in this section how the existence of condensates
associated with the three critical scales provides a mechanism for
fermion generations to be self-consistently introduced. We note however
that this auxilary field technique is quite general and may in principle
be extended beyond the current 2- and 3-generation models [ 21 ] , [ 23
] . Here the motivation for considering three generations is given by
the observation that, once the requirement of chiral symmetry is
dropped, there are three possible types of 4-fermi potential.

### 4.4 CP-violation

The model contains several potential sources of CP-violation. Firstly,
as noted, the masses in Eq.( 4.27 ) are complex, chiral objects. As
outlined above, upon introducing three generations the phases may be
eliminated if @xmath , @xmath . That is, if one appeals to the existence
of a chiral @xmath symmetry.

In this case flavour mixing also arises from the fact that the mass
matrix in Eq.( 4.28 ) is only determined up to an ambiguity; an internal
rotation which cancels at the level of the @xmath constituent fields,
leaving the eigenvalues of @xmath invariant. These CKM/MNS mixing angles
are naturally expressed in terms of the ratios of quark/lepton
generation masses and Kiselev has shown [ 21 ] that when the augmented
mass matrix is expressed in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the resulting estimates for the CP-violating phase and certain CKM
matrix elements are statistically equivalent to best current
experimental limits (see [ 21 ] ).

In the absence of the discrete chiral symmetry, the complex chiral
phases will lead to further sources of CP violation. In the general
parametrisation there are such three CP parameters: @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

#### 4.4.1 Triviality

In summarising this section to date, we have introduced a toy fermionic
theory which appears to contain mass generation and, upon
self-consistent introduction of three fermion generations, CP-violating
behaviour. It was constructed in such a way that perturbative
renormalisability was implicit. However the magnitude of the running of
the coupling was ignored until now. If the model is to represent a
high-energy matter-only sector, rescuing the @xmath hypercharge from
triviality analogous to the GNJL, the model must itself be well-behaved
in the UV and IR limits.

The running behaviour of the dimensionless couplings @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath in the LPA approximation of the Wegner-Houghton RG scheme are
readily obtained from using Eq.( 2.37 ) with the Wilson potential given
by @xmath in Eq.( 4.1 ). Equivalently the form of the one-loop @xmath
functions can be deduced from the diagrams given in Appendix B . For
vanishing bare fermion mass the running couplings are described by (c.f.
[ 56 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant associated with the evaluation of the fermion
loop in figure B.2 , and the dimensionless scale parameter @xmath is
defined in terms of the fixed scale @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equivalently the equations for @xmath , @xmath may be split into real
and imaginary parts, as above:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The system of equations ( 4.29 , 4.31 , 4.32 ) is found, for @xmath , to
have the same qualitative properties as existing analyses of the
conventional 4-Fermi theory [ 106 ] , [ 107 ] . In this case Eq.( 4.29 )
has the analytic solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the constant of integration. This solution evidently
flows to a vanishing IR point ( @xmath ) and the non-trivial UV fixed
point ( @xmath ) at @xmath .

There is also a well-behaved analytic solution for Eqs.( 4.31 , 4.32 )
when @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

i.e., it has vanishing IR and finite UV behaviour, similar to Eq.( 4.33
) above.

Once the symmetry-breaking couplings are switched on, the full system of
equations can only be solved numerically. Again the model flows to a UV
fixed point, however in the general complex case the IR behaviour has
been altered. Given the IR boundary conditions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

it is found that for @xmath , the values @xmath , @xmath are
scale-independent, however @xmath and @xmath rapidly become singular
below @xmath .

The reason for this behaviour becomes clear when these equations are
combined:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, when @xmath , the flow through coupling constant space remains
null, defining another renormalised trajectory. Along this path the RG
equations simplify to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From Eq.( 4.39 ) it is clear that a possibility for finite nontrivial
solutions exists if the exponent is positive, i.e., for “small” enough
@xmath .

With vanishing imaginary coupling @xmath the running couplings are, from
Eqs.( 4.37 , 4.38 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

This phase of the theory could, therefore, with suitable matching
conditions upon @xmath , @xmath at some scale @xmath be interpreted as a
high ( @xmath ) energy limit of some lower effective theory.

At this stage it is helpful to classify the three interesting
coupling-constant trajectories. We shall refer to the subspace defined
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

as region I. It is characterised by a real, positive coupling and the
relevant low-energy 4-fermi operator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Region II is defined to be the trajectory

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which is just the conventional attractive scalar interaction of the GNJL

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally there is region III, where both couplings are non-zero

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where if @xmath is now an attractive scalar interaction, @xmath is
necessarily repulsive, a similar situation to the 1+1-dimensional
Luttinger liquid model of interactions between left- and right-moving
charge densities. The relevant operator in this case is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Up until now our analysis has only considered one scale, however with
the hierarchy @xmath the set of phase transitions suggested in [ 2 ]
could naturally be described by the following scenario.

Consider a chiral gauge theory defined at momentum scales @xmath . Upon
evolution to higher scales, an attractive, irrelevant scalar operator
@xmath [Eq.( 4.41 )] acquires a large anomalous dimension, and begins to
mix with the gauge interaction, suppressing the non-asymptotically free
coupling before becoming marginal in the neighborhood of @xmath . This
chiral symmetry- and parity-breaking interaction is analogous to the
chiral condensates generated at the right-right critical scale in [ 2 ]
. At progressively larger scales fluctuations of operator @xmath [Eq.(
4.42 )] become apparent, before, at the scale @xmath , also becoming
relevant. As noted previously it is the left-right hypercharge
interaction which gives rise to such a term, it is natural therefore to
associate @xmath with this critical scale. Finally, at @xmath both
couplings are switched on, however in this phase @xmath has been driven
negative, the marginal operator is now @xmath [Eq.( 4.45 )]. This
phenomenon of competing attractive and repulsive scalar interactions
also occurs in the Luttinger liquid models of strongly correlated
electrons in 1+1 dimensions (see section 6.3 for further discussion).

#### 4.4.2 Summary

In this section we proposed a toy 4-fermion model which, upon analysis
was demonstrated to have behaviour matching that of the hypothesis [ 2 ]
of dynamical mass, generations and CP violation.

To the best of our knowledge it is the first toy model exhibiting such
dynamical features and can be considered essentially intermediate to two
differing approaches to the generation problem, [ 81 ] , [ 21 ] , both
of which are independent of the nature of the origin of mass and make
good tree-level predictions for CKM matrix elements, heavy/light mass
ratios etc.

The study of Kiselev [ 21 ] illustrates how, with the self-consistent
introduction of @xmath symmetric fermions and a special 3-Higgs
potential, the generation structure emerges. Under our proposal the
three Higgs scalars are composites, the underlying dynamics being the
four-fermion operators needed to rescue the chiral @xmath model from
triviality in the Wilsonian RG picture. This is in direct analogy to the
GNJL as the extended version of QED.

The latter [ 81 ] notes that RG evolution of the SM fermion mass
matrices offers a mechanism for flavour mixing and the fermion mass
hierarchy. Given that these “masses” are coupling-dependent linear
combinations of the conventional NJL auxilary fields, the running of the
couplings would generate flavour mixing in a similar manner.

The main drawback with this model is the origin and nature of the
explicit chiral symmetry breaking. In the Fierz reordering of the
(chiral-symmetric) hypercharge effective action above, such terms
cancelled for the separate right-right and left-left interactions, also
for the combination of left-right and right-left terms. The most
probable cause is an anomalous mixing of pseudoscalar and vector/ axial
fermion couplings, in which case the effect is small at low scales.

Secondly there is the question of how the operators @xmath , @xmath of
Eqs.( 4.41 , 4.45 ) which seemingly break the chiral symmetry but, in
the mean-field approximation at least, impart no fermion mass at
subcritical scales. With two of the three fermion species ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) behaving in a different manner to @xmath , it moreover appears
logical to associate the former with the heavier, unstable generations.

A resolution to this may lie in the “pseudogap” phenomenon of
strongly-correlated electrons [ 108 ] : It is well-known that
mean-field, Bardeen-Cooper-Schriffer (BCS) type theories of
superconductivity are inadequate outside the regimes of weak coupling
and high carrier density. A separation of the temperatures of pair
formation and pair condensation occurs and, in the intermediate
temperature range Cooper pairs exist, however due to large fluctuations
no condensate is formed.

Recently it was shown [ 108 ] that the phenomenon exists in the
Gross-Neveu model and it was suggested to apply to other relativistic
matter-only models. In the theory under consideration the implication is
that the Dirac vacuum is, in fact such a “pseudogap”-like phase.
Although the pairing operators @xmath , @xmath should be written down,
in the absence of a condensate the chiral symmetry is not broken.

While the origin of such an effect is speculative, the model contains
all the desirable features needed for the hypothesis [ 2 ] . Thus,
instead of rejecting the model in Eq.( 4.5 ) outright, we shall now use
the insights gained to attempt to construct a well-defined theory from
an alternative approach.

### 4.5 Four-fermion model

We now proceed to investigate the effective 4-fermi theory containing
chirally-invariant, parity-violating terms Eq. ( 4.4 ). In terms of left
and right auxilary fields we may write it as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.46)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order to study chiral symmetry breakdown we shall improve on the
mean-field approximation and consider dynamical fluctuations in the
composite chiral bosons. The fermion self-energy SDE is readily obtained
from the generating functional of Eq.( 4.46 ) via a similar procedure to
that in section 2.4 . Alternatively it may be written diagrammatically
as shown in Figure 4.2 :

The most general form of the inverse fermion propagator consistent with
Lorentz invariance we consider is, in Euclidean space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which may be rewritten in a number of ways, however we shall project out
the chiral components of the propagator on the left simplifies to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the chiral form factors are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and the Euclidean mass “poles” and wavefunction normalisations are read
off as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.51)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The presence of chirality-dependent form factors in the numerator of
Eq.( 4.49 ) can be interpreted as the fermion interacting with a
non-trivial background. For example, in the presence of an external,
spatially varying pseudoscalar field it has been shown [ 109 ] that a
bias exists between particles and antiparticle distributions of the same
chirality. We shall encounter this plus the case when Eq.( 4.49 )
contains two distinct terms, @xmath , @xmath , in section 5.1.1 .

The fermion self energy is now written down from Fig 3.15 as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.53)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the quantities @xmath , @xmath denote the bare and full boson
vertices and @xmath the inverse boson propagators. The bare vertices
appear in Eq.( 4.46 ) while the boson propagators satisfy the SDEs

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here the bare boson propagators are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The full vertices @xmath also satisfy SDEs, however in addition to the
two-point functions defined here they depend upon 4-point Greens
functions. As mentioned in section 2.4 the full set of SDEs for a theory
is a countably infinite set of coupled equations. In order to obtain an
approximate solution it is necessary to truncate the system. Here we
shall adopt the standard approach and truncate at the two-point level,
making approximations to the vertex functions.

#### 4.5.1 Mass generation

The simplest approximate solution of the fermion self-energy Eq.( 4.53 )
is obtained by replacing all full vertices and boson propagators by
their bare counterparts, for the latter this is achieved by neglecting
the vacuum polarisation terms @xmath .

The (Euclidean space) self energy is also defined through the inverse
fermion propagator Eq.( 4.48 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.54)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Equating Eq.( 4.54 ) and Eq.( 4.53 ) projected into chiral components

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

expressions for the chiral form factors @xmath , @xmath may then be
traced out. Computing the momentum integral in polar coordinates, these
expressions are found to be:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which have an analytic solution given by [c.f. the NJL gap equation Eq.(
3.13 )]:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As for the NJL model, @xmath are real solutions and one finds the
critical coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

To move beyond this approximation it is necessary to promote the bosons
to dynamical particles. This is achieved by dropping the auxilary “mass”
terms and adding the kinetic piece

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to the Lagrangian Eq.( 4.46 ). The bare boson propagators @xmath are
thus modified:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With these substitutions in Eq.( 4.53 ), Eqs. ( 4.55 , 4.56 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.58)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where, as before, @xmath is the Heaviside step function and the squared
momenta are @xmath , @xmath .

The solutions of the system Eqs.( 4.59 ) are again real, @xmath and
given by the equation of quenched rainbow QED in the Landau gauge with
the 4-fermion interaction strength @xmath playing the role of the
fine-structure constant @xmath . Analysis of the critical coupling may
proceed in an almost identical fashion as in [ 18 ] , for example,
converting Eq.( 4.59 ) into a differential form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These equations are scale invariant for @xmath and have the solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Only the latter of these satisfies the ultraviolet boundary condition
nontrivially:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore real positive solutions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are obtained above the dimensionless critical coupling defined by (c.f.
Eq.( 4.57 ))

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the 4-fermi model therefore, one sees that in this approximation the
couplings @xmath , @xmath enter the expressions for the scalar form
factors @xmath on an equal footing and that the momentum integral of the
kernel in Eq.( 4.58 ) vanishes. This vanishing of the chiral dependency
of form factors is a natural artifact of the choice of bare propagators
and vertices. Thus while such an approximation is useful for study of
mass generation there is no opportunity for CP-violation.

An improved vertex ansatz , leading to non-vanishing @xmath
contributions could be expected to remedy this problem. However study of
the gauged 4-fermion model in the next chapter is also seen to lead to
non-vanishing contributions of the required type.

## Chapter 5 Quenched hypercharge

In this chapter we wish to investigate the question of criticality in
the hypercharge theory. In contrast to QED there are three couplings and
the behaviour of the two models could therefore reasonably be expected
to differ.

In 5.1.1 for the (non-anomalous) quenched, rainbow approximation we find
an indication of different dynamics for the left- and right- fermion
chiralities in the DSE for the self-energy. Specifically the departure
from the equalities @xmath , @xmath in non-Landau gauges ( @xmath )
leads to the appearance of two poles in the fermion propagator,
associated with two types of scalar fermion pairing and the dynamical
breaking of parity.

In addition to being badly gauge-dependent, these poles are degenerate
in the Landau gauge. In section 5.1.2 therefore, following the
successful Ball-Chiu [ 36 ] and Curtis-Pennington [ 91 ] approaches for
QED we propose a (naively) multiplicatively-renormalisable hypercharge
vertex. A bifurcation analysis of these equations suggests the
separation of the chiral poles, while a small effect, persists for all
choices of gauge.

The second part of the chapter is concerned with incorporating composite
scalars into the theory, preliminary to considering the full gauged
4-fermi model. In [ 2 ] it was suggested that at the lowest (right)
critical scale the lightest generation “froze out” of the theory;
fermions with right chirality formed a condensate @xmath , consistent
with the presence of two poles in the propagator. The left-handed vacuum
was highly excited relative to its right counterpart and via gauge
transformations the ABJ anomaly caused a flux of (dynamical) left
fermions over into the condensed phase. It is for this reason that both
chiralities are expected to feel the same scalar potential. Moreover in
the presence of global chiral symmetry breaking, inclusion of Goldstone
bosons is necessary for construction of a unitary, low-energy effective
theory. To this end we consider the contribution of the
dynamically-generated composite Goldstones to the fermion self-energy
and their mixing with the gauge boson via the anomalous correction to
the vertex WTI are thus investigated in 5.2.1 .

### 5.1 D@xmathSB in hypercharge @xmath

In the same way that approximate solutions to the QED SDEs led to early
suggestions that non-perturbative QED was capable of dynamically
generating a fermion mass, we commence with the analogous equations for
the @xmath hypercharge model. The relevant SDEs were derived in chapter
2 . With a quenched boson propagator the main qualitative difference to
QED is that the fermion gauge-boson coupling is a linear combination of
vector and axial vector contributions; The bare (respectively right-and
left-handed) fermion-boson vertices have the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We shall adopt the same form of the inverse fermion propagator in
Euclidean space, Eq.( 4.48 ), as used in section 4.5

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.1 Rainbow approximation

From Eq.( 4.48 ) we can write the fermionic self- energy as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Approximating the full vertex @xmath by Eq. ( 5.1 ) and the gauge boson
propagator @xmath by its quenched form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

one arrives at the analogue of the quenched rainbow approximation for
the fermion self-energy. Tracing out the various projected components
yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath

In the Landau gauge @xmath and mass generation is obtained from the
behaviour of the two coupled integral equations in @xmath . In the limit
@xmath the system reduces to the integral equations of the bare-vertex 4
fermi approximation Eqs.( 4.58 , 4.59 ). That is, the solutions are of
the form @xmath and can be considered as equivalent to the QED scalar
form factor. Converting Eq.( 5.6 ) to differential form and repeating
the latter analysis one then obtains the critical coupling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

That is, like quenched rainbow QED the hypercharge theory appears to
have two phases separated by a transition associated with breakdown of
chiral symmetry.

There are two important distinctions however: Eq.( 5.7 ) now represents
a curve (hyperbola) in 2-dimensional coupling constant space rather than
a point on a line. Secondly the degeneracy @xmath in Eq.( 5.5 ) is
lifted and consequently in Eq.( 5.6 ), @xmath . Indeed solving Eqs.( 5.5
, 5.6 ) numerically by an iterative process confirms this. See, for
example, Fig. 5.1 .

The appearance of two poles @xmath in the fermion propagator Eq.( 4.49 )
has a natural interpretation in terms of an extra mode of fermion
pairing [ 111 ] . Moreover the pairings were found to become marginal at
separate critical scales. Figure 5.2 shows the coupling-dependence of
the fixed point equations,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

analogous to the determination of the QED critical coupling [ 91 ] . In
this example, for fixed @xmath , because @xmath the left-handed fermion
acquires a gap first at @xmath while the right chirality remains
massless until the point @xmath . The behaviour of the chiralities is
switched upon changing the values @xmath .

This is precisely the behaviour anticipated [ 2 ] at the right-right and
left-left critical coupling points, where right and left-handed
condensates were expected to form.

It is clear that a physical, i.e., Hermitean, Lorentz-invariant fermion
“mass” term requires

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and moreover, that unless @xmath , due to Eq. ( 5.5 ) this relation will
not be satisfied. In [ 2 ] the mass term becomes possible due to the ABJ
anomaly-driven collapse of the (dynamical) chiral sector with largest
mass. In the case shown in Figure 5.2 , above the left critical scale,
there is a nett loss of gapped (left) fermions and gain of gapless right
fermions, while the former remains as a resonant state. In this way both
left and right fermion pairings are on an equal footing, allowing
condensation, hence physical mass generation, to occur.

Unlike QED, therefore, dynamical chiral symmetry breaking in hypercharge
is a necessary but not sufficient condition for dynamical mass
generation. The extra condition, namely the (anomalous) effective
coupling of composite scalars with fermions will be considered in 5.2 .

We conclude this subsection with the observation that that, as is the
case for QED, only the choice of Landau gauge in the quenched, rainbow
approximation satisfies the vertex WTI, required for gauge-invariant
renormalisability. Clearly any physically realistic truncation of the
3-point vertex Greens function DSE must also have this property. However
as evidenced in Eqs.( 5.6 , 5.7 ) the choice @xmath is precisely where
the degeneracy of the chiral condensates occurs, leading to
qualitatively QED-like behaviour. It is vital therefore to move beyond
rainbow approximation.

#### 5.1.2 Renormalisable vertex

We now attempt to reduce the gauge-dependence of the dynamical mass by
building a vertex respecting the appropriate WTI. Given the success of
the method of Ball and Chiu [ 36 ] and improvement by Curtis and
Pennington [ 91 ] for the dressed, multiplicatively-renormalisable QED
vertex ansatz , it is logical to emulate this approach here.

We begin by considering the analogue of the Ball-Chiu ansatz [ 36 ] ,
i.e., a vertex form which satisfies the 3-point Ward-Takahashi identity
and reduces to the bare vertex in the perturbative limit. The WTI
follows from the general vector and axial current identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by forming the relevant linear combinations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . There are a number of immediate qualitative differences
to QED. The first two terms of the right-hand side can be made to be
singularity-free in the limit @xmath , analogous to the QED identity
Eq.( 3.3.2 ). However, while the currents satisfying Eq.( 5.9 ) are
gauge invariant, they do not represent a true functional variation. As a
result the two extra terms, the dynamical Goldstone term (c.f.. [ 110 ]
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a hard component @xmath , related to the ABJ anomaly can give rise
to kinematic singularities in the vertex. Initially we shall proceed by
naively neglecting these corrections.

The remainder of the vertex function @xmath itself may be expanded in
the same manner as that of QED:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the Ball-Chiu [ 36 ] basis vectors. The longitudinal
part of the vertex constrained by eq. Eq.( 5.9 ) which is free of
kinematic singularities is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Setting @xmath in Eq.( 4.53 ) gives the longitudinal contribution to the
self energy @xmath . Tracing out the various components yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.13)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.14)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

The form of the transverse part of the vertex, that is, the term
associated with the eight Ball-Chiu basis vectors, is constrained by a
number of considerations. It is possible to derive a transverse
Ward-Takahashi [ 95 ] identity of the form @xmath or to enforce physical
requirements such as that of multiplicative renormalisability (MR) [ 91
] . Finding closed forms for the transverse WTI is difficult for more
than two dimensions, where it may be written exactly, while the MR
requirement has been highly successful in quenched QED. We therefore
choose to consider restrictions of the latter kind.

For the (massless) hypercharge theory, the renormalisation process
involves rescaling the fields by

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

and the couplings by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the superscript @xmath denotes renormalised quantities. For the
quenched approximation @xmath and the (non-anomalous) WTI imposes @xmath
. The renormalised Lagrangian then reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

from which the renormalised DSEs may be obtained, as in section 2.4
above. The renormalised chiral vector form functions must satisfy [ 91 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the arbitrary renormalisation scales for the left- and
right-sectors and for simplicity we assume they have the same UV cutoff.

Following [ 91 ] , Eq.( 5.15 ) must have the perturbative, leading
logarithm expansion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the coefficient associated with the 1-loop correction.
The 1-loop vertex correction for @xmath is readily obtained as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Substituting this vertex form into Eq.( 4.53 ) yields the coefficient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus the transverse vertex choice (c.f. [ 91 ] )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

guarantees renormalisability to 1 loop, where @xmath is the Ball-Chiu
basis vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This expression is obtained under the assumption @xmath , thus removal
of the apparent singularity in Eq.( 5.1.2 ) can be justified by assuming
the denominator is valid only to @xmath .

A form for this modified factor may be obtained upon consideration of
the massive 1-loop fermion correction. In this case there are extra
renormalised parameters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

appearing in the Lagrangian. Of course for the case of physical
fermions, Eq.( 5.8 ) must hold, in which case it is well known that the
WTI Eq.( 5.9 ) fails unless @xmath and @xmath . However, as pointed out
above, it is the anomaly which catalyses mass generation, in which case
gauge-invariant renormalisation is spoiled anyway. We shall thus focus
here on reducing the gauge-dependance of the calculated quantities, with
the understanding that the “mass” terms @xmath obtained need not
correspond to physical fermion masses.

The term associated with the “mass”, computed from the vertex diagram is
for @xmath readily verified to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

while perturbatively, the fermion self-energy to first order is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is apparent that substitution of Eq.( 5.16 ) in Eq.( 4.53 ) leads to
the correct 1-loop self-energy result. The sum of vertex terms Eqs.(
5.12 , 5.1.2 ) are thus seen to reproduce the (naively) renormalised
1-loop self-energy in the leading log approximation. While, due to
decoupling of the chiral sectors, the vertex for massless fermion
corrections could be anticipated to be MR to all orders of the leading
logarithm expansion as for QED [ 91 ] we have only verified it
explicitly here at the one-loop level. This is for simplicity and
because the interesting, i.e., massive fermion) case and the ABJ anomaly
(see section 2.2 ) in general spoil chiral-invariant renormalisability,
therfore negating the motivation to proceed to higher orders analogous
to [ 91 ] .

All that remains to complete the vertex is to find an @xmath
modification for the denominator of Eq.( 5.1.2 ) with the correct
charge- conjugation property, i.e., symmetric under @xmath ). To this
end we propose a generalised version of the function used in [ 91 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The kernel of the 1-loop renormalisable transverse vertex contribution
is thus given by the contribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Computation of the angular integrals and tracing over the vector and
scalar parts yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.18)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The full, 1-loop DSE equations are thus given by the combination of
Eqs.( 5.13 , 5.18 ) and Eq.( 5.14 ) with Eq.( LABEL:bt6 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Following [ 85 ] we can undertake a bifurcation analysis of Eqs.( 5.20 ,
5.21 ), the idea being that at the critical coupling their solution
bifurcates into nontrivial terms. This is achieved by taking the
functional derivative of the equations and enumerating the result at the
trivial value @xmath . It is clear that only the terms linear in @xmath
will survive this procedure. The behaviour of the pure gauge-interaction
part of the theory is then obtained by proceeding along similar lines to
bifurcation analyses of quenched QED [ 85 ] , [ 86 ] , [ 99 ] .
Performing the functional derivative of Eqs.( 5.20 , 5.21 ) and
evaluating them at the points @xmath , the simplified equations then
read, to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.23)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first integral in Eq.( 5.22 ) is readily computed leaving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are of the same form as the corresponding equation for QED (see [
99 ] ), and upon converting to differential form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are readily seen to have the unique solutions

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.24)
  -- -- -- --------

with the exponent

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting Eq.( 5.24 ) now into Eq.( 5.23 ) one obtains the equation
(c.f. [ 99 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.25)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Upon taking the limit @xmath we look for scale-invariant solutions to
the equations ( 5.25 ), signalling the presence of a UV fixed point. The
obvious candidate is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where, due to the coupling of chiral form factors in Eqs.( 5.21 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, the exponents @xmath must now be roots of (c.f. the QED case
Eq.( 3.34 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and convergence of the integrals in Eq.( 5.25 ) is conditional upon
@xmath .

Numerical solution of Eq.( 5.26 ) reveals the number of roots in the
interval @xmath to be gauge-dependent. In the Landau gauge there are two
such roots and therefore in a general gauge we wish to consider only the
pair of roots which is continuously connected to this pair via the
change of gauge parameter. Criticality corresponds to a choice of
coupling constants @xmath for which the two roots become equal. The
results of such a computation in the Feynman gauge @xmath are shown in
Table 5.1.

The first observation to be made about these results is that the
critical curve is again a parabola in the two-dimensional coupling
constant space @xmath as shown in Fig. 5.3 . In the vector limit the
critical coupling is @xmath corresponding to a value @xmath , identical
with the value obtained for Feynman gauge QED [ 99 ] . In fact from
Table 5.1 the equation of the critical parabola is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is an approximate symmetry between couplings @xmath and the
solutions @xmath , @xmath which may also be pertinent for models of
mirror matter.

It is seen that at the critical point, both mass terms @xmath have a
large anomalous dimension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and become marginal operators. Over the coupling range considered, the
mismatch between the anomalous dimensions of these operators is
typically less than @xmath . Therefore in the neighbourhood of the fixed
point, the gaps due to each chiral condensate are approximately (i.e to
@xmath ) degenerate.

It is also found for a large range of values for @xmath , the scaling
exponents and critical couplings are quite robust. See, for example, the
values obtained in Table 5.2. In this study, motivated by [ 36 ] , [ 91
] , we have proposed a vertex with longitudinal part satisfying the
non-anomalous WTI and the transverse part constrained to be (naively,
the Goldstone-fermion coupling has been ignored) renormalisable to
1-loop. In addition to relatively gauge-insensitive results it was found
that both left and right fermion pairings acquired large anomalous
dimensions in the neighborhood of the phase transition with
approximately equal exponents.

### 5.2 Role of composite scalars

We conclude this section with another correction which needs to be
noted. The quenched, rainbow approximation is meant to use the
perturbative boson propagator and vertex function, however as Gribov [
31 ] and others have pointed out, in order to construct a low-energy
unitary perturbation theory in the presence of dynamically-broken,
global chiral symmetry, the gauge boson-Goldstone mixing needs to be
included. For the quenched rainbow hypercharge approximation this
amounts to including diagrams where internal gauge boson lines are
replaced by Goldstone propagators, with the bare vertex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The effective “Goldstone”-fermion coupling, required to balance the
left- and right-hand sides of Eq.( 5.9 ), is given by Eq.( 5.10 ) and
the inverted commas refer to the fact that the bound state is a chiral
object. The fermion self-energy Eq.( 5.3 ) has now two contributions,
the first given by Eqs( 5.20 , 5.21 ) above, while the second
corresponds to the “Goldstone” loop. The kernel of Eq.( 4.53 ) contains
the extra term

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives the form factors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

That is, we may write the full expressions as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

At this stage inspection of Eq.( 5.32 ) reveals the possibility for
generation of a fermion mass satisfying Eq.( 5.8 ). While the fermion
self-energy for @xmath due to gauge terms, e.g. Eq.( 5.21 ), contained
only terms with @xmath in the kernel, the Goldstone contributions are
seen to be @xmath . The equations for @xmath no longer depend solely on
@xmath , condensation of one chirality, e.g., right if the SM couplings
are used, as in [ 2 ] ) is now partially offset by formation of a
condensate of the other at the same scale, similar to the
anomaly-catalysed collapse of the left-fermion sector [ 2 ] .

An opportunity for obtaining three physical masses at three separate
scales now exists: At small momentum scales with Eq.( 5.32 ) in
differential form there would be no nontrivial real solutions compatible
with the UV boundary condition, analogous to quenched QED. When the
critical right-right coupling is reached, the “Goldstone” term @xmath
admits a nonzero solution. Due to the coupling of the @xmath equations
both form factors acquire a non trivial real solution, hence a
conventional “mass”, that is, one involving both left and right-handed
condensates could be generated. The remaining two terms, ( @xmath and
@xmath ) would be “switched on” at the right-left and left-left critical
points respectively, leading to three distinct mass terms. The two key
steps, the appearance of three separate contributions to the equations
@xmath and the mixing of these equations, required to generate mass
terms are made possible here by the Goldstone-gauge boson mixing. With
pure gauge-boson contributions the equations for @xmath only contain
@xmath terms in the kernel and always couple @xmath .

#### 5.2.1 Anomalous vertex

The last piece of the vertex WTI to be considered is the ABJ anomaly,
the motivation being to see whether fermion mass generation can be
dynamically generated in conjunction with the chiral symmetry breaking
described previously in 5.1.2 . In the proposal of [ 2 ] the mismatch
between the chiral sectors (i.e right-condensed vs left-dynamical
fermions) was suggested to be removed via the ABJ anomaly. In the model
under consideration the discrepancy is manifested as the breakdown of
Eq. ( 5.8 ), specifically @xmath . The anomalous term @xmath omitted
from the identity (Eq. 5.9 ) is given by [ 37 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We shall approximate this here by obtaining an effective anomalous
vertex from integrating over the pseudoscalar-2 boson anomalous diagram
shown in Fig. 5.4 .

Using a momentum-cutoff regulation and with soft external momenta a
possible form for the 3-boson contact term is see [ 112 ] in Eq.(
LABEL:ann1 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a massless composite pseudoscalar, @xmath the fermion
mass and @xmath the Yukawa coupling. Inserting this expression into the
loop diagram Fig. 5.4 one finds the effective vertex

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a finite scalar function to be constrained by the
physical properties of the anomaly: the anomalous vertex function must
have the opposite CP properties to the gauge-boson vertex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e., @xmath must be symmetric in @xmath and @xmath and it must not
vanish for massless fermions. With the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

added to the kernel of Eq.( 4.53 ), computation of these contributions
gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.37)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the anomalous coupling

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that for the naive estimate @xmath these contributions would
diverge quadratically. In order to obtain the correct power counting
behaviour it is clear that @xmath must have mass dimension @xmath . In
fact in deriving the vertex function ( 5.35 ) from Eq.( 5.34 ), such a
factor, @xmath has been effectively absorbed into @xmath . A convenient
form consistent with the above requirements and the momentum-squared
rescaling @xmath is then just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The form factor equations to be solved are now given by Eqs.( 5.31 ,
5.32 , 5.37 , LABEL:Banom )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For simplicity we numerically investigate Goldstone and anomaly
modifications to the rainbow approximation Eqs.( 5.5 , 5.6 ). Upon
performing the momentum scaling @xmath , these equations are solved for
@xmath and @xmath as before. The system of equations ( 5.40 , 5.41 ) is
highly sensitive to the value of @xmath : the anomalous terms are either
negligible, in which case the above-described 5.1.1 behaviour occurs, or
rapidly come to dominate the iterative solution process, in which case
@xmath . Thus as expected, the anomaly removes the discrepancy between
the chiral sectors, viz the restoration of Eq.( 5.8 ), however
unfortunately not in the manner envisaged in [ 2 ] : the dynamical mass
vanishes altogether!

Naturally a number of objections may be made to the above approximation.
Firstly Eq.( 5.34 ) is only strictly valid for “soft” photon legs. Once
included in the loop shown in Fig. 5.4 , large- @xmath corrections in
the fermion self energy would rapidly become dominant. Secondly if
gauge-boson-Goldstone mixing is to be incorporated, it is necessary to
move beyond the quenched approximation, in which case @xmath and there
are several diagrams (perturbatively, at least) more significant than
the anomalous correction to the fermion self-energy.

Indeed, if an anomaly-matching condition, such as the sum over all
fermions within a SM generation, is imposed the above discussion is
rendered academic and the desirable features of the non-anomalous
approximations may be retained. Nonetheless, it represents the first, to
our knowledge, attempt to quantitatively understand a possible role for
the ABJ anomaly in the D @xmath SB context. Such considerations are
clearly necessary to evaluate whether the anomaly-catalysed vacuum decay
proposed in [ 2 ] can form the foundation for self-consistent
introduction of three fermion generations.

Finally we note that the Goldstone terms are at least quadratic in the
form factors @xmath , therefore they will not contribute to the
linearised bifurcation analysis in section 5.1.2 . Moreover the chosen
form of the anomalous vertex, being independent of @xmath also will not
affect the lowest order result.

## Chapter 6 Conclusion and outlook

In this thesis we have introduced two models in order to investigate a
proposal [ 2 ] that dynamical chiral symmetry breaking in the
hypercharge sector of the SM can give rise not only to fermion masses
but also the three-generation structure and attendant CP violation.

### 6.1 Chiral-breaking model

The first theory, a toy fermion-pairing model, was demonstrated in
chapter 4 to exhibit the qualitative features of the SM which remain
poorly understood and therefore are desirable for the proposal [ 2 ] .
The key feature was the observation that when both chiral-symmetric and
-breaking scalar 4-fermi operators are permitted

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the form of the mean-field approximation differs depending on whether
one of, or both, such types of term are present. In a 1-loop
renormalisation group study of the running couplings this meant that
there were three distinct renormalised flows depending upon whether
@xmath or @xmath were non-vanishing. The low-energy effective 4-fermi
operators were thus found, in terms of the dimensionless couplings
@xmath , @xmath to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In each of these three cases a two-phase structure was suggested via
solution of the analogues of the NJL gap equations, with the critical
coupling strengths given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the operators @xmath respectively. In particular it was found that,
while @xmath had trivial IR limits, the couplings @xmath , @xmath flowed
to finite IR values for @xmath , making it a suitable “high energy”
effective theory. In all cases a fixed point in the ultraviolet region
was also found.

The next step was to introduce a “fundamental” fermion with three
components which, while identical with respect to gauge interactions,
participated in either symmetric, breaking or both types of fermion
pairing, thereby living in distinct subspaces corresponding to the
4-fermi operators @xmath . As each of the couplings @xmath attains the
critical strength at separate scales the theory has three distinct phase
transitions, each associated with dynamical mass generation for a
component of the fundamental fermion.

This model was found to be similar to the 3-Higgs model of Kiselev [ 21
] where the fermion families arise as a consequence of a @xmath
-symmetric vacuum. The latter [ 21 ] has been found to give good
tree-level estimates of the CKM matrix elements.

The main qualitative difference is that here the auxilary fields, which
play the roles of the Higgs VEVs, are in general complex, chiral
objects. Therefore in order to be left with the single CP-violating
internal rotational uncertainty of [ 21 ] one requires the existence of
a discrete @xmath symmetry which may, as pointed out in 6.3 be
interesting in terms of left-right-symmetric matter-only models.
Otherwise the model contains three extra (2 complex, 1 chiral)
CP-violating phases.

While the proposed model was shown to have the required qualitative
features several important issues remain to be resolved. Firstly, while
the presence of chiral condensates is anticipated in the proposal [ 2 ]
it is not immediately clear how such terms can be derived by integrating
out the gauge-bosons from the hypercharge Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

One possibility is to include the vacuum polarisation in the boson
propagator, @xmath , where mismatches between the right-left and
left-right cross terms prevent the cancellation of parity-odd scalar
terms in the subsequent Fierz re-ordering.

Secondly the question of vector 4-fermi interactions has been ignored.
It has been demonstrated that for quenched QED [ 106 ] , such terms
remain irrelevant, even close to the fixed point. Here this is
correlated with the fact that the 1-loop RGE equation for the coupling
@xmath does not contain a quadratic term @xmath . Similarly the
corresponding terms are seen to be missing from the hypercharge
equations for @xmath , @xmath thus one can tentatively anticipate
similar behaviour. While chiral symmetry guarantees the QED Wilson
potential has next-to-leading order terms of degree eight in the fermion
fields, in this model 6-fermi terms cannot be discounted. It is
important to investigate the possible effect of these higher-order
terms.

Finally while the explicit-breaking terms will break chiral symmetry at
any scale the mean-field approximation suggests they only impart a
fermion mass above a critical coupling strength. This result also
requires an explanation, which may be outlined as follows. From
high-temperature superconductivity the mean-field approximation is known
to be deficient. In particular there exists an intermediate phase where
violent phase fluctuations mean that while fermion pairing occurs,
condensate formation is inhibited. Recently such a “pseudogap” has been
demonstrated in the Gross-Neveu model [ 108 ] and is conjectured to
exist in other relativistic fermionic theories.

### 6.2 Quenched hypercharge

The second model considered in this thesis is the hypercharge gauge
interaction itself. Analysis of dynamical chiral symmetry breaking in
quenched QED has an extensive literature. In particular we proceed by
generalising the Schwinger-Dyson equation for the fermion self-energy.

In the simplest approximation with the quenched boson propagator and
bare vertex it is found that for an arbitrary covariant gauge separate
“gaps” for the left- and right-chirality fermions appeared, evidence for
the chiral pairings considered in the 4-fermi model of chapter 4 .
Moreover they were found to arise at separate scales, as shown in Figure
5.2 , suggesting a multiple-phase structure.

The exception to this behaviour was the Landau gauge, whereupon the gaps
and critical scales became degenerate. We therefore attempted to
generalise the successful procedure [ 36 ] , [ 91 ] developed for
construction of a QED vertex with greatly-reduced sensitivity to gauge
choice.

The breakdown of the chiral Ward-Takahashi identity Eq.( 5.9 ) due to
the ABJ anomaly and dynamically-generated Golstone bosons meant that the
procedure was not completely successful. In particular we constructed a
vertex with longitudinal part satisfying the (non-anomalous) WTI Eq.(
5.9 ) and transverse term ensuring multiplicative renormalisability of
the fermion SDE Eq.( 4.53 ) to one loop. Diagrams due to the Goldstones
and their anomalous mixing with the gauge-boson vertex were of at least
quadratic order in the scalar form factors @xmath in Eqs.( 5.40 , 5.41 )
and therefore the proposed vertex was found to be sufficient for a
linearised bifurcation analysis, similar to that undertaken for QED [ 99
] . Here it was found that the seperation of chiral condensates
persisted in all gauges, however with a difference in scaling exponents
of @xmath the effect was greatly reduced. In particular in the
neighbourhood of a critical coupling both mass terms acquired large
anomalous dimensions, suggesting the splitting between the left- and
right- gaps is significantly less than that obtained in rainbow
approximation. These results were shown to be robust for a large range
of covariant gauge parameter values.

Finally the effect of the composite scalars was included in the quenched
rainbow approximation to investigate the effect upon the dynamical
chiral symetry breaking: the Goldstones are necessary to construct a
unitary low-energy effective perturbation theory, while it was
hypothesised that the anomaly enables the generation of physical fermion
mass, by coupling left- (right-) fermions with the right- (left-)
condensates. Inclusion of the bare Goldstone propagator and effective
bare scalar-fermion couplings led to the appearance of mass terms
depending upon all three couplings Eqs.( 5.31 , 5.32 ). Unfortunately
the ansatz for the anomalous vertex term was found to dominate the
fermion SDEs ( 5.40 , 5.41 ) causing vanishing of all mass functions.
There are numerous reasons for rejecting the ansatz Eq.( 5.39 ),
discussed in section 2.2 . In particular a correct implementation would
involve unquenching the boson propagator.

In summary we have shown in sections 5.1.1 , 5.1.2 that a fermion
propagating in a background of hypercharge gauge fields appears to
couple differently to chiral scalar condensates, which become critical
at different scales. These are necessary prerequisites for the dynamical
generations hypothesis [ 2 ] , however its viability depends upon
whether an improved treatment of the anomaly can translate into physical
fermion mass, with subsequent family structure and mixing behavour.

### 6.3 Outlook

Until this stage, an appealing feature of the model is that no higher
physics is required to qualitatively produce the SM features outlined in
[ 2 ] . Once this requirement is lifted, one can speculate that the
non-perturbative effects embodied in this model facilitate a range of
new theories with the Standard Model as a low energy limit. The fields
of condensed matter and quantum field theory have a long history of
cross-pollination. Recently Volovik [ 113 ] has written extensively on
similarities between the electroweak sector of the SM and the superfluid
@xmath HeB and it seems logical to seek QFT analogues of recent
developments in condensed matter. Phenomena such as chiral surface
states in unconventional superconductors Sr @xmath RuO @xmath [ 114 ] ,
[ 115 ] and Bi @xmath Ca @xmath MnO @xmath [ 116 ] , chiral
superfluidity in @xmath HeA [ 113 ] , [ 117 ] or spin-charge separation
(SCS) [ 118 ] , [ 119 ] may well have relevance to the non-perturbative
sector of the Standard Model.

We begin by noting the 4-fermi terms obtained upon quenching the inverse
hypercharge boson propagator @xmath in Eq.( 6.1 ) resemble a
higher-dimensional analogue of the Luttinger liquid Lagrangian [ 119 ] ,
[ 120 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

if one identifies the terms @xmath with left-and right-moving charge
density operators, which in the Luttinger liquid are of the form @xmath
, i.e., fermion-fermion condensates.

Model Eq.( 6.2 ) has, in @xmath dimensions a number of remarkable
features: the cross-term @xmath modifies the pole structure of the
fermion propagator (indeed the Fierz-ordering of this term in 4
dimensions leads to the scalar term breaking chiral symmetry). The
@xmath term lifts any residual degeneracies, similar to a hopping matrix
element between spin chains [ 119 ] , and leads in 1+1 dimensions to
SCS. Here, the effect is signalled by the appearance of two poles in the
fermion propagator. An attempt to inject a free fermion into the second
unoccupied energy level above the Fermi surface causes a hole
excitation. The resulting hole-electron pair (in the lowest free energy
level) decomposes into spin and charge fluctuations which propagate
through the medium with different velocities.

This, too reminds of the problem encountered in the SDE analysis of the
previous chapter with the appearance of new poles related to each
condensate. We then see a possible interpretation of this feature is for
some kind of recombination of fermionic degrees of freedom. A
qualitative argument, based on the Dirac sea picture of the anomaly [ 40
] runs as follows. The two-dimensional (for simplicity) hypercharge
theory has Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the Dirac sea picture, second quantisation corresponds to filling all
negative energy eigenmodes while leaving positive ones empty. Setting
@xmath and the potential @xmath a space-time constant, the eigenmodes
satisfy the 2-D Dirac equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath the energy-momentum dispersion relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is shown in the upper left of Figure 6.1 . The left- and right-hand
branches correspond to the separate fermion chiralities. If @xmath is
adiabatically changed to a small (positive) value the relation is that
of the upper right diagram,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have assumed both @xmath and @xmath are positive. Gauge
transformations in this case cause a nett production of right
antiparticles and left particles. While the total number of states is
conserved, the separate left and right numbers are not.

Introducing now a mass term @xmath to the Lagrangian Eq.( 6.3 ) would
lead to the gapped lower left diagram in Fig 6.1 .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Increasing the value @xmath has the effect of shifting the parabolas
upwards and to the left for positive couplings @xmath , @xmath ,
resulting in a nett production of right-handed particles at the expense
of left ones, as expected in [ 2 ] . Using this analogy the necessary
anomaly-induced collapse of the left vacuum appears to break down if
@xmath whereby the left and right parabolas shift in opposite
directions, such that there is no net change in chirality. This happens
for the hypercharge couplings for the electron, up- and down-type quarks
at the values @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. In this case an
alternative scenario, such as the SCS type transition advocated here
would be required to produce the fermion generations in a manner
outlined below.

Of course these dispersion relations do not correspond to the eigenmodes
of a full Dirac fermion; each branch contains only half the required
number of degrees of freedom. Up until now we have considered a single
fermion, however SCS is a many-body phenomenon. If we consider a
superposition of a fermion and antifermion to make up the requisite
number of degrees of freedom it is apparent that this diagram could also
correspond to dispersion relations for two distinct bosonic objects, as
shown in the lower right picture, in the limit of a vanishing gap @xmath
. These relations, of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

have a natural interpretation as those of composite bosons. @xmath and
@xmath would then represent fluctuations in charge- and spin-type
degrees of freedom respectively.

The hypothesised effect in 4-dimensions is that the SCS in the vector
interactions results in condensates containing “charge” and “spin”
degrees of freedom. Consider now a free fermion with global @xmath
“isoflavour” symmetry. Addition of charge density interactions,such as
those in Eq.( 6.2 ), breaks the symmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a single isoflavour, @xmath , the @xmath fermions decouple into
commuting @xmath sectors reminiscent of a left-right-symmetric
electroweak theory. Upon breaking this to the QED scale, the degeneracy
in the (iso)“spin” condensates is lifted, leading to fermion mass terms
of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that a mass term of this form is used in Gribov’s calculation of
the @xmath and @xmath masses. The dominant contribution (from the
heaviest fermion generation) to vacuum polarisation reproduces good
approximations to both boson masses and the expected Higgs VEV.

Alternatively if instead of Abelian densities of left- and right-movers,
as in the Luttinger lagrangian Eq.( 6.2 ), interactions between isospin
densities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the @xmath isospin matrices, the relevant decomposition
into decoupled theories is [ 118 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the integer subscript denotes the fact that the interaction is in
fact described by a chiral Wess-Zumino-Witten [ 51 ] model, the value
referring to the central charges.

If we identify @xmath with the number of known fermion generations
@xmath , then the model contains not only (iso)spin and (hyper)charge
interactions but an @xmath “flavour” sector also. In @xmath dimensions [
118 ] the analogous model contains a non-trivial fixed point which
generates a mass gap for the fermion propagators. The bosonic spin
fluctuations also acquire mass while the charge and flavour excitations
remain gapless, strongly reminiscent of photons and gluons in the SM.

In this context we note the dualised standard model (DSM) [ 80 ] also
associates the number of fermion generations with that of the fermionic
colour degrees of freedom. This colour ”dual”, analogous to the duality
of electrodynamics under exchange of charge and magnetism, represents
the same gauge symmetry as @xmath , differing only by parity. The
question of whether the decomposition ( 6.6 ) is equivalent to the DSM
written in “left-right” rather than “vector-axial” notation certainly
warrants further investigation.

The fact that the centre of the group @xmath is @xmath also serves as a
motivation for the self-consistent introduction of a @xmath symmetric
“fundamental” fermion in the generational model of Kiselev [ 21 ] . The
@xmath would then be interpreted as a relic of the broken dual @xmath .

The model has a natural three-step decomposition, from the “Luttinger”
phase, through the left-right symmetric SM, step ( 6.7 ), down to the
Standard Model in stage ( 6.8 ) before, finally, the conventional chiral
symmetry breaking reproduces the familiar low-energy physics of stage (
6.9 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7)
                                   
              @xmath   @xmath      (6.8)
              @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This symmetry breaking pattern is consistent with the hierarchy of the
three critical chiral scales shown to exist in the quenched hypercharge
theory of the previous chapter.

In conclusion we observe that certain recent aspects of condensed
matter, in particular the behaviour of chiral fluids, are potentially
fertile ground for understanding how the behaviour of the scalar sector
of the SM gives rise to fermion mass, generation number and flavour
mixing. Regarding higher gauge theories, only one coupling and two
six-dimensional fundamental fields (one “quark” and one “lepton”) would
be required as input at the @xmath level.

We argue that it appears logical and compelling to investigate whether a
technicolour version of the left-right symmetric SM might be analogous
to certain forms of SCS.

## Appendix A Fierz transformations

Consider an orthogonal basis @xmath for the space of @xmath matrices
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An arbitrary @xmath matrix @xmath has the expansion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and from the completeness of @xmath one obtains the general Fierz
identity for any pair of matrices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case of the 4-dimensional Lorentz group ( @xmath ) the identity
is frequently used for manipulating 4-fermion scalar interactions. For
the 16 Dirac matrices we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath range over @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . With the notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and using the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we arrive at the general result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In chapter 4 we encounter four-fermion interactions of the form

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The results for Lorentz scalars are commonplace in texts, for example, [
37 ] , [ 17 ] ) or are readily computed from the identity ( A.1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.2)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.3)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The parity-violating, chiral symmetric terms, which cancel in 4 , are
included for completeness. The non-zero contributions from Eq.( A.1 )
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.4)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Now the full expansion of 4-fermion terms in Eq.( 4.3 ) is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Upon substituting the expressions ( A.2 - LABEL:av ), one arrives at the
claimed form, Eq.( 4.4 ), of the Lagrangian.

## Appendix B 1-loop running couplings

## Appendix C Transverse boson propagator

In this appendix we compute the 1-loop hypercharge boson propagator.
Following Gribov [ 31 ] it is demonstrated that modifying the
fermion-boson vertex to include a Goldstone-fermion coupling cancels the
non-transverse contributions of massive fermion loops to the vacuum
polarisation.

From the hypercharge Lagrangian

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the 1-loop vacuum polarisation is computed to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For @xmath only the second term survives and yields the familiar QED
result:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the usual @xmath scalar polarisation. More generally,
following Gribov [ 31 ] we include the Goldstone contribution in each
vertex in order to restore transversality to @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the boson-Goldstone transition amplitude and the
Goldstone-fermion coupling @xmath is given by the Ward-Takahashi
identity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the free fermion propagator it is just

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now Eq.( C ) is replaced by 4 terms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

At the one-loop level, the contraction @xmath vanishes. @xmath is just
the bare result, Eq.( C.2 ) above. The second and third terms are equal
(and vanish in this case) while

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Combining this with Eqs.( C ) we see

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which is transverse when the Goldstone self-energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

a natural condition for composite bosons.