##### Acknowledgements. I would like to thank my supervisor, Michael
Singer, for all his help with this thesis, and for being so generous
with his time. In particular, our joint publication would not have been
possible without his work. Others in the Department I would like to
thank are Toby Bailey, my second supervisor; Elmer Rees, for helping
with some homotopy; and Allan Sinclair, for reading an early draft of
the thesis. My contemporaries Ann and Des have been a huge source of
support, Des providing wise advice at crucial moments, and Ann just
putting up with me day after day. They have played a large part in
seeing this thesis finished. I must also thank the EPSRC for financial
support. Outside the Department my thanks go to Ingrid for all our
adventures together, and to all the other friends I have been out on the
hill with. Thanks also go to Braemar Mountain Rescue Team for the
helicopter ride. My friends Ross and Jo helped by taking me out for a
few shandies once in a while. From further back I would like to thank
Dan Scott, for his influence on my mathematical career, and Rob Rule,
for years of friendship and good advice. Above all, however, I would
like to thank my parents for their constant support and faith in me,
throughout all the ups and downs. I cannot thank them enough.

\standarddeclaration

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Anti-self-dual connections and the Nahm transform
        -    1.1.1 The anti-self-duality equation on @xmath
        -    1.1.2 Translation reduction: the Bogomolny and Nahm
            equations
        -    1.1.3 Gauge transformations
        -    1.1.4 Spin structures and Dirac operators
        -    1.1.5 The Nahm transform on the @xmath -torus
        -    1.1.6 The Nahm transform on the generalized torus
        -    1.1.7 Notes on the literature for the Nahm transform
        -    1.1.8 Twistor theory and spectral curves for monopoles
    -    1.2 Review of existing work on calorons
        -    1.2.1 The loop group point of view
        -    1.2.2 Calorons with vanishing monopole charges
    -    1.3 Overview of results
    -    1.4 Open problems
-    2 The Topology of Calorons
    -    2.1 Boundary conditions
        -    2.1.1 Boundary conditions for monopoles
        -    2.1.2 Framed bundles
        -    2.1.3 Boundary conditions for calorons
        -    2.1.4 Framed quasi-periodic connections
        -    2.1.5 Calorons as loops of monopoles
        -    2.1.6 Smoothness at the boundary
        -    2.1.7 Chern-Weil theory
    -    2.2 The rotation map
    -    2.3 Boundary conditions from the loop group point of view
-    3 From Nahm Data to Calorons
    -    3.1 The Nahm transform for @xmath monopoles
        -    3.1.1 Nahm data for @xmath monopoles.
        -    3.1.2 Definition of the Nahm operator @xmath
        -    3.1.3 Results from Hurtubise and Murray
    -    3.2 The construction of calorons up to boundary conditions
        -    3.2.1 Definition of caloron Nahm data
        -    3.2.2 The index of @xmath
        -    3.2.3 The adjoint of @xmath
        -    3.2.4 Nahm’s equation and anti-self-duality
        -    3.2.5 Periodicity
        -    3.2.6 Remarks on the rotation map
    -    3.3 The model operator @xmath
        -    3.3.1 Strategy
        -    3.3.2 Defining @xmath : the case of vanishing monopole
            charges
        -    3.3.3 Defining @xmath : the case of no zero jumps in the
            instanton block
        -    3.3.4 Defining @xmath : the remaining case
        -    3.3.5 The adjoint of the model operator
    -    3.4 Framing for @xmath
        -    3.4.1 Approximate solutions for @xmath in the monopole
            block
        -    3.4.2 Solutions for @xmath in the instanton block
        -    3.4.3 How good is the approximation?
        -    3.4.4 Proof that @xmath is framed
    -    3.5 Calculating @xmath for @xmath
        -    3.5.1 The case of no zero jumps in the instanton block
        -    3.5.2 The case of vanishing monopole charges
        -    3.5.3 The case @xmath
    -    3.6 Deforming @xmath to @xmath
        -    3.6.1 Existence of a path between @xmath and @xmath
        -    3.6.2 Recovering the boundary conditions
        -    3.6.3 Volume forms
-    4 From Calorons to Nahm Data
    -    4.1 Generalizing the @xmath -torus Nahm transform
        -    4.1.1 Defining the transform
        -    4.1.2 Nahm’s equation
        -    4.1.3 Periodicity
        -    4.1.4 Further remarks on the rotation map
    -    4.2 The Fredholm condition
        -    4.2.1 Proof of the Fredholm condition using Anghel’s
            criterion
        -    4.2.2 Pseudo-differential operators on manifolds with
            fibred boundaries
        -    4.2.3 Decay properties of zero modes
    -    4.3 The index theorem
        -    4.3.1 Proof when @xmath
        -    4.3.2 Proof when @xmath
    -    4.4 Extension to the singular points
        -    4.4.1 The model operator for monopoles
        -    4.4.2 The terminating component for monopoles
        -    4.4.3 The terminating component for calorons
        -    4.4.4 The continuing component and decomposition for @xmath
-    Glossary of Notation

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Anti-self-dual (ASD) connections have been studied intensively by
mathematicians over the last three decades, and have many remarkable
properties and applications. One of the original problems in the area,
the construction of finite-action ASD connections on @xmath , was solved
in 1978 by Atiyah and others [ 5 , 4 ] . They gave a complete
construction of all such connections—the celebrated ADHM construction of
instantons—by means of twistor theory and algebraic geometry. For the
purposes of this introduction we will call any anti-self-dual connection
on @xmath an instanton . Instantons are of great interest to physicists,
since they are solutions to the Yang-Mills equation in a gauge field
theory, and so represent minimum-energy configurations. They have had an
important impact on quantum chromodynamics (QCD), with applications to
symmetry breaking, tunnelling, and confinement.

In fact the ADHM construction can be regarded as a special case of a
correspondence we will refer to as the Nahm transform . If @xmath is a
sub-group of translations, and @xmath is the dual of @xmath (so that
@xmath consists of elements taking integer values on @xmath ), then the
Nahm transform is a correspondence between ASD connections on @xmath and
ASD connections on @xmath . The details of the transform vary depending
on the nature of @xmath , and the existence and invertibility of the
transform have been proved rigorously in several cases. For example, the
case @xmath corresponds to the ADHM construction, as presented by
Donaldson and Kronheimer [ 12 ] .

Another area of interest to mathematicians and physicists alike is that
of monopoles, which are solutions to the Bogomolny equation on @xmath .
The Bogomolny equation is a translation reduction of the ASD equation,
and so monopoles can be thought of as translation-invariant instantons,
or equivalently, ASD connections on @xmath where @xmath . In this case,
the Nahm transform is a correspondence between monopoles and objects
defined on the ‘dual torus’ @xmath , which we will refer to as Nahm data
. The construction of monopoles from Nahm data and the inverse
correspondence has been described by Hitchin [ 17 ] (for @xmath
monopoles) and Hurtubise–Murray [ 20 ] (for arbitrary gauge group).

Periodic connections on @xmath correspond to @xmath , and form an
intermediate case between instantons and monopoles. A periodic
anti-self-dual connection over @xmath is called a periodic instanton, or
caloron . The aim of this thesis is to study the geometry of calorons
and the Nahm transform. Since @xmath , the transform will be a
correspondence between calorons lying on @xmath and Nahm data on @xmath
. In some sense a caloron can be thought of as a hybrid between an
instanton and a monopole. For example, a caloron has an ‘instanton
charge’ (an invariant that depends on the @xmath -dimensional topology
of the caloron) together with ‘monopole charges’ (which characterize the
@xmath -dimensional topology). We will see this reflected in the Nahm
transform for calorons, as it shares features with both the ADHM
construction of instantons and the construction of monopoles. Originally
introduced by Nahm in [ 33 ] , the transform for calorons has been
studied recently for calorons with unit instanton charge and zero
monopole charges, in a series of papers [ 23 , 24 , 22 ] and [ 26 ] .

Completeness of the ADHM construction of instantons and construction of
monopoles was originally proved using twistor theory. In the case of
monopoles, there is a correspondence between monopoles and certain
algebraic curves in twistor space, called spectral curves, and this was
used in [ 17 ] and [ 20 ] to go from monopoles to their Nahm data. The
twistor picture for calorons was studied in [ 13 ] , and there is a
similar correspondence between calorons and their spectral curves. While
the twistor picture could be used to prove the existence of the Nahm
transform for calorons, the approach in this thesis is via analysis of
families of Dirac operators, regarding the caloron case as a
generalization of the Nahm transform on the @xmath -torus.

With the scene set, we go on to introduce anti-self-duality and the Nahm
transform more formally in Section 1.1 . In Section 1.2 we review
existing work on calorons, before giving an overview of the aims and
results of this thesis in Section 1.3 . From the outset, we draw the
reader’s attention to the Glossary of Notation on page Glossary of
Notation in the hope it will make the thesis easier to read.

### 1.1 Anti-self-dual connections and the Nahm transform

#### 1.1.1 The anti-self-duality equation on @xmath

Let @xmath be the standard coordinates on @xmath , and equip @xmath with
the standard Euclidean inner product. Fix an orientation by decreeing
that the ordered basis of @xmath -forms @xmath be positive. The space of
@xmath -forms on @xmath is denoted @xmath , and a @xmath -form @xmath
will be represented by its skew-symmetric covariant tensor @xmath of
components, defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In general, the Hodge star operator is defined on any @xmath
-dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath with volume form @xmath . It is
the linear map @xmath defined pointwise by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is the inner product between @xmath -forms
defined by the metric. Integrating over the manifold @xmath gives an
inner product on forms defined globally:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

On @xmath the Hodge star becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath -form @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional
alternating tensor with @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath has eigenspaces
with eigenvalues @xmath . A @xmath -form @xmath is self-dual (SD) if
@xmath and anti-self-dual (ASD) if @xmath . In terms of components,
@xmath is anti-self-dual if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Given a connection @xmath on a bundle @xmath on @xmath , @xmath is
anti-self-dual, or satisfies the anti-self-duality equation , if its
curvature @xmath is anti-self-dual as an endomorphism-valued @xmath
-form \ie if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we consider the action of a discrete sub-group @xmath of translations
on @xmath , so that @xmath is @xmath -dimensional, the anti-self-duality
condition makes sense on the quotient manifold @xmath . The ASD @xmath
-forms are those that satisfy @xmath where @xmath are the coordinates on
@xmath corresponding to the standard coordinates on @xmath . Note that
throughout we will use the symbols @xmath \etc to refer to vector
bundles and connections over @xmath -manifolds and the corresponding
symbols @xmath \etc to refer to vector bundles and connections over
@xmath -manifolds.

An instanton is a unitary ASD connection @xmath on @xmath whose action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is finite. Uhlenbeck [ 40 ] showed that any such connection extends
smoothly to the compactification @xmath of @xmath , and that every ASD
connection on @xmath arises in this way. Thus instantons really live on
@xmath and are characterized by their second Chern class, which is often
called the instanton number, or charge.

#### 1.1.2 Translation reduction: the Bogomolny and Nahm equations

Next, we define the Bogomolny equation and Nahm’s equation, and show how
these can be thought of as translation reductions of the
anti-self-duality equation. The Bogomolny equation applies to
connections over @xmath , and we need to fix the following conventions.
Throughout, we will consider @xmath as a slice of @xmath of the form
@xmath constant, oriented so that the ordered basis @xmath is positive.
The Hodge star operator is given in components by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional alternating tensor with @xmath .
To distinguish between the star operators on @xmath and @xmath we will
sometimes write them as @xmath and @xmath .

Consider what happens to the anti-self-duality equation @xmath if we
decree that a connection @xmath is translation invariant. Of course,
this is equivalent to looking at connections on the ‘generalized torus’
@xmath with @xmath , that satisfy a symmetry reduction of the ASD
condition. Let @xmath be the matrices representing @xmath in some global
trivialisation of @xmath , and suppose that the matrices are independent
of @xmath . Then, using @xmath and @xmath , we see that @xmath is ASD
iff

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds, together with the two equations obtained by cyclic permutations
in @xmath . Let @xmath be a unitary bundle over @xmath with some fixed
trivialisation. From this point on we will restrict to unitary bundles
for the rest of the thesis. Let @xmath be the connection on @xmath with
components @xmath in this trivialisation and let @xmath be the
endomorphism of @xmath represented by @xmath . Then @xmath and its
cyclic permutations can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the Bogomolny equation. Note that conversely, any solution to
the Bogomolny equation can be used to construct a translation invariant
ASD connection on @xmath via the same argument. The endomorphism @xmath
is called a Higgs field .

A monopole is a unitary solution @xmath to the Bogomolny equation whose
energy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is finite. The finite energy condition can be re-expressed in terms of
the asymptotic behaviour of @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath monopoles the
asymptotic condition is that @xmath as @xmath where @xmath is the
standard polar coordinate on @xmath . (In fact there are additional
conditions that will not concern us till later.) On the @xmath -sphere
at infinity @xmath therefore has eigenvalues @xmath , defining two
eigenbundles. We let @xmath be the first Chern classes of these
eigenbundles, and say that the monopole @xmath has charge @xmath . Note
that instantons cannot be translation invariant, since this would
contradict the finite action condition.

We can perform further translation reduction: consider an ASD connection
@xmath on @xmath whose components @xmath are independent of @xmath in
some trivialisation. The anti-self-duality equation becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

plus cyclic permutations in @xmath . In a similar way to the reduction
to the monopole case above, @xmath determines a connection @xmath and
three endomorphisms @xmath on a vector bundle over @xmath ; from @xmath
we see that these satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is Nahm’s equation. Following the sketch of the Nahm transform at
the start of the Chapter, we expect solutions to Nahm’s equation to
correspond to solutions of the Bogomolny equation under the transform.

#### 1.1.3 Gauge transformations

Monopoles and instantons are studied modulo the action of the group of
bundle automorphisms preserving the base manifold. These automorphisms
are referred to as gauge transformations . In particular, the Nahm
transform is defined modulo this gauge action. If local trivialisations
are fixed, the action of a gauge transformation is the same as a change
of trivialisation. We therefore sometimes refer to fixing a local
trivialisation as ‘fixing a gauge’.

For an instanton @xmath on a @xmath bundle @xmath , a gauge
transformation @xmath acts on sections of @xmath by @xmath and on @xmath
by @xmath . In a local trivialisation over some open region @xmath ,
@xmath becomes a map @xmath and @xmath is represented by matrix-valued
functions @xmath . The action of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, for a monopole @xmath on a @xmath bundle @xmath , a gauge
transformation @xmath acts on sections of @xmath by @xmath , on @xmath
by @xmath , and on @xmath by @xmath . In a local trivialisation over
some open region @xmath , @xmath becomes a map @xmath , @xmath becomes a
map @xmath , and @xmath is represented by @xmath . The action of @xmath
on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Gauge transformations for bundles over the @xmath -torus and over @xmath
are defined in an analogous way.

#### 1.1.4 Spin structures and Dirac operators

The Nahm transform is defined using Dirac operators on @xmath . In this
Section we fix our notation and conventions for such operators. We
start, however, by recalling the definition of a spin structure on an
arbitrary manifold. References [ 12 ] , [ 39 ] and [ 14 ] provide more
background material, and proofs of all the statements.

Suppose @xmath is an oriented smooth @xmath -dimensional Riemannian
manifold. Let @xmath be the principal @xmath bundle of oriented
orthogonal frames for the tangent bundle. A spin structure for @xmath is
a pair @xmath where @xmath is a principal @xmath -bundle over @xmath ,
and @xmath is a two-to-one covering such that the restriction to each
fibre is the double covering @xmath . The obstruction to the existence
of a spin structure is the second Stiefel-Whitney class, which is
contained in @xmath (see [ 12 , Section @xmath ] ), and the number of
spin structures is counted by @xmath . If a spin structure exists then
@xmath is called a spin manifold. The spin bundle @xmath is defined to
be the vector bundle associated to the @xmath principal bundle @xmath
via the spin representation. It comes equipped with a representation
@xmath of the Clifford algebra of the tangent space @xmath on the fibre
@xmath for each @xmath , and this is used to define the Dirac operator.

When @xmath , it is easy to check that there is a unique spin structure.
Since @xmath it follows that the spin bundle @xmath decomposes into two
@xmath bundles @xmath with @xmath (see [ 12 , Section @xmath ] ). The
spin representation @xmath respects this decomposition in the following
way. Given the orthonormal frame @xmath the endomorphisms @xmath
decompose as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Since @xmath is a representation of the Clifford algebra
these endomorphisms satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular, we can choose bases for @xmath and @xmath in which the
endomorphisms are given by matrices

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that these satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a cyclic permutation of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
covariant differential operator on some bundle @xmath associated to some
unitary connection @xmath , and let @xmath be its components in the
frame @xmath . The Dirac operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and are called the Dirac operators coupled to the bundle @xmath via the
connection @xmath .

Next consider the two cases @xmath where @xmath or @xmath ( \ie @xmath
or @xmath ). The spin bundle and spin representation @xmath are
invariant under the action of @xmath , and so descend to the quotient.
Thus in both cases @xmath has a spin bundle @xmath , together with Dirac
operators defined by equations @xmath – @xmath .

The following Weitzenböck formula holds on @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
:

###### Lemma 1.14.

Given any section @xmath of @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the self-dual part of the curvature @xmath of @xmath .

Proof: Using the relations @xmath and definitions @xmath – @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The last term can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

A basis of anti-self-dual @xmath -forms is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting these forms into @xmath and using @xmath , we see that the
final term vanishes on the anti-self-dual part of @xmath , establishing
the lemma. @xmath

Finally, consider @xmath . In this case the spin bundle is a @xmath
bundle which we denote @xmath . We can find a trivialisation of @xmath
in which the spin representation @xmath for @xmath is given by @xmath ,
where the @xmath are defined by @xmath . Given a unitary bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a unitary connection @xmath on @xmath , the Dirac
operator coupled to @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that we will often want to use identifications

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the projection @xmath or @xmath .

#### 1.1.5 The Nahm transform on the @xmath-torus

As described on page 1 , the Nahm transform is a correspondence between
ASD connections on @xmath and ASD connections on @xmath , where @xmath
is a group of translations. The Nahm transform on the @xmath -torus
(when @xmath ) is in some ways the most natural version, and the other
cases of the transform can be regarded as generalizations of the @xmath
-torus version. In this Section we present the Nahm transform on @xmath
following Braam-van Baal [ 6 ] and Donaldson-Kronheimer [ 12 , Section
@xmath ] ; later, we will use this as the framework into which the other
cases fit, in particular the transform for calorons.

Let @xmath be a maximal lattice in @xmath and let @xmath . As before,
the dual lattice @xmath consists of elements of @xmath taking integer
values on @xmath , and we define the dual torus to be @xmath . We equip
@xmath with the flat Riemannian metric induced from @xmath , and denote
the spin bundles @xmath . Note that if @xmath is generated by @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath is the standard basis of @xmath then @xmath has
periods @xmath for @xmath .

The dual torus @xmath parameterizes flat @xmath connections on @xmath in
the following way. Any @xmath can be regarded as a @xmath -form with
constant coefficients on @xmath via @xmath . The connection @xmath on
the trivial line bundle @xmath is flat, and we denote the line bundle
with this connection by @xmath . Two points @xmath determine gauge
equivalent connections iff there is a well-defined gauge transformation
@xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the coordinate on @xmath . The map @xmath is a
well-defined gauge transformation @xmath iff @xmath . Thus @xmath and
@xmath are gauge equivalent iff @xmath , and @xmath parameterizes gauge
equivalence classes of flat @xmath connections on @xmath .

Next, fix a unitary vector bundle @xmath over @xmath with a unitary ASD
connection @xmath . We restrict to connections that are ‘irreducible’ in
the following sense (the definition is taken directly from [ 12 ] ):

###### Definition 1.18.

The connection @xmath is WFF (without flat factors) if there is no
splitting @xmath compatible with @xmath for any flat line bundle @xmath
.

For each @xmath we can consider the bundle @xmath equipped with the
induced connection @xmath . Using some fixed trivialisation of @xmath ,
@xmath is represented by @xmath where (by abuse of notation) @xmath is a
matrix of @xmath -forms. It is easy to check that @xmath is ASD for all
@xmath . We can write down the Dirac operators on @xmath coupled to
@xmath via @xmath , following definitions @xmath – @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the spin representation for @xmath . Since @xmath is ASD,
applying Lemma 1.14 we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath iff @xmath , in which case @xmath is a covariant constant
section of @xmath , and, if non-trivial, yields a splitting @xmath .
Since we are assuming that @xmath is WFF it follows that @xmath is
injective.

Via standard results on elliptic operators, @xmath is Fredholm for all
@xmath and has constant @xmath -index. Since @xmath is injective, using
the Fredholm alternative it follows that @xmath and this is independent
of @xmath . Moreover, the fibres @xmath define a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath which inherits an hermitian metric from the @xmath hermitian
metric on @xmath . Let @xmath be the bundle over @xmath whose fibre at
@xmath consists of @xmath sections of @xmath so that @xmath is a
sub-bundle of @xmath , and let @xmath be the @xmath orthogonal
projection onto @xmath . Let @xmath be the map on @xmath given fibrewise
by @xmath . Using the standard covariant derivative @xmath on the
trivial bundle @xmath , we can define a unitary connection @xmath on
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath so that @xmath is a gauge transformation identifying
@xmath with @xmath . Hence @xmath acts on @xmath , and the quotient is a
bundle over @xmath , which we also denote @xmath . The connection @xmath
respects this action and descends to a connection over @xmath in the
same way.

###### Definition 1.21.

If @xmath is a unitary WFF ASD connection on a unitary bundle @xmath
then @xmath is called the Nahm transform of @xmath , where @xmath is
given fibrewise by @xmath and @xmath is defined by @xmath .

The transform is non-trivial, in that, when @xmath , the rank and Chern
classes of @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(When @xmath there is a very similar formula.) The relations are a
direct result of the index theorem for families due to Atiyah-Singer,
and a proof is given in [ 12 , Section @xmath ] .

The key point is the following:

###### Proposition 1.22.

The Nahm transform @xmath of @xmath is ASD.

Proof: The curvature @xmath of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath -projection onto @xmath at each point @xmath
. Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting this into the expression for @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is ASD (which can be checked by substituting in the matrices @xmath from
@xmath and comparing with the anti-self-duality equation), it follows
that @xmath is ASD provided @xmath commutes with Clifford multiplication
for all @xmath . But Lemma 1.14 shows that @xmath commutes with Clifford
multiplication, so the Proposition follows. @xmath

Another remarkable property of the Nahm transform is that—like the
Fourier transform—it is invertible, and the inverse is the transform
itself (up to factors of @xmath and sign). It turns out that given an
ASD WFF connection @xmath , not only is @xmath ASD, but it is also WFF,
so the transform can be applied again to @xmath . The inverse transform
is defined in the following way.

Just as @xmath parameterizes the flat line bundles on @xmath , the torus
@xmath parameterizes flat line bundles over @xmath via the
identification @xmath . We write @xmath to denote the line bundle and
flat connection corresponding to @xmath , and, given a unitary bundle
@xmath and unitary connection @xmath over @xmath , let @xmath be the
Dirac operators coupled to @xmath via @xmath twisted by @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is WFF and ASD then the inverse Nahm transform, @xmath , is
defined entirely analogously to the original transform, so that @xmath
has fibre @xmath for each @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.23.

If @xmath is a WFF ASD unitary connection on @xmath then @xmath is WFF.
Hence @xmath is well defined and there is a natural isomorphism @xmath
such that @xmath .

The analogy with the Fourier transform for functions on @xmath is
obvious—indeed Donaldson-Kronheimer call the Nahm transform the ‘Fourier
transform for ASD connections’.

There are two approaches to proving the Theorem, as described by
Braam-van Baal [ 6 ] and Donaldson-Kronheimer [ 12 ] respectively. The
first approaches uses relations between harmonic spinors on @xmath and
harmonic spinors on @xmath . Given an ASD connection @xmath and its
transform @xmath , there is an elegant relation between the Greens
function @xmath of @xmath on @xmath and solutions @xmath to @xmath on
@xmath . The Greens function @xmath is given very explicitly, and it
follows quite readily that @xmath is WFF. There is also a formula
expressing the solutions @xmath to @xmath on @xmath in terms of the
solutions @xmath to @xmath . Using these two relations one constructs
the desired isometry @xmath . The second approach to the Theorem is to
convert the problem into an equivalent one in holomorphic geometry that
can be solved using @xmath -cohomology and spectral sequences. ASD
connections on @xmath are characterized by the following: a unitary
connection @xmath on a unitary bundle @xmath is ASD if and only if it
defines a holomorphic structure on @xmath for each complex structure on
@xmath . There is also an identification between the spaces of forms
@xmath , and @xmath over @xmath with the spin bundles @xmath . This
characterization allows one to move between ASD connections on unitary
bundles and @xmath -operators on holomorphic bundles. The holomorphic
version of the transform was first given by Mukai [ 30 ] ;
Donaldson-Kronheimer also give a proof of the holomorphic version
together with the details of how to move between ASD connections and
holomorphic bundles.
Remarks
( @xmath ) In algebraic geometry the transform of Mukai between
holomorphic bundles over complex tori has been generalized to give the
‘Fourier-Mukai’ transform—a transform between bundles over algebraic
varieties ( \eg elliptic surfaces, K @xmath surfaces). This has been
very successful in the study of moduli spaces of bundles over these
surfaces.
( @xmath ) The Nahm transform is a hyperKähler isometry between the
moduli spaces @xmath and @xmath of WFF ASD connections on @xmath and
@xmath . The moduli spaces are smooth manifolds away from the
connections with flat factors and are equipped with natural metrics,
given by the @xmath metrics on @xmath -forms over @xmath and @xmath .
The ASD equation implies that these metrics are hyperKähler. Braam-van
Baal [ 6 ] prove the Nahm transform on the @xmath -torus is a
hyperKähler isometry. It is conjectured that this holds for the
transform for other cases of @xmath , and this has been proved in
certain cases.
This concludes our description of the Nahm transform on @xmath . Next we
consider the transform when @xmath is a general group of translations,
reviewing the cases that have been studied in the literature.

#### 1.1.6 The Nahm transform on the generalized torus

We want to consider the ‘generalized torus’ @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for each @xmath . It can be thought of as
the limit of the @xmath -torus with generators @xmath where some of the
@xmath tend to zero or infinity. Recall that the dual torus has periods
@xmath , so ‘shrinking’ @xmath to zero ( \ie taking @xmath ) corresponds
to ‘stretching’ a period on the dual torus ( \ie taking @xmath where
@xmath ) and vice versa. Given some generalized torus, one can attempt
to carry across all the theory in Section 1.1.5 to give a version of the
Nahm transform in this new setting. Many aspects carry across readily,
but two main problems are encountered:

1.  In all cases other than the @xmath -torus we can assume @xmath is
    non-compact (since if @xmath is compact then @xmath must be
    non-compact and we can swap the two around). It becomes necessary to
    impose boundary conditions at infinity on the connection @xmath to
    ensure that @xmath is Fredholm—and even with these conditions @xmath
    may fail to be Fredholm for certain values of @xmath . The Nahm data
    will contain singularities at the points where @xmath is not
    Fredholm. In fact @xmath will not in general be a single vector
    bundle, but may change rank at these singular points. This
    introduces a new element into the problem: one must give boundary
    conditions for @xmath and @xmath at infinity and singular points,
    and then show that these can be recovered from each direction of the
    transform.

2.  A related problem is that the index theorem for families relating
    the topology of @xmath and @xmath does not hold on non-compact
    manifolds or for singular connections. Furthermore, while index
    theorems on non-compact manifolds do exist in the literature, they
    depend heavily on the precise nature of the geometry at infinity. It
    may therefore be necessary to prove a new index theorem depending on
    @xmath and the nature of the boundary conditions being imposed, for
    each different case of the transform.

Various cases of the transform on the generalized torus exist in the
literature, and we review these next. We describe the constructions of
instantons and monopoles in some detail, as these cases are directly
relevant to the caloron case, but delay commenting on the literature
until Section 1.1.7 . We let @xmath denote the @xmath -torus @xmath .
The case @xmath , @xmath : the ADHM construction of instantons. A
description of the ADHM construction as a generalization of the Nahm
transform on the @xmath -torus is given in [ 12 , Chapter @xmath ] . We
give a brief sketch of the construction, comparing with what you might
expect naïvely from the @xmath -torus transform.

Let @xmath be an instanton with charge @xmath (recall the definition in
Section 1.1.1 ). There is a unique flat line bundle over @xmath and the
dual torus @xmath is a single point, so to perform the Nahm transform we
consider only the Dirac operator @xmath rather than the family of
operators @xmath . The boundary condition on @xmath ( \ie the assumption
that the instanton extends to the compactification @xmath ) allows the
Atiyah-Singer index theorem to be applied. This shows that @xmath is
Fredholm with index @xmath , so @xmath is just the @xmath -dimensional
vector space @xmath . In analogy with the transform for @xmath , we
expect @xmath to be an ASD connection over @xmath invariant under any
translation. This would be represented by skew-hermitian endomorphisms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and cyclic permutations in @xmath (the fully translation invariant ASD
equation). In fact when we perform the transform, the RHS of equation
@xmath turns out to be non-zero. This ‘surprise’ arises as a direct
result of the non-compactness of @xmath .

The correct dual picture is the following. Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath skew-hermitian matrix and @xmath a rank @xmath
row vector, for @xmath . The map @xmath is the analogue of the Dirac
operator @xmath . Under the assumptions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath defines an @xmath bundle @xmath over @xmath as @xmath varies.
This has @xmath , and an analogue of Proposition 1.22 shows that the
induced connection @xmath is ASD. Atiyah and others [ 5 , 4 ] proved
that every @xmath instanton can be constructed in this way—this is the
ADHM construction. Expanding @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and cyclic permutations in @xmath ; this is the correct version of
equation @xmath . To obtain the ADHM data @xmath from a given instanton
@xmath one must consider the Nahm transform less naïvely than we did
above. Careful analysis of the asymptotic behaviour of the solutions in
@xmath can be used to obtain the @xmath .
The case @xmath , @xmath : the construction of monopoles. The following
sketch of the Nahm transform for @xmath monopoles as a generalization of
the transform on the @xmath -torus follows Nakajima [ 34 ] . We comment
on other approaches in the literature in Section 1.1.7 .

We have already seen how a translation invariant anti-self-dual
connection @xmath is equivalent to a solution @xmath of the Bogomolny
equation. We can perform a similar reduction on the Dirac operator
@xmath . Using the identifications , @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the coordinate on the dual torus. The rank of the Nahm
transform is given by the dimension of the cokernel of @xmath .

An important rôle will be played in this thesis by Callias’ index
theorem [ 7 ] , which gives a formula for the index of operators like
@xmath on odd dimensional manifolds. The original version of the theorem
applied to operators on bundles over @xmath for odd @xmath , but was
generalized by Anghel [ 3 ] and Råde [ 38 ] to apply more widely. The
generalized version applies to operators of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a complete open odd-dimensional spin manifold with spin
bundle @xmath ; E is a unitary vector bundle on @xmath ; @xmath is the
Dirac-operator coupled to @xmath via a unitary connection @xmath ; and
@xmath is a skew-adjoint endomorphism of @xmath . The main condition
required is that @xmath should be invertible outside some compact set
@xmath and on the boundary @xmath (some mild additional conditions are
also required). If this is the case, then @xmath decomposes @xmath as a
direct sum @xmath where @xmath consists of eigenvectors of @xmath that
have positive eigenvalue, and @xmath consists of eigenvectors with
negative eigenvalue.

###### Theorem (Callias-Anghel-Råde).

Under the assumptions above, @xmath is Fredholm with @xmath -index given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where denotes the Chern character of a bundle and @xmath is the @xmath
-genus. (See [ 39 , Chapter 2] for background on characteristic classes
and genera.)

Returning to the operator @xmath defined by @xmath , we want to apply
Callias’ theorem to compute its index. Suppose that @xmath satisfies the
@xmath monopole boundary condition, so that at infinity @xmath has
eigenvalues @xmath defining eigenbundles with Chern classes @xmath .
Since the @xmath -genus of the two sphere is trivial, @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

provided @xmath is invertible on @xmath for all sufficiently large
@xmath . Here @xmath is the eigenbundle over @xmath on which @xmath is
positive, @xmath denotes the first Chern class, and @xmath is the @xmath
-sphere with radius @xmath . Since this result is independent of @xmath
we can take the limit as @xmath , and write @xmath . When @xmath ,
@xmath is trivial so the index is zero; when @xmath , @xmath is the
whole vector bundle over @xmath , so the index is zero again; and when
@xmath , @xmath is the eigenbundle with Chern class @xmath so the index
is @xmath . A Weitzenböck formula like Lemma 1.14 shows that @xmath is
injective, so the Nahm transform of @xmath consists of a bundle @xmath
over the interval @xmath with rank @xmath .

The analogue of @xmath is a connection @xmath and skew-adjoint
endomorphisms @xmath on @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for a family @xmath . These satisfy Nahm’s equation @xmath . Near the
singularities @xmath there is a parallel gauge in which the @xmath have
a simple pole:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and at each singularity the residues @xmath define an irreducible
representation of @xmath with dimension @xmath .

Conversely, given such a connection @xmath and endomorphisms @xmath on a
rank @xmath bundle @xmath , the analogue of @xmath is the operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Nahm’s equation implies @xmath is injective, and the
singularity condition implies that @xmath has index @xmath , so @xmath
is a rank @xmath bundle over @xmath . We then define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath for each @xmath . An analogue of Proposition 1.22 shows
@xmath satisfies the Bogomolny equation @xmath , and the monopole also
satisfies the @xmath monopole boundary condition with eigenvalues @xmath
and charge @xmath .
The case @xmath , @xmath : calorons. Existing work on the transform for
calorons is reviewed in Section 1.2 .
The case @xmath , @xmath . Jardim [ 21 ] has recently proved the
existence and invertibility of the transform for this case. The
transform takes instantons on @xmath satisfying certain decay conditions
to solutions of the so-called Hitchin equations on @xmath with point
singularities. The proof has a strong algebro-geometric flavour by
regarding @xmath as a complex manifold @xmath , and in broad terms
follows the proof of the transform on @xmath in [ 12 , Chapter @xmath ]
.
The case @xmath , @xmath . Van Baal [ 41 , 42 ] has studied instantons
on @xmath and the Nahm transform, in particular with ‘twisted boundary
conditions’ (conditions on every half period, as well as full
periodicity).

#### 1.1.7 Notes on the literature for the Nahm transform

In Section 1.1.6 we presented the constructions of instantons and
monopoles as generalizations of the Nahm transform on the @xmath -torus.
Historically, this is not how these constructions arose—in this Section
we describe approaches to the Nahm transform for instantons and
monopoles as they occurred in the literature.

The ADHM construction of instantons [ 5 ] arose from developments in
twistor theory in the late 1970’s. Ward [ 43 ] proved a correspondence
between instantons on @xmath and certain holomorphic bundles on the
twistor space @xmath of @xmath . In turn, the ADHM construction [ 5 ]
was a complete construction of these bundles, thereby giving a complete
construction of instantons.

In the early 1980’s Nahm [ 32 , 33 ] sketched the Nahm transform,
showing how it encompassed the ADHM construction, and describing the
transform for monopoles and calorons. It was apparent from this work,
but not explicitly stated, that the transform would work on @xmath and
generalized tori. At roughly the same time Mukai [ 30 ] proved the
existence and invertibility of the transform between holomorphic bundles
over complex tori which we mentioned on page 1.1.5 . Later,
Corrigan-Goddard [ 9 ] provided some of the details missing from Nahm’s
original work on the transform for instantons and monopoles.

Up to this point there was no rigorous proof of the transform for
monopoles including the singularities in the Nahm data. Hitchin [ 17 ]
proved the correspondence between @xmath monopoles and Nahm data via
spectral curves of monopoles. Using twistor theory he proved a
correspondence between @xmath monopoles and certain algebraic curves in
the twistor space @xmath of @xmath [ 16 ] . Instead of constructing the
Nahm data directly from the cokernel of a Dirac operator coupled to a
monopole, Hitchin [ 17 ] considered the spectral curve of the monopole
and constructed a set of Nahm data from this. By going round the circle
shown in Figure 1.1 and proving the monopole obtained is isomorphic to
the monopole started from, Hitchin showed that the construction of
@xmath monopoles from Nahm data is complete. Hurtubise-Murray [ 20 ]
adopted a similar approach to prove completeness of the Nahm transform
for @xmath monopoles.

In 1989 Braam-van Baal [ 6 ] described the Nahm transform on @xmath as
we presented it in Section 1.1.5 , in terms of ASD connections and Dirac
operators, rather than the holomorphic approach of Mukai [ 30 ] . At a
similar time, Nakajima [ 34 ] proved the existence and invertibility of
the Nahm transform for @xmath monopoles by ‘direct’ means ( \ie via
analysis of the relevant Dirac operators obtained by dimensional
reduction of the transform on @xmath ), rather than by the spectral
curve method. A direct proof for @xmath monopoles is yet to be given.

#### 1.1.8 Twistor theory and spectral curves for monopoles

In this Section we expand on the twistor theory used to prove the
existence of the Nahm transform for monopoles. The twistor space for
@xmath is the set of oriented geodesics in @xmath . This can be
identified with the tangent space to the @xmath -sphere, @xmath .
Hitchin [ 16 ] proved a correspondence between certain rank @xmath
holomorphic bundles over twistor space @xmath , and @xmath solutions
@xmath to the Bogomolny equation on a bundle @xmath . Given a solution
@xmath , the fibre @xmath at @xmath of the corresponding bundle is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the oriented geodesic in @xmath corresponding to @xmath
, and @xmath is the unit vector along @xmath . Imposing the @xmath
boundary conditions on the monopole, some analysis reveals that there is
a holomorphic rank @xmath sub-bundle @xmath of @xmath , whose fibre at
@xmath is given by sections of @xmath over @xmath solving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

that decay in the direction of the oriented geodesic @xmath . Similarly
there is a holomorphic rank @xmath sub-bundle @xmath whose fibre at
@xmath is given by solutions of @xmath over @xmath that decay in the
opposite direction. The spectral curve @xmath is then defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath consists of geodesics over which there exist solutions to
@xmath which decay at both ends of the geodesic. The spectral curve is a
compact algebraic curve, and from it one can reconstruct @xmath and
hence the original monopole. In other words, monopoles are uniquely
determined by their spectral curves. Proofs for all these statements are
given in [ 16 ] . As described in Section 1.1.7 , the spectral curve is
used to prove completeness of the construction of @xmath monopoles from
Nahm data in [ 17 ] . The Nahm data is given in terms of a flow on the
Jacobian of the spectral curve.

As we mentioned above, twistor theory and spectral curves have also been
used to prove completeness of the Nahm transform for @xmath monopoles.
In [ 20 ] Hurtubise-Murray describe spectral curves and Nahm data for
@xmath monopoles, and give a chain of constructions equivalent to those
in Figure 1.1 . The spectral curve of an @xmath monopole has @xmath
components in @xmath with some prescribed intersection relations. More
relevant to us, however, is the Nahm picture for @xmath monopoles.

Given an @xmath monopole @xmath we assume that at infinity @xmath has
eigenvalues @xmath which define eigenbundles with Chern classes @xmath .
(There are other boundary conditions which we ignore for the moment.)
The @xmath are ordered so that @xmath . Hurtubise-Murray [ 20 ] show
that the Nahm picture for @xmath consists of @xmath bundles @xmath over
the intervals @xmath , @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each bundle is equipped with a connection @xmath and endomorphisms
@xmath , @xmath , satisfying Nahm’s equation. At each @xmath there is a
gluing condition between the bundles @xmath and @xmath , which depends
on the ranks of @xmath and @xmath : see Figures 1.2 and 1.3 . When
@xmath , rank @xmath @xmath rank @xmath and we call this a ‘zero jump’.

This form for the Nahm data is precisely what you expect if you consider
the cokernel of @xmath , the Dirac operator defined by equation @xmath .
Applying Callias’ index theorem in a similar way as that on page 1.1.6 ,
@xmath is Fredholm except when @xmath , and the dimension of the
cokernel is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This agrees with equation @xmath .

### 1.2 Review of existing work on calorons

Recent work on calorons consists of two main strands. First there is the
work of Garland-Murray in which @xmath calorons are regarded as
monopoles whose structure group is the loop-group of @xmath . Secondly,
Kraan and others have proved the existence of a version of the Nahm
transform for a special kind of caloron, namely those with unit
instanton charge and vanishing monopole charges. Before reviewing this
work, however, we make some remarks on other places calorons appear in
the literature.

Calorons and their applications to QCD at finite temperature were first
studied in the late 1970’s: [ 10 ] contains a review of this work. In [
15 ] , Harrington-Shepard constructed an explicit @xmath caloron by
arranging a periodic array of charge- @xmath instantons in @xmath .
Later, others showed how to take monopole and instanton limits of the
Harrington-Shepard caloron (by letting the period tend to zero or
infinity respectively). Other explicit solutions have been constructed
by Chakrabarti using various ansätze, including calorons with
non-trivial monopole charges: see [ 8 ] and the references therein.
Calorons and the Nahm transform have an interpretation in string and
brane theory: a caloron can be regarded as a periodic arrangement of
strings and D-branes; the Nahm transform is a correspondence between
different brane configurations, called ‘T-duality’. In this thesis,
however, we steer clear of these stringy issues.

#### 1.2.1 The loop group point of view

Garland and Murray [ 13 ] make the remarkable observation that @xmath
periodic instantons are the same as monopoles with the group @xmath as
their structure group, where @xmath is the semi-direct product of the
loop group @xmath and @xmath . In other words, they show that the
anti-self-duality equation @xmath for a @xmath connection on @xmath is
equivalent to the Bogomolny equation @xmath for a @xmath monopole.
Garland and Murray go on to develop twistor theory and the spectral
curve picture for periodic instantons, by regarding them as loop-valued
monopoles, and extending known results for regular monopoles. In a
similar vein, Norbury [ 35 ] has extended the rational map construction
of @xmath monopoles [ 11 ] to a construction of @xmath monopoles based
on holomorphic maps from @xmath to a certain flag manifold.

In general we will not make much use of the loop group approach in this
thesis; on the other hand it often gives clues as to what one might
expect for calorons, by extending existing results for monopoles. In
this Section we prove the correspondence between calorons and loop-group
monopoles, before sketching Garland and Murray’s work [ 13 ] on the
spectral curve of a caloron. Finally we describe the form we expect
caloron Nahm data to take, as sketched by Garland and Murray [ 13 ,
Section 8] . First, however, we make the following definitions.

Let @xmath be a Lie group and @xmath its Lie algebra. The loop group
@xmath of @xmath is the group of smooth maps from @xmath to @xmath with
pointwise composition. Let @xmath denote the Lie algebra of @xmath ,
that is @xmath . Define the Lie group @xmath to be the semi-direct
product of @xmath and @xmath : as a set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the composition is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Note that there is a choice as to how we let @xmath act on @xmath . We
have taken the choice as above since, as we shall see, it gives an
adjoint action corresponding to ordinary gauge transformation on @xmath
.) The Lie algebra @xmath is then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and the Lie bracket is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we want to describe the correspondence between @xmath calorons and
@xmath monopoles. We will consider calorons with period @xmath for some
@xmath . These can be thought of as connections on bundles over @xmath
where @xmath . Given a connection @xmath on a bundle @xmath fix a global
trivialisation of @xmath , and define @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath is a loop of connections on a bundle @xmath and @xmath a
loop of endomorphisms on @xmath , parameterized by @xmath . We then
define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

to be the @xmath monopole configuration on @xmath corresponding to
@xmath , where @xmath . Conversely, given an @xmath monopole
configuration of the form @xmath on a bundle @xmath , let @xmath where
@xmath is the projection @xmath , and define @xmath using @xmath .
(Garland and Murray show that by gauge transforming, every finite energy
@xmath monopole can be written in the form @xmath .) We want to show
that this correspondence is gauge invariant. Let @xmath be a gauge
transformation on @xmath and let @xmath be the corresponding map @xmath
. The @xmath gauge transformation corresponding to @xmath is then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under @xmath , @xmath and @xmath transform as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

using the adjoint action @xmath . Since @xmath this is exactly the same
as the action of @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition (Garland and Murray [13]).

Under the correspondence given above, @xmath is ASD if and only if
@xmath satisfy the Bogomolny equation.

Proof: Fixing a global trivialisation of @xmath , @xmath is represented
by a matrix of @xmath -forms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coordinate form of the anti-self-duality equation @xmath then
implies

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and cyclic permutations in @xmath . These equations can be written
invariantly as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the @xmath Bogomolny equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the curvature of @xmath . However @xmath , while from
the bracket @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and @xmath are equivalent. @xmath

With the correspondence between @xmath calorons and @xmath monopoles
established, Garland and Murray go on to consider the twistor theory and
spectral curves of calorons. The twistor space of @xmath can be obtained
by lifting the translation @xmath on @xmath to an action on the twistor
space @xmath of @xmath , and quotienting by this action. (The twistor
space @xmath of @xmath can be obtained in a similar fashion.) The
quotient is a bundle @xmath over @xmath with fibre @xmath , and it can
be embedded in a fibre bundle @xmath with fibre @xmath . Just like the
monopole case, standard twistor theory methods show that a caloron
@xmath determines a holomorphic bundle @xmath over twistor space @xmath
. Garland and Murray show that if the caloron satisfies certain boundary
conditions, then @xmath extends to the compactification to define a
holomorphic bundle @xmath . The bundle @xmath can then be used to define
@xmath spectral curves in @xmath : a point @xmath lies in a given curve
depending on the existence of certain sections of @xmath over the fibre
of @xmath above @xmath . In particular, sections over a fibre @xmath of
@xmath are characterized by how they extend from @xmath to zero and
infinity. Garland and Murray then show how a caloron is determined by
its spectral curves, constructing a caloron from a set of spectral data.

Given the twistor picture for calorons, and arguing by analogy with the
monopole case, one can predict what the Nahm picture for calorons should
look like — this is sketched in [ 13 , Section 8] . First, however, we
need to describe Garland and Murray’s boundary conditions for calorons.
They require that there is a gauge at infinity in which a @xmath
monopole @xmath of the form @xmath agrees with a static ( @xmath
-independent) @xmath monopole configuration. Thus a caloron can be
characterized asymptotically by the eigenvalues @xmath of the Higgs
field in this gauge, and the Chern classes @xmath (the ‘monopole
charges’). There is an additional topological characteristic, denoted
@xmath and called the ‘instanton charge’, that is the obstruction up to
deformation on the interior of @xmath to the entire configuration being
@xmath -independent. In terms of an @xmath periodic instanton @xmath the
boundary condition requires that there is a gauge at infinity in which
@xmath has eigenvalues @xmath etc.

We expect the Nahm data corresponding to such a caloron to consist of
@xmath bundles @xmath , @xmath , over the intervals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each bundle @xmath is equipped with a connection and endomorphisms
satisfying Nahm’s equation. Furthermore, we anticipate the rank of the
data to be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Garland-Murray do not give this formula, but it is implicit from their
work.) At each point @xmath we expect the Nahm data to satisfy
conditions entirely similar to those for @xmath monopoles (recall
Figures 1.2 and 1.3 ). A typical set of @xmath caloron Nahm data is
illustrated in Figure 1.4 .

#### 1.2.2 Calorons with vanishing monopole charges

The Nahm transform for calorons has been studied recently for @xmath
calorons with unit instanton charge and vanishing monopole charges in a
series of papers [ 23 , 24 , 22 ] and [ 26 ] . In terms of the boundary
conditions described in Section 1.2.1 , these calorons have @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath . In [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] , and [ 22 ] , Kraan and others
construct such calorons from infinite arrays of ordinary ADHM data,
corresponding to an arrangement of instantons in @xmath repeated
periodically, possibly with some topological ‘twist’. (This is, of
course, a similar approach to the Harrington-Shepard construction, but
more general.) The caloron is given by the cokernel of an
infinite-dimensional matrix operator @xmath , similar to the operator
@xmath for the regular ADHM construction, but constructed from this
array of data. By regarding the algebraic equation @xmath as a equation
for the Fourier coefficients of a function on @xmath , Kraan obtains the
Nahm picture for calorons. This agrees exactly with the Nahm picture
conjectured at the end of Section 1.2.1 and consists of bundles @xmath ,
@xmath over the intervals @xmath , each equipped with a connection and
skew-adjoint endomorphisms @xmath . The bundles all have rank @xmath ,
and so Nahm’s equation reduces to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the @xmath commute. Working in a parallel gauge on each bundle,
the matrices @xmath are constant. At each point @xmath there is a ‘zero
jump’ ( \ie rank @xmath rank @xmath ), and the matrices have some
prescribed discontinuity there. Kraan and van Baal [ 24 ] show that each
discontinuity determines (and is determined by) a vector @xmath . Note
that each block of data @xmath is exactly the same as the Nahm data for
a charge- @xmath @xmath monopole, and so the caloron can be said to
consist of @xmath ‘constituent monopoles’. Kraan and van Baal show that
the constituent monopoles are located at the points @xmath . This
interpretation does not hold for higher charge calorons: for example,
consider a caloron with @xmath and vanishing monopole charges. The Nahm
data for the caloron should be discontinuous, but not singular, at each
@xmath , while the data for a charge- @xmath @xmath monopole has
singularities at its endpoints. The caloron Nahm data therefore cannot
be assembled from @xmath sets of monopole Nahm data. Figure 1.5
illustrates Nahm data for Kraan’s calorons.

Since Nahm’s equation can be solved completely in the case of unit
instanton charge and vanishing monopole charges, the construction of
calorons can be given very explicitly. Roughly speaking, the locations
of the ‘constituent monopoles’ @xmath and the values @xmath determine
the Nahm data completely: expressions for the corresponding caloron are
given in terms of these data in [ 24 ] . Kraan and van Baal go on to
consider the moduli space of calorons, and argue completeness of their
construction by counting parameters. They also take various limits for
the @xmath caloron, obtaining monopole ( @xmath ) and instanton ( @xmath
) limits on the moduli space. Shrinking one interval of the Nahm data
gives a caloron with a ‘massless’ constituent monopole—the
Harrington-Shepard caloron can be obtained in this way. Independently of
Kraan, Lee [ 26 ] has given a very similar construction of calorons from
this kind of Nahm data.

### 1.3 Overview of results

The aim of this thesis is to prove the existence of a version of the
Nahm transform for calorons as a generalization of the transform on the
@xmath -torus. As indicated in Section 1.1.6 , many aspects of the Nahm
transform on the @xmath -torus carry across directly to the caloron
case, but we encounter the following difficulties:

1.   Boundary conditions. We need to specify boundary conditions on the
    caloron that are sufficiently strong for the transform from the
    caloron to the Nahm data to be possible, but sufficiently weak to be
    recovered for a caloron constructed from some set of Nahm data. The
    ‘dual’ problem—specifying conditions for the Nahm data at
    singularities—is much more straightforward as we take these to be
    exactly the same as the conditions for @xmath monopoles. The main
    difficulty in the construction of calorons from Nahm data is proving
    the caloron obtained satisfies the boundary conditions; conversely,
    obtaining the singularity conditions for the Nahm data constructed
    from a caloron is also a difficult problem.

2.   The index formula. Given a caloron @xmath we need a formula for the
    @xmath -index of the Dirac operator @xmath in order to calculate the
    rank of the Nahm data obtained from the transform.

Our approach to these problems and our main results can be summarized in
the following way:
Chapter 2: the topology of calorons.
We define boundary conditions for calorons and explore topological
aspects such as deformation of caloron configurations. The main
innovation is that we work on closed manifolds with boundary rather than
open manifolds with asymptotic boundary conditions, and thus consider
calorons on @xmath where @xmath is the interior of the closed ball
@xmath . This allows the boundary conditions to be stated very
succinctly, but the drawback is that we have to do more work to recover
them in the Nahm transform. A @xmath bundle @xmath is framed if it is
equipped with a trivialisation @xmath at infinity. There is a
topological obstruction, denoted @xmath , to extending this to a global
trivialisation of @xmath . Our boundary condition for a caloron @xmath
on @xmath is that it should resemble the pull-back of a @xmath monopole
configuration in the trivialisation @xmath . Thus calorons are
characterized by the eigenvalues @xmath of the Higgs field at infinity,
the Chern classes @xmath of the corresponding eigenbundles, the period
@xmath , and the invariant @xmath of the framed bundle. We go on to
define a map between calorons in different topological classes which
corresponds to a rotation of the Nahm data round @xmath . This ‘rotation
map’ has been considered previously by Lee [ 26 , 25 ] for calorons with
vanishing monopole charges, but its relation with the Nahm transform has
not been fully explored. It plays an important rôle in our construction
of calorons from Nahm data.
Chapter 3: the transform from Nahm data to calorons.
Nahm data for calorons was described at the end of Section 1.2.1 . Let
@xmath denote the collection (modulo gauge transformations) of Nahm data
characterized by @xmath , so that the data is singular at @xmath and has
rank given by @xmath . Here @xmath and similarly for @xmath , and we
call @xmath a set of caloron boundary data. Let @xmath be the collection
of calorons (modulo gauge transformations) with boundary conditions
defined by @xmath . We prove the following in Chapter @xmath :

###### Theorem (Nahm data @xmath caloron).

For each set of boundary data @xmath , the Nahm transform is a
well-defined map from @xmath to @xmath .

Showing that the connection constructed from the Nahm data is ASD,
periodic, and @xmath , is relatively easy, and the main difficulty lies
in recovering the boundary conditions. In the notation of Section 1.1.5
, @xmath is the Dirac operator whose cokernel gives the caloron. We
define a model operator @xmath —a deformation of @xmath —and prove that
the cokernel of @xmath gives a periodic connection satisfying the
desired boundary conditions, but not the ASD condition. We then prove
that the boundary conditions are not affected by the deformation, and
conclude that the cokernel of @xmath therefore satisfies the desired
boundary conditions. This approach was used by Hitchin [ 17 ] to recover
the boundary conditions for an @xmath monopole. We have extended it in
three ways: firstly to deal with zero jumps (which cannot occur for an
@xmath monopole); secondly to work right up to the boundary of @xmath ;
and finally to model @xmath on the interior as well as at infinity. This
last point is necessary to recover @xmath , which is the obstruction to
extending the framing of the caloron to the interior, and so requires
understanding of @xmath (at least up to deformation) when @xmath is in
the interior of @xmath . Defining the model operator @xmath requires
some ingenuity, and recovering the boundary conditions occupies the
majority of Chapter 3.
Chapter 4: the transform from calorons to Nahm data.
We aim to prove:

###### Theorem (Caloron @xmath Nahm data).

For each set of boundary data @xmath , the Nahm transform is a
well-defined map from @xmath to @xmath .

In particular, we have to prove that the rank of the Nahm data obtained
is given by @xmath , and that the Nahm data obtained satisfies the
desired singularity conditions. The rank condition follows from the
following theorem:

###### Theorem (The index theorem).

Given a caloron @xmath on a framed bundle @xmath which satisfies the
boundary conditions specified by @xmath , @xmath is Fredholm with @xmath
-index

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath and @xmath is defined by @xmath for @xmath .

The proof of the index theorem involves two main steps. The first is a
calculation of the index when @xmath , in which case the caloron can be
deformed through the space of calorons satisfying the boundary
conditions, until it is independent of @xmath . Callias’ index theorem [
7 ] is used to compute the index in this case. The second step uses an
excision theorem of Gromov-Lawson [ 14 ] to reduce the problem to the
case @xmath . The theorem has been published, together with some
material from Chapter 2, in [ 36 ] , and a copy of this paper is
attached to the thesis.

The singularity conditions are recovered, in part at least, by
generalizing Nakajima’s analysis [ 34 ] of the singularities for @xmath
monopoles. We successfully recover the singularity conditions at points
@xmath where @xmath under the assumption of two analytic conjectures
given in Section 4.4.4 . Note that we do not give a complete proof of
the Theorem (Caloron @xmath Nahm data): we do not recover the gluing
conditions at zero jumps in the Nahm data, and we do not show that the
Nahm data obtained gives rise to an injective operator @xmath —a
necessary condition for the Nahm data to lie inside @xmath .

### 1.4 Open problems

Behaviour at the singular points. There are a few problems concerning
the behaviour of the Nahm data constructed from a monopole or caloron
which we do not resolve. These are explained in Section 4.4.4 .
Injectivity of the Nahm operator and invertibility of the transform. An
obvious ‘next step’ following this thesis is to prove that the transform
from Nahm data to calorons and the transform from calorons to Nahm data
described in Chapters @xmath and @xmath are mutually inverse. One
approach to proving invertibility is to adapt Donaldson and Kronheimer’s
method [ 12 , Chapter @xmath ] that uses holomorphic geometry and @xmath
-cohomology. Another approach, more in keeping with the rest of this
thesis, is to adapt Nakajima’s analytic proof that the Nahm transform
for @xmath monopoles is invertible [ 34 , Sections @xmath and @xmath ] .
We remarked above that our proof of the Theorem (Caloron @xmath Nahm
data) is incomplete because we do not prove injectivity of the ‘Nahm
operator’ @xmath constructed from the Nahm data in a similar way to
@xmath . Without this established, it may not be possible to apply the
inverse transform to go back to the caloron. This is not a serious
problem: if we perform the transform on a caloron, and then form the
Nahm operator @xmath from the Nahm data obtained, it is easy to prove
that @xmath is injective away from a finite collection of points, so the
inverse transform is defined almost everywhere. A first step towards
proving invertibility is to express the Greens function of @xmath in
terms of smooth solutions @xmath of @xmath (see [ 6 , Section @xmath ]
for the @xmath -torus calculation). This Greens function should have
some canonical form in terms of the spinors @xmath . A proof by
contradiction shows that @xmath is injective: if it is not then the
spinors @xmath cannot be smooth. Braam-van Baal [ 6 , Proposition @xmath
] and Corrigan-Goddard [ 9 , Section @xmath ] use an argument like this
for the @xmath -torus and ADHM construction respectively. With this in
place, adapting Nakajima’s proof of invertibility should be quite
straight-forward.
The moduli space of calorons. There are many open problems concerning
the moduli space of calorons, including fundamental problems such as
proving existence and smoothness, calculating the dimension of the
space, and proving the existence of a hyperKähler metric. These
fundamental problems also apply to the space of Nahm data. With these
problems solved, it might be possible to prove that the Nahm transform
is a hyperKähler isometry between the two spaces. One could then explore
the moduli space of calorons by working on the space of Nahm data. Many
of the problems investigated for monopoles, for example calculation of
the metric for widely separated constituents or scattering for symmetric
configurations, could be carried over to calorons.
Monopole and instanton limits of calorons. One of the reasons for
studying calorons is that they form an interpolating case between
monopoles and instantons. An obvious question to ask is whether we can
find families of calorons with a monopole or instanton limit. In terms
of moduli spaces it might be possible to prove that monopoles and
instantons form the boundary of the caloron moduli space in some sense.
Kraan and van Baal [ 22 , 24 ] have constructed such families for
calorons with vanishing monopole charges and unit instanton charge.
However, these involve taking the limit as one interval of the Nahm data
is contracted to zero (taking the ‘massless monopole limit’ in physics
language). This is the same as looking at monopoles and calorons with
non-maximal symmetry breaking—opening up a wide range of problems.
Throughout this thesis we will only consider calorons with maximal
symmetry breaking.

## Chapter 2 The Topology of Calorons

This Chapter is concerned with topological aspects of calorons,
especially boundary conditions. Based on the boundary conditions used by
Garland-Murray [ 13 , Section @xmath ] , in Section 2.1 we define a set
of boundary conditions which are sufficiently strong for the Nahm
transform from calorons to Nahm data to be possible, but which can be
recovered for a caloron constructed from some set of Nahm data. We draw
the reader’s attention to definitions 2.6 , 2.9 , and 2.10 —these are
central to the rest of the thesis. In Section 2.2 we study ‘large’ gauge
transformations (non-periodic gauge transformations that leave the
caloron periodic) and a map between different calorons given by such a
gauge transformation, that in some sense corresponds to rotation of the
Nahm data round @xmath . Section 2.3 contains a slight digression in
which the caloron boundary conditions are derived by regarding a @xmath
caloron as a @xmath monopole and imposing the monopole boundary
conditions.

### 2.1 Boundary conditions

Boundary conditions for objects on open manifolds can be regarded from
two points of view:

1.  one can specify a set of asymptotic conditions that control
    behaviour as ‘infinity’ is approached;

2.  alternatively, one can glue on a boundary to obtain a compact
    manifold with boundary, and demand that objects extend to the
    boundary and have fixed behaviour there.

The second approach is motivated by the work of Melrose (see [ 27 , 28 ]
). It allows the boundary conditions to be stated more concisely, and is
the approach we adopt to define the boundary conditions in Sections
2.1.1 and 2.1.3 . I acknowledge the help of my supervisor, Michael
Singer, with the definitions in this Section, many of which appeared in
our joint publication [ 36 ] .

We compactify @xmath by identifying it with the interior of the closed
@xmath -ball @xmath . As previously, we consider calorons with period
@xmath , and let @xmath . Let @xmath , denote the boundary by @xmath ,
and let @xmath be the projection on to @xmath . The interior @xmath can
be identified with @xmath . Let @xmath be the coordinates on @xmath
corresponding to the standard coordinates on @xmath under projection
@xmath , and orient @xmath so that @xmath is positive. Let the metric
@xmath on @xmath be the standard flat product metric that gives the
circle length @xmath . Next we write down coordinates near the boundary
of @xmath and derive the form of the metric @xmath in these coordinates.
Let @xmath be polar coordinates on @xmath , so that @xmath is the
distance from the origin in @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are some local
angular coordinates on @xmath . We suppose @xmath and @xmath are chosen
so that @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some positive locally-defined functions @xmath . Local coordinates
near the boundary of @xmath will be @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , so that
@xmath becomes a boundary defining function: @xmath on @xmath , with
equality only at @xmath , and @xmath on @xmath . Writing @xmath in terms
of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

so @xmath is singular at the boundary.

#### 2.1.1 Boundary conditions for monopoles

Let @xmath be the trivial @xmath vector bundle and let @xmath . Suppose
@xmath is a @xmath connection on @xmath , @xmath is a skew-adjoint
endomorphism on @xmath , and that the following conditions are
satisfied:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is projection onto the @xmath -th eigenbundle, and @xmath
is the covariant derivative on @xmath . It follows that @xmath . The
condition that the eigenvalues are distinct is that of maximal symmetry
breaking: although this is not required for many of our results, we only
prove the existence of the Nahm transform for calorons with maximal
symmetry breaking. We therefore assume maximal symmetry breaking from
the outset. Note that we also assume @xmath (since we are ultimately
interested in the gauge group @xmath ).

###### Definition 2.4.

A @xmath monopole configuration framed by @xmath is a unitary connection
@xmath on @xmath and a skew-adjoint endomorphism @xmath on @xmath that
satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will also work with @xmath monopole configurations, in which case we
require @xmath and @xmath to be trace-free and @xmath to be compatible
with the volume form. Note that a monopole configuration is not required
to satisfy the Bogomolny equation. The gauge transformations are the
unitary bundle automorphisms of @xmath that are the identity at
infinity.

Let @xmath be the eigenvalues of @xmath , and order them so that @xmath
. Let @xmath be the Chern class of the eigenbundle with eigenvalue
@xmath . Thus we have @xmath and @xmath satisfying:

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath .

This choice of notation matches that in [ 13 ] and [ 20 ] .

###### Definition 2.5.

A pair @xmath is a set of @xmath monopole boundary data if it satisfies
these two conditions. It is a set of @xmath monopole boundary data if in
addition it satisfies @xmath .

We have shown that on one hand a pair @xmath satisfying the boundary
conditions determines a set of boundary data; on the other hand note
that a set of monopole boundary data @xmath determines @xmath uniquely
up to isomorphism.

#### 2.1.2 Framed bundles

###### Definition 2.6.

A @xmath framed bundle over @xmath consists of a pair @xmath where
@xmath is a @xmath vector bundle and @xmath is a unitary
bundle-isomorphism.

There exists a topological obstruction to extending @xmath to a global
identification of @xmath with @xmath , and we use this to define an
invariant @xmath of a framed bundle. Consider what happens when we try
to extend @xmath : for each @xmath we can find an identification @xmath
that agrees with @xmath on @xmath . We can do this continuously, and
obtain a path of maps @xmath for @xmath in some interval @xmath . Define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the group of unitary automorphisms of @xmath that are
the identity on @xmath . Then @xmath represents an element of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we call @xmath . Note that @xmath is independent of the choice of
@xmath , that the choice of @xmath corresponds to a bundle automorphism
of @xmath , and that @xmath can be chosen so that @xmath is independent
of @xmath . If @xmath is sufficiently smooth then there is the following
integral formula for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

To establish this formula it is easier to work with a map @xmath and
prove that @xmath is given by the same integral over @xmath . It is easy
to check that the formula holds when @xmath is the standard map with
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove that the integral depends only on the homotopy class of @xmath
, consider a family of maps @xmath defined for all @xmath in some open
interval in @xmath . The form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact, so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it follows that the integral is homotopy invariant. Finally, given
some @xmath and some @xmath , a short calculation shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves the integral formula for @xmath for @xmath . Identifying
@xmath with @xmath then gives @xmath .

###### Definition 2.9.

Given a framed bundle @xmath let @xmath . We may also write @xmath .

We can equally well work with gauge group @xmath , in which case the
clutching map @xmath takes values in @xmath , the group of special
unitary automorphisms of @xmath that are the identity on the boundary.
The same formula holds for @xmath .

#### 2.1.3 Boundary conditions for calorons

Let @xmath be a @xmath connection and endomorphism on @xmath satisfying
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 2.10.

Let @xmath be a unitary connection on a framed bundle @xmath . Then
@xmath is a @xmath caloron configuration framed by @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the framing @xmath is being used to identify @xmath with @xmath .

We can define @xmath caloron configurations in a similar way by
equipping @xmath with a parallel volume form. Note that the gauge
transformations are (strictly periodic) unitary bundle automorphisms of
@xmath . A gauge transformation @xmath acts on the framing @xmath by
@xmath , and acts on the connection in the usual way.

Just as for monopoles, the boundary conditions for a caloron
configuration determine (and are determined by) a set of boundary data
@xmath . In particular the Higgs field at infinity, @xmath , determines
a set of monopole boundary data @xmath and we assume that @xmath . In
addition the caloron configuration is characterized by @xmath and by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We require two further conditions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first condition is equivalent to saying that, regarding the caloron
as a loop-group monopole as in Section 1.2.1 , the Higgs field at
infinity lies in the positive Weyl chamber of the Lie algebra. Garland
and Murray [ 13 ] discuss this condition in greater detail. The second
condition ensures that each block of Nahm data has positive rank. It can
be derived from the spectral curve picture—see [ 13 , Section @xmath ] .

###### Definition 2.13.

A set of caloron boundary data is a set @xmath where @xmath is a set of
monopole boundary data, and the two conditions @xmath and @xmath are
satisfied. The boundary data is said to be principal if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The condition of being principal is important in the context of the
rotation map which we discuss in Section 2.2 , and is equivalent to
saying that the lowest rank of any block of the Nahm data is @xmath .

For each set of caloron boundary data we need the following quantities.
Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and take @xmath . In the physics literature @xmath and @xmath
are called the charges and masses of the ‘constituent monopoles’ of the
caloron respectively. Note that @xmath is principal iff @xmath .

#### 2.1.4 Framed quasi-periodic connections

Let @xmath be some open neighbourhood of the interval @xmath with
coordinate @xmath . Let @xmath be the projection @xmath and let @xmath .
There is an obvious correspondence between caloron configurations and
connections on @xmath —we spell out the details in this Section. Let
@xmath satisfy @xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 2.16.

A @xmath connection @xmath on @xmath is quasi-periodic with clutching
map @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath clutches with clutching function @xmath . The map
@xmath has a degree since it represents an element of @xmath .

@xmath quasi-periodic connections are defined in exactly the same way,
except the clutching function @xmath takes values in @xmath .

###### Definition 2.17.

A connection @xmath on @xmath is framed by @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a @xmath correspondence between caloron configurations and
quasi-periodic connections framed by @xmath (up to bundle isomorphism).
Given a caloron configuration @xmath on @xmath , extend @xmath by @xmath
(as in Section 2.1.2 ). Let @xmath . Then @xmath is a framed
quasi-periodic connection with clutching function given by @xmath .
Conversely, given a framed quasi-periodic connection @xmath with
clutching function @xmath , quotienting by the action of @xmath gives a
framed caloron configuration @xmath on a framed bundle @xmath with
@xmath . The framing @xmath is properly periodic on @xmath because
@xmath on @xmath . The correspondence is determined up to bundle
automorphisms on @xmath that are the identity on the boundary @xmath ,
and periodic bundle automorphisms of @xmath . Given a caloron
configuration @xmath , we call the corresponding framed quasi-periodic
connection @xmath the quasi-periodic pull-back of @xmath .

#### 2.1.5 Calorons as loops of monopoles

There is a correspondence between loops of monopoles ‘with a twist’ and
caloron configurations. Fix a set of monopole boundary data @xmath and
let @xmath be the connection and Higgs field on @xmath this determines.
Let @xmath denote the set of all @xmath -monopole configurations which
are framed by @xmath (as defined by Definition 2.4 ). @xmath is equipped
with gauge group @xmath , and @xmath acts according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is an affine space, hence contractible, so
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the smooth (free) loops in @xmath with degree
@xmath and parameterized by @xmath . Some care is needed to ensure loops
are smooth across the ends of paths, so we note the following
characterization of smooth loops. Suppose @xmath is some path in @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . The path defines a smooth loop in @xmath if and only
if it can be extended to a path defined for @xmath , for some small
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Note that @xmath is independent of @xmath .

There is a correspondence up to isomorphism between caloron
configurations with boundary data @xmath and elements of @xmath , which
follows immediately using the quasi-periodic pull-back of a caloron
configuration. A loop in @xmath whose ends are related by @xmath
determines a framed quasi-periodic connection via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence a caloron configuration with boundary data @xmath . On the
other hand, given a framed caloron configuration consider its framed
quasi-periodic pull-back @xmath with clutching map @xmath . As we have
already seen, @xmath can be chosen so that @xmath is independent of
@xmath . The splitting @xmath then determines an element of @xmath .
Note that the correspondence does not restrict to a correspondence
between loops of monopoles satisfying the Bogomolny equation and
anti-self-dual calorons (compare the Bogomolny equation @xmath with the
equation for loop-group monopoles @xmath ). Also note the difference
between the picture of a caloron as a twisted loop of framed monopole
configurations (where the twisting occurs on the interior of @xmath )
and the loop-group picture (where the twisting is at infinity).

In the light of this correspondence, it is clear that a monopole
configuration can be pulled-back from @xmath to @xmath to give a caloron
configuration with @xmath . We will need the following converse:

###### Lemma 2.20.

Let @xmath be a framed @xmath caloron on a framed bundle with @xmath .
Then there is a deformation @xmath of @xmath (through framed @xmath
caloron configurations), such that @xmath is the pull-back of a
monopole.

Proof: Let @xmath be a quasi-periodic pull-back of @xmath . Then @xmath
has clutching map @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be any smooth unitary
automorphism of @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Such an extension exists if and only if @xmath . Acting on @xmath by
@xmath , we reduce to the case @xmath . If we define a connection and
endomorphism @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a framed quasi-periodic connection which is the pull-back of the
monopole configuration @xmath . Moreover, @xmath can be deformed to
@xmath through framed quasi-periodic connections with @xmath via the
obvious linear path. @xmath

#### 2.1.6 Smoothness at the boundary

Up to this point we have been deliberately vague about the precise
degree of smoothness up to the boundary that we are assuming ( \ie
whether connections are continuous or smooth up to the
boundary)—Definitions 2.4 , 2.6 , 2.9 , 2.10 , and 2.17 all make sense
if we assume only continuity up to the boundary. In this Section we
specify precise smoothness conditions for our objects. We also give a
brief comparison of our boundary conditions with the asymptotic boundary
conditions for calorons used by Garland and Murray [ 13 ] and others.

We will need the following spaces of functions:

###### Definition 2.21.

@xmath is the space of functions @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath is
smooth on @xmath , and for all @xmath and all @xmath , @xmath is
continuous up to the boundary.

###### Definition 2.22.

A @xmath -form @xmath on @xmath is @xmath if the @xmath component is
@xmath and the other components are @xmath .

Let @xmath be a caloron configuration on a framed bundle @xmath that is
continuous up to the boundary, and framed by @xmath . Then there exist
local gauges on @xmath defined for sufficiently small @xmath and all
@xmath , in which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath , where @xmath is a local trivialisation of @xmath respecting
the decomposition into eigenbundles, and such that @xmath are continuous
up to the boundary. Here @xmath are the matrices representing @xmath in
the fixed gauge. Conversely, if such gauges exist for some connection
@xmath on @xmath , then @xmath is framed by @xmath and some map @xmath .
We restrict attention to caloron configurations for which there exist
local gauges satisfying @xmath and @xmath in which @xmath is @xmath . We
call these @xmath caloron configurations .

In addition, we also require that, on the boundary, @xmath is diagonal
and independent of @xmath in these gauges. We impose this condition to
ensure that @xmath has the following asymptotic behaviour:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath is anti-self-dual. To obtain this, extend the framing @xmath
to a neighbourhood of the boundary, perform the “ @xmath ” decomposition
@xmath , and consider the @xmath component of the anti-self-duality
equation @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Working in the gauges described above, on the boundary @xmath the @xmath
component of the LHS of @xmath is @xmath , because @xmath is the
standard connection on each constituent line bundle of @xmath . On the
RHS of @xmath the second term vanishes on the boundary, while the @xmath
component of the first is @xmath . Equating the two sides of @xmath
shows that the @xmath term of @xmath is @xmath , and so we obtain @xmath
. We will need the expansion @xmath in Chapter @xmath when we construct
Nahm data from a given caloron.

###### Definition 2.27.

Given a set of @xmath caloron boundary data, let @xmath be the set of
gauge equivalence classes of @xmath @xmath caloron configurations @xmath
satisfying these smoothness conditions, whose boundary conditions are
determined by @xmath . Let @xmath denote the subset of anti-self-dual
caloron configurations modulo gauge. When the boundary data is @xmath we
restrict @xmath and @xmath to @xmath configurations.

It is convenient at this point to compare our boundary conditions for
calorons with the ‘BPS’ decay conditions used in [ 13 ] . Given a framed
bundle @xmath , we can extend @xmath to a neighbourhood of the boundary
@xmath , and perform the “ @xmath ” decomposition @xmath to define a
loop of connections @xmath on @xmath over this neighbourhood, and a loop
of endomorphisms @xmath . Garland and Murray [ 13 ] impose the condition
that @xmath and @xmath satisfy the ‘BPS’ boundary conditions for
monopoles uniformly in @xmath . (Various versions of the ‘BPS’ monopole
boundary conditions exist: see [ 31 ] and [ 16 ] for example.) For a
@xmath framed caloron, @xmath and @xmath are @xmath as @xmath , while
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath . Using the form of the metric in equation
@xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a gauge invariant quantity—it does not depend on the choice of
framing @xmath . Thus our boundary conditions imply the following:

-   there are local gauges in which @xmath higher order terms,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath for @xmath ,

and these estimates are uniform in @xmath . But these conditions are
just the BPS monopole boundary conditions described in [ 16 ] .

#### 2.1.7 Chern-Weil theory

Given a caloron configuration @xmath on a framed bundle @xmath , we will
need the ‘Pontryagin integral’

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we calculate in this section. Here @xmath denotes the second order
term of the Chern character of @xmath (which also depends on the
connection @xmath since we are working on a manifold with boundary). The
integral has been evaluated by different means in [ 10 ] and [ 13 ] .
Pulling @xmath back to a framed quasi-periodic connection @xmath on
@xmath gives:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the familiar trick of writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the integral becomes an integral over the boundary of the rectangle
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Working on the boundary requires the smoothness assumptions made in
Section 2.1.6 . Regarding @xmath as a path in @xmath , we obtain a path
@xmath , whose ends are related by @xmath . Evaluating @xmath on the
component @xmath and using the clutching formula gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first term is @xmath , and the second can be re-expressed as an
integral on @xmath which vanishes because @xmath on @xmath . On the
other component of the boundary we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The final term vanishes because @xmath on @xmath , and the sum of the
middle two terms is exact, so does not contribute. Since the connection
@xmath is compatible with @xmath , the first term is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the eigenbundle of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath .
Putting the terms together, we arrive at the expression

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
              @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Just like regular instantons, calorons minimize the action within each
topological class. Expanding @xmath and using @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second term is constant within each topological class, so the action
is minimized when @xmath \ie when @xmath is ASD. A similar result is
obtained by regarding a @xmath caloron as a @xmath monopole, evaluating
the energy @xmath , and performing the ‘Bogomolny trick’ (re-arranging
in terms of @xmath ).

### 2.2 The rotation map

Up to this point we have considered two caloron configurations to be
equivalent if related by a strictly periodic bundle isomorphism, or, in
other words, we have taken gauge transformations to be strictly
periodic. However, we can consider ‘large’ gauge
transformations—transformations that are non-periodic but leave the
caloron strictly periodic. In the quasi-periodic picture, these are
equivalent to bundle automorphisms of @xmath that are not necessarily
the identity at infinity, and such gauge transformations affect the
framing (recall the final paragraph of Section 2.1.4 ). We therefore
expect a large gauge transformation (if such an object exists) to be a
map between calorons with different framings, and possibly with
different boundary data.

On the other hand, consider a caloron constructed from some set of Nahm
data. (For the present we assume we have a construction like that
conjectured in the Introduction.) The choice of origin on the circle
@xmath should have no effect on the caloron constructed from the Nahm
data (as a connection over @xmath ) because the inner product defined on
sections of the Nahm data is independent of the origin. However,
changing the origin does change the values @xmath and therefore the
framing of the caloron obtained. The Nahm construction gives a
connection over @xmath which we quotient by some action of @xmath to
obtain a framed connection on @xmath , and there is some freedom as to
how we take the quotient and make the framing. The choice of origin for
the circle @xmath corresponds in some sense to a choice of the quotient
and framing. Furthermore, calorons obtained by different quotients are
related by large gauge transformations.

All this will be made rigorous later, but we can draw the following
conclusion: given a caloron with boundary data @xmath we expect that by
applying a large gauge transformation we can obtain a caloron with
boundary data @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are related by shifting
the origin on @xmath . We call this the ‘rotation map’ and prove its
existence in this Section. We will explore its relation to the Nahm
transform later. Lee [ 26 ] has described the rotation map for calorons
with vanishing monopole charges, and explained it in representation
theoretical terms [ 25 ] .

Fix a set of boundary data @xmath and consider the following map:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are defined by @xmath and @xmath . This map
permutes—or rotates—the ‘constituent monopoles’. We have defined it so
that it corresponds to a rotation of the Nahm data—the map can be
obtained by comparing Figures 2.1 and 2.2 . For example, the highest
rank block has width @xmath before rotation and width @xmath after
rotation, so @xmath . In terms of @xmath and @xmath the map is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                        
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath            @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that the result is a new set of boundary data ( \ie
it satisfies the conditions of Definition 2.13 ), hence we have a map
@xmath defined on sets of caloron boundary data. Note that @xmath is the
identity and that the quantity @xmath remains constant under the action
of the rotation. Each orbit under @xmath contains at least one set of
principal boundary data, corresponding to @xmath being the lowest rank
(recall Definition 2.13 and the remarks following it).

Our aim is to construct a map @xmath on caloron configurations that
changes the boundary data in the same way as @xmath . In other words we
want a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix a set of boundary data @xmath and some framed caloron configuration
@xmath . Let @xmath be the connection and Higgs field on @xmath fixed by
@xmath . The map @xmath is a large gauge transformation on the
quasi-periodic pull-back of the caloron configuration. Let @xmath be the
quasi-periodic pull-back of @xmath in the sense of Section 2.1.4 . Let
@xmath be the clutching map. Start by defining a family of maps @xmath
for @xmath , by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , and @xmath . Note that @xmath lies in the centre of
@xmath and acts trivially as a bundle automorphism. The rotation map can
be thought of as an action of the centre of @xmath (which is @xmath ) on
the space of @xmath caloron configurations. Next we extend @xmath
arbitrarily (but smoothly) to the interior of @xmath to obtain a family
of maps @xmath . Now @xmath defines a bundle automorphism of @xmath —but
it does not necessarily define a (periodic) automorphism of @xmath .

Consider the action of @xmath on @xmath . Our claim is that @xmath is
the pull-back of an element of @xmath : we have to show @xmath is framed
correctly and that it clutches correctly. Split @xmath as @xmath using
the framing at infinity; we know that on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
But @xmath acts on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to check that @xmath is independent of @xmath and has
eigenvalues @xmath defined by @xmath . Moreover the eigenbundle with
eigenvalue @xmath has Chern class @xmath , so @xmath is framed in the
desired manner. The map @xmath preserves the eigenbundles of @xmath ,
and since @xmath is compatible with the decomposition of @xmath into
eigenbundles, @xmath . Hence @xmath is also framed in the desired
manner. It remains to show that @xmath clutches correctly. Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath has clutching function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, @xmath so, as it stands, @xmath does not clutch correctly (the
clutching function should be @xmath on @xmath ). But @xmath acts
trivially as a gauge transformation since it is in the centre of @xmath
, so if we redefine

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

it becomes a well-defined clutching function. We want to show @xmath so
that @xmath has the correct action on @xmath . We do this indirectly by
considering the action of the caloron configurations. The map @xmath is
a bundle isomorphism on @xmath so it preserves the quantity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using @xmath this implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , and this completes the proof of the claim. Note that the
choice of extension of @xmath corresponds to a bundle automorphism on
@xmath , so that @xmath is really defined on isomorphism classes of
connections.

Having defined @xmath we will consider its relation to the Nahm
transform in subsequent Chapters. My thanks go to Michael Murray for a
useful exchange of emails about the definition of the rotation map
@xmath .

### 2.3 Boundary conditions from the loop group point of view

The boundary condition for @xmath monopoles (Definition 2.4 ) implies
that there is a gauge at infinity in which the Higgs field, @xmath ,
lies in some adjoint orbit of @xmath . Let @xmath be a @xmath monopole
configuration on @xmath . The corresponding boundary condition is that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our aim is to interpret this boundary condition in terms of the caloron
@xmath corresponding to @xmath and compare it with Definition 2.10 .
This attempt to ‘justify’ our boundary conditions is not used at any
point later, and is simply intended as a comparison of the two
view-points.

The first problem is to identify the adjoint orbits of @xmath on @xmath
. From @xmath , the adjoint action of @xmath is the action of @xmath
followed by a rotation in @xmath . The following Proposition determines
the orbits under the action of @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.36 (Pressley and Segal [37]).

Suppose @xmath is a compact simply connected Lie group with Lie algebra
@xmath . Let @xmath be some non-zero constant. Given @xmath , solutions
@xmath to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfy @xmath for some @xmath called the holonomy of @xmath . The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism between the adjoint orbits of @xmath on @xmath and
conjugacy classes in @xmath .

Fix a @xmath monopole configuration @xmath on a bundle @xmath and let
@xmath be the corresponding caloron configuration so that @xmath and
@xmath is given by @xmath . The boundary condition @xmath says that
there is a trivialisation of @xmath in which @xmath lies in an adjoint
orbit of @xmath . Since the adjoint action of @xmath is the action of
@xmath followed by a rotation in @xmath , the orbits of the two groups
are the same, because two elements of @xmath related by a rotation in
@xmath have the same holonomy so lie in the same orbit of @xmath . For
each @xmath , the holonomy map defined in the Proposition takes @xmath
to @xmath so that @xmath lies in a fixed conjugacy class of @xmath as
@xmath varies. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some fixed @xmath which we can assume is diagonal, where @xmath .
Define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Note Stab @xmath Stab @xmath because @xmath and @xmath are diagonal.)
Clearly @xmath lies in a fixed adjoint orbit of @xmath as @xmath varies.
By construction, the constant loop @xmath and @xmath have the same
holonomy for each @xmath , and so lie in the same adjoint orbit of
@xmath . In other words, there is a gauge transformation @xmath taking
@xmath to @xmath . Thus we have constructed a trivialisation of @xmath
in which @xmath where @xmath lies in a fixed adjoint orbit of @xmath as
@xmath varies.

Since a trivialisation at infinity is really a framing, the
interpretation of @xmath in terms of calorons can therefore be stated as
follows:

  given a connection @xmath on @xmath there is a framing @xmath in which

    -- -------- --
       @xmath   
    -- -------- --

  where @xmath is a loop of connections on @xmath and @xmath has
  eigenvalues independent of @xmath .

In other words, the @xmath component of @xmath is framed at infinity.
Comparing this with Definition 2.10 , we have successfully derived a
weak version of the caloron boundary conditions from @xmath .

## Chapter 3 From Nahm Data to Calorons

We present the construction of calorons from Nahm data. Section 3.1
contains material from [ 20 ] on the construction of @xmath monopoles
from Nahm data, including the precise conditions imposed on the Nahm
data at singularities, which we use in our definition of Nahm data for
calorons. In Section 3.2 we prove that the connection constructed from
our caloron Nahm data is periodic and ASD. As we explained in Section
1.3 , the main difficulty in the construction of calorons lies in
recovering the boundary conditions. This occupies Sections 3.3 to 3.6
and follows the deformation method outlined in Section 1.3 .

### 3.1 The Nahm transform for @xmath monopoles

#### 3.1.1 Nahm data for @xmath monopoles.

Nahm data for @xmath monopoles are defined in [ 20 ] and [ 19 ] , and
the following definition is taken almost directly from these papers.
Given a set of boundary data @xmath , define @xmath for @xmath and fix
the conventions @xmath . A set of monopole Nahm data consists of the
following:

  Bundles:  

    hermitian vector bundles @xmath of rank @xmath on each interval
    @xmath for @xmath . We fix the conventions @xmath and take @xmath to
    be rank zero bundles. Let @xmath be a coordinate on @xmath .

  Connections and endomorphisms:  

    an analytic connection @xmath on @xmath and analytic skew-hermitian
    endomorphisms @xmath , on the interior of @xmath for each @xmath .
    Note that the connection @xmath is defined on an open neighbourhood
    of the closed interval @xmath . The connection and endomorphisms
    satisfy Nahm’s equation on the interior of each interval:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

The bundles @xmath come with a means of gluing them together at each
@xmath :

  When @xmath :  

    an injection @xmath .

  When @xmath :  

    an injection @xmath .

  When @xmath :  

    an identification @xmath . We call this a zero jump .

Each map preserves the hermitian structure. At each boundary point
@xmath the data satisfy the following boundary conditions:

  When @xmath :  

    we require that for each @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    exists and @xmath is analytic at @xmath . Fix a parallel unitary
    basis for @xmath in a neighbourhood of @xmath . Using the injection
    into @xmath this determines a unitary parallel basis of a rank
    @xmath sub-bundle of @xmath in a neighbourhood of @xmath , which we
    can extend to a unitary parallel basis of @xmath . In this gauge
    there is a decomposition:

    []
    where the upper diagonal block corresponds to the image of @xmath in
    @xmath . The upper diagonal block is analytic in @xmath ; the lower
    diagonal block is meromorphic in @xmath ; and the off-diagonal
    blocks are of the form @xmath . The residues @xmath define an
    irreducible representation of @xmath : in particular the map

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    is the unique irreducible representation @xmath on homogeneous
    polynomials in @xmath of degree @xmath , where the @xmath are
    defined by @xmath .

  When @xmath :  

    the situation is just the previous case but with @xmath and @xmath
    swapped round.

  When @xmath :  

    working in a gauge that is parallel either side of the join and
    continuous across the join, we require that limits @xmath of @xmath
    and @xmath of @xmath exist. Setting

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we require that for all @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for some @xmath -dimensional column vectors @xmath . At the
    singularity we therefore have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is an element of @xmath formed from @xmath and @xmath .

The gauge transformations on a set of Nahm data consist of bundle
automorphisms on each of the bundles @xmath , such that the automorphism
on @xmath is the identity at @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . A gauge
transformation @xmath acts on @xmath by @xmath and on @xmath by @xmath .

###### Definition 3.3.

Let @xmath be the space of gauge equivalence classes of monopole Nahm
data with boundary data @xmath .

#### 3.1.2 Definition of the Nahm operator @xmath

The next task is to show how to construct the analogue of the Dirac
operator @xmath from a set of monopole Nahm data. Consider adopting a
naïve approach to generalizing the @xmath -torus Nahm transform to the
monopole case, as we did in Section 1.1.6 . Dimensional reduction of the
Dirac operator @xmath by @xmath gives an operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a connection on a bundle @xmath , and @xmath are
skew-adjoint endomorphisms of @xmath , satisfying Nahm’s equation. Of
course, this picture is not quite correct, since the rank of the
‘bundle’ may jump, but using @xmath and the definition of the Nahm data
it is clear how to define @xmath on the interior of the intervals @xmath
. We call the analogue of @xmath the Nahm operator , @xmath . In fact,
following conventions in the monopole literature, we introduce a factor
of @xmath and define @xmath to be the analogue of @xmath . Some care is
needed at the points @xmath in the definition of @xmath . In particular,
we want to ensure that @xmath is Fredholm with index @xmath and is
injective for all @xmath , so that the cokernel of @xmath defines a rank
@xmath bundle over @xmath . If we can construct @xmath with these
properties then we can make the following definition:

###### Definition 3.5.

Suppose @xmath is a family of bounded linear maps between Hilbert spaces
@xmath , parameterized by @xmath , such that @xmath is injective,
Fredholm, and has index @xmath for all @xmath . Define @xmath to be the
@xmath bundle over @xmath with fibre @xmath , equipped with the
connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is orthogonal projection from @xmath onto @xmath for each
@xmath , and @xmath is the standard covariant derivative on the trivial
bundle @xmath . If @xmath is a local trivialisation of @xmath , then in
this gauge the connection is represented by matrices

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath .

To see that @xmath is a smooth bundle we find a trivialisation on a
neighbourhood of the origin in @xmath . First note that @xmath for all
@xmath . Identifying @xmath with @xmath , there is a decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is invertible. Relative to this decomposition of
@xmath we can write @xmath where @xmath is invertible for sufficiently
small @xmath . The null-space of @xmath is a graph over @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a smooth isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath for all sufficiently small
@xmath . The same argument gives a trivialisation round an arbitrary
point, and the transition between different trivialisations is smooth.

Working with some fixed set of @xmath monopole Nahm data, let @xmath ,
@xmath , be the corresponding vector bundles. Using the trivialisations
of the spin spaces @xmath and @xmath fixed by @xmath we identify @xmath
with @xmath throughout this Chapter. Let @xmath . Let @xmath be the
Sobolev space of sections of @xmath with @xmath derivatives in @xmath ,
where the @xmath inner product (conjugate linear in the second entry) is
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Also define @xmath to be the Sobolev space of functions on
@xmath with @xmath derivatives in @xmath . Often we will just write
@xmath where we mean the @xmath inner product or the pairing between
elements in dual Sobolev spaces.

One has to be slightly careful when defining spaces of distributions on
manifolds with boundary due to the different choices that can be made
when taking completions. It will be more apparent why this concerns us
when we consider dual spaces in Section 3.2.3 . These subtleties are
dealt with in Hörmander’s book [ 18 , Appendix B2] , and we will adopt
his notation. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows immediately that @xmath is the dual of @xmath , where the
pairing is given by the @xmath inner product. We define @xmath to
consist of @xmath sections of @xmath , and in what follows we will often
just write @xmath to mean @xmath on a manifold with boundary. Note that
differentiation is a well-defined map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath supported on @xmath . Also note that if @xmath then the
values @xmath and @xmath are well defined: by the Sobolev embedding
theorem each representative of @xmath is continuous, and any two
representatives must agree on @xmath . This ends the technical aside on
the definition of the Sobolev spaces, and we return to the definition of
the Nahm operator.

We adopt the following terminology from [ 20 ] . Suppose @xmath . At the
boundary point @xmath of @xmath , @xmath decomposes as a direct sum
@xmath using the inclusion of @xmath into @xmath . We call vectors in
the first component ‘continuing’, and vectors in the second component
‘terminating’. If @xmath then all the vectors in @xmath are continuing.
We adopt similar terminology at the other end of the interval. See
Figure 1.2 for an illustration.

Let @xmath be the subset of sections of @xmath whose terminating
components vanish at both ends of the interval (this definition makes
sense following the remark above about @xmath functions). Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is well defined since the component of the section acted on
by the singular part of @xmath is zero: using the Cauchy Schwartz
inequality one obtains

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any function @xmath vanishing at @xmath .

The zero jumps need special consideration. Let @xmath be a zero jump (
\ie suppose @xmath ). The boundary condition on the Nahm data at a zero
jump fixes a @xmath (complex-)dimensional subspace of @xmath , which we
denote @xmath (the ‘jumping space’ at @xmath ). For each zero jump we
fix an element @xmath of @xmath with norm @xmath , and let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any continuous section @xmath of @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of
zero jumps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath .

We are now in a position to define the Nahm operator @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Nahm operator @xmath is the direct sum of the @xmath operators,
together with the projection at each zero jump:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The map @xmath has components @xmath for @xmath . Note that we deal with
the zero jumps slightly differently from Hurtubise and Murray. Instead
of @xmath their projection @xmath maps into @xmath —we fix a basis for
this space (the @xmath ), and work in this basis. At some stages we will
need to deform the projections @xmath ; with our set-up the deformed
operator will still be a map @xmath , whereas with Hurtubise and
Murray’s version, the spaces would change with the deformation, which
would cause problems. We have to check that @xmath is independent of the
choice of @xmath : making a different choice for the @xmath is just
equivalent to a unitary change of basis in @xmath . Hence the choice of
@xmath does not affect @xmath up to isomorphism.

#### 3.1.3 Results from Hurtubise and Murray

Given a Nahm operator @xmath constructed from a set of @xmath monopole
Nahm data, Hurtubise and Murray prove the following results in [ 20 ] :

-   @xmath is injective and has index @xmath for all @xmath \ie @xmath
    is well-defined (recall Definition 3.5 ),

-   Nahm’s equation implies that @xmath is anti-self-dual,

-   @xmath is a translation invariant @xmath bundle and connection, and

-   @xmath satisfies the monopole boundary conditions.

In other words, they show that the Nahm transform takes a set of
monopole Nahm data and produces a monopole. Since Hurtubise and Murray
assume weaker boundary conditions for monopoles than we do, we cannot
assume that the Nahm transform on an element of @xmath gives a monopole
configuration as defined by Definition 2.4 . Thus we must state
precisely which results from [ 20 ] we are free to assume. We assume:

###### Lemma 3.10.

If @xmath is the Nahm operator constructed from some set of @xmath
monopole Nahm data in @xmath then @xmath is injective and Fredholm with
index @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.11.

Under the same assumptions as Lemma 3.10 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(This is just equation @xmath except with @xmath since @xmath is a
monopole configuration.)

Both Lemmas are implicit in [ 20 ] .

Later on it will be useful to consider Nahm data that does not satisfy
Nahm’s equation. In addition, it is useful to drop the requirement that
the Nahm data is discontinuous accross zero jumps. We therefore make the
following definition:

###### Definition 3.12.

The space @xmath consists of gauge equivalence classes of Nahm data with
boundary data @xmath , such that the data does not necessarily satisfy
Nahm’s equation. Moreover, at a zero jump @xmath , either

1.  the endomorphisms @xmath are discontinuous, as described previously,
    or

2.  the endomorphisms are continuous, but there is still a projection
    operator @xmath and some @xmath -dimensional subspace @xmath
    associated to the zero jump.

Some of the results of Hurtubise and Murray continue to hold for this
wider class of data. In particular, it is easy to check that the proof
of Lemma 3.10 still holds. We will also assume that Lemma 3.11 holds for
data in @xmath : this does not follow from Hurtubise and Murray’s
results, but we will give a proof later. Since we will not require
Nahm’s equation to hold most of the time, we will refer to data from
@xmath as ‘monopole Nahm data’ and point out where we use Nahm’s
equation specifically.

### 3.2 The construction of calorons up to boundary conditions

#### 3.2.1 Definition of caloron Nahm data

A set of @xmath caloron Nahm data with boundary data @xmath consists of
@xmath bundles @xmath over the intervals @xmath defined by @xmath . The
rank of @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath is defined by @xmath . The
bundles are equipped with exactly the same structures as monopole Nahm
data, and glued together in the same way at each @xmath , @xmath . Note
that @xmath is glued to @xmath at @xmath , and the data satisfy exactly
the same gluing conditions there. The gauge transformations are also
defined in an entirely analogous way.

Next we have to build the Nahm operator @xmath from this data. This is
entirely analogous to the monopole case in Section 3.1.2 . Define @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath in the same way as in Section 3.1.2 .
Label the zero jumps by @xmath , and define @xmath and @xmath just as
previously. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, @xmath consists of sections that are continuous around
the circle. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the monopole case every Nahm operator @xmath built from Nahm data was
injective: Hurtubise-Murray prove this by showing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus any element of the kernel of @xmath has to be constant, and the
vanishing condition at the end points @xmath and @xmath ensures that any
such section is trivial. (In fact this is a slight over-simplification
because zero jumps also have to be taken into account.) This proof does
not carry over to the caloron case: there could exist covariantly
constant sections of the bundles that remain in the continuing component
at each @xmath . It is quite easy to construct examples of caloron Nahm
data satisfying our definition that do not give rise to injective Nahm
operators: for example take a set of @xmath monopole Nahm data and glue
on a rank @xmath bundle over @xmath equipped with the trivial connection
and endomorphisms. This satifies the conditions to be a valid set of
caloron Nahm data, but the Nahm operator is not injective for all @xmath
. Thus we restrict to sets of Nahm data that do give rise to injective
operators:

###### Definition 3.15.

Let @xmath be the set of gauge equivalence classes of @xmath caloron
Nahm data satisfying Nahm’s equation, and with boundary data @xmath ,
such that the Nahm operator @xmath is injective for all @xmath .

It is useful to also consider caloron Nahm data that does not satisfy
Nahm’s equation. We therefore define @xmath analogously to Definition
3.12 . In general, we will refer to data in @xmath as ‘caloron Nahm
data’ and point out where we specifically require Nahm’s equation and
discontinuities at zero jumps.

We will sometimes use the following terminology:

###### Definition 3.16.

A set of caloron Nahm data is principal if it has principal boundary
data (in the sense of Definition 2.13 ).

#### 3.2.2 The index of @xmath

Given a set of caloron Nahm data and the corresponding Nahm operator
@xmath , we want to show that @xmath is well-defined \ie we want to show
that @xmath is Fredholm with index @xmath for all @xmath . (Recall that
@xmath is injective by definition.) The calculation of the index is an
adaptation of the @xmath monopole version [ 20 , Section 4] .

To calculate the index of @xmath we want to identify the kernel and
cokernel, and count dimensions. It is clear that the kernel of @xmath
consists of @xmath satisfying

-   @xmath , and

-   at zero jumps @xmath is in @xmath

in addition to the constraints on @xmath ( \ie that terminating
components vanish at @xmath where @xmath and that continuing components
are continuous at any @xmath ). To find the cokernel we integrate by
parts. Fix @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath if and only if this vanishes for all @xmath . If we assume
that @xmath and @xmath is smooth for all @xmath , then integration by
parts of the first sum makes sense, and we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(If we do not assume @xmath for all @xmath then problems arise because
@xmath may not be well-defined and the boundary contribution in the
parts integration may not make sense.) Hence @xmath must satisfy @xmath
for all @xmath . It follows that @xmath is smooth on the interior of
@xmath , and the continuing components of @xmath are continuous up to
the ends of the interval. Under these conditions integrating @xmath by
parts makes sense for all @xmath , and we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the continuing component of @xmath . Then @xmath iff

-   @xmath on each interval @xmath for @xmath ,

-   the continuing components are continuous at each @xmath where @xmath
    , and

-   at zero jumps, @xmath .

To count the number of solutions in the kernel and cokernel we need some
analysis of @xmath and @xmath close to the singular points @xmath . This
is taken more-or-less directly from Hitchin’s paper on the construction
of monopoles [ 17 , Section 2] . Start by considering the case @xmath ,
and recall the conditions imposed on the endomorphisms @xmath at such a
point. Let @xmath be a coordinate in a neighbourhood of @xmath . For
@xmath we have in some parallel gauge the block decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is analytic and bounded, and @xmath . In terms of the
representation @xmath defined by @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is possible to express @xmath in terms of Casimir operators. If
@xmath is a representation of @xmath then the Casimir operator is
defined by @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Casimir operator on @xmath is @xmath , and decomposing into
irreducibles we have @xmath . Hence

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.19)
  -- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath be the @xmath dimensional space of solutions to @xmath on
@xmath . Using the block decomposition of @xmath and the calculation of
@xmath , we see that @xmath decomposes as @xmath where

-   @xmath is the @xmath dimensional space of solutions that are @xmath
    corresponding to elements of @xmath ,

-   @xmath is the @xmath dimensional space of solutions that are @xmath
    corresponding to elements of @xmath , and

-   @xmath is the @xmath dimensional space of solutions that are @xmath
    corresponding to elements of the other diagonal block.

The solutions in @xmath do not have vanishing terminating component and
are not @xmath so cannot be elements of @xmath . (Here ‘B’ is for ‘bad’,
‘G’ is for ‘good’ and ‘C’ is for ‘continuing’. The ‘bad’ solutions are
the ones that cannot be in @xmath .)

Next consider the cases @xmath and @xmath : the same decomposition of
@xmath exists, but @xmath and @xmath are trivial because all solutions
are in the continuing block. Alternatively, one can decompose @xmath
depending on the behaviour of solutions at the other end of the
interval, and obtain @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath and @xmath are
trivial, but when @xmath we have

-   @xmath is the @xmath dimensional space of solutions that are @xmath
    corresponding to elements of @xmath ,

-   @xmath is the @xmath dimensional space of solutions that are @xmath
    corresponding to elements of @xmath , and

-   @xmath is the @xmath dimensional space of solutions that are @xmath
    corresponding to elements of the other diagonal block.

For these estimates we have taken @xmath . For @xmath let @xmath \etc
denote the projections with respect to the decomposition.

We can perform exactly the same kind of analysis for @xmath . Let @xmath
be the @xmath dimensional space of solutions to @xmath (at the moment
the ‘ @xmath ’ is just a label—but in fact @xmath will turn out to be
the dual of @xmath ). We obtain decompositions @xmath and @xmath . In
particular when @xmath we choose @xmath to correspond to elements of
@xmath so that it contains solutions that are @xmath , and when @xmath
we choose @xmath to correspond to elements of @xmath so that it contains
solutions that are @xmath . When @xmath @xmath is trivial, and similarly
for @xmath when @xmath . Now suppose @xmath for some fixed @xmath . Then
@xmath is well defined for any @xmath in the interior of @xmath because
the elements of @xmath and @xmath are necessarily smooth on the
interior. But because @xmath and @xmath are solutions to @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath so @xmath really is the vector space dual of @xmath ,
with the pairing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, because the solutions in @xmath and @xmath correspond to
elements of @xmath , @xmath is the dual of @xmath , and similarly for
@xmath and @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath in the interior of @xmath etc. Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because the values at the end-points are well defined. We obtain a
similar expression to @xmath using the decomposition of @xmath at the
other end of the interval, in terms of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

The boundary conditions for the kernel and cokernel can be stated in
terms of these decompositions. Suppose @xmath and @xmath satisfy the
conditions to be in the kernel at @xmath . This is equivalent to saying
@xmath (so that the terminating components vanish), that @xmath (the
continuing components are continuous), and at zero jumps @xmath .
Similarly, suppose @xmath and @xmath satisfy the conditions to be in the
cokernel at @xmath . This is equivalent to saying @xmath (so that @xmath
and @xmath are @xmath ), that at points @xmath where @xmath we have
@xmath (the continuing components are continuous), and at zero jumps
@xmath , @xmath .

To find the index of @xmath we introduce a map @xmath between finite
dimensional vector spaces whose index is easy to compute, but
constructed so that @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of pairs
@xmath satisfying the boundary conditions for the kernel of @xmath at
@xmath for @xmath , and let @xmath in the same way. Consider the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction, the kernel of @xmath is the kernel of @xmath . Also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Checking each case ( @xmath and @xmath ) we have @xmath while @xmath .
Hence @xmath . If we can show the annihilator of @xmath is @xmath then
we can conclude that @xmath

Fix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using @xmath (plus its analogous version in terms of @xmath ) and the
fact that @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and any @xmath . But @xmath because @xmath satisfies the
boundary conditions for @xmath at @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The annihilator of @xmath consists of @xmath for which this vanishes for
all @xmath . Such @xmath satisfy the following conditions.

1.  At points @xmath that are not zero jumps @xmath .

2.  At zero jumps @xmath , @xmath , because @xmath .

3.  We have seen that at any @xmath either @xmath (when @xmath ) or
    @xmath (when @xmath ). In the latter case @xmath gives @xmath for
    all @xmath and for all @xmath so @xmath has to vanish. Similarly, by
    considering the other case, @xmath satisfies @xmath for each @xmath
    .

These are precisely the conditions that @xmath as stated on page 3.2.2 ,
and this completes the proof of the following lemma.

###### Lemma 3.22.

If @xmath is the Nahm operator corresponding to some set of @xmath
caloron Nahm data then @xmath is Fredholm with index @xmath for all
@xmath .

We also need to consider the index of deformations of @xmath , for which
the following definitions will be useful.

###### Definition 3.23.

A multiplicative operator @xmath is a map of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a smooth uniformly-bounded matrix-valued function on
@xmath over each interval @xmath . The second component is the zero
vector in @xmath . The continuing components of the @xmath matrices are
continuous at each @xmath , except at zero jumps where we allow @xmath
and @xmath to be different.

###### Definition 3.24.

A deformation @xmath of @xmath is framed if, for sufficiently large
@xmath , @xmath is a multiplicative operator that is independent of
@xmath . (Here @xmath is the polar coordinate on @xmath .)

###### Definition 3.25.

Suppose @xmath is the Nahm operator corresponding to a set of @xmath
caloron Nahm data, and @xmath is defined by @xmath . A deformation
@xmath of @xmath is a controlled deformation if it is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the following conditions hold:

-   For each @xmath , @xmath is a smooth uniformly-bounded matrix-valued
    function on the interval @xmath that is independent of @xmath , and
    with the same continuity conditions as in Definition 3.23 .

-   The projection @xmath has components

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath . Here @xmath is some (possibly @xmath -dependent) vector
    in @xmath , such that @xmath for all @xmath outside some compact
    set.

-   For all @xmath , @xmath is a compact operator @xmath and @xmath has
    compact support \ie @xmath for sufficiently large @xmath .

Note that any controlled deformation is also framed. Roughly speaking,
the solutions in the cokernel of a framed deformation @xmath of @xmath
will be asymptotically close to solutions in the cokernel of @xmath .
The condition of being a controlled deformation is stronger, with
implications on the interior as well as asymptotically:

###### Corollary 3.26.

Suppose @xmath is a controlled deformation of @xmath . The proof of
Lemma 3.22 applies to @xmath , and so @xmath is Fredholm with index
@xmath for all @xmath .

#### 3.2.3 The adjoint of @xmath

Given the Nahm operator @xmath , the ‘Hilbert space’ adjoint @xmath is
difficult to compute, involving the Sobolev space inner product on
@xmath . Instead it is easy to consider the adjoint as a map into the
dual space of @xmath , where linear functionals consist of pairing the
@xmath sections in @xmath with sections in @xmath , because this can be
computed by parts integration like that at the start of Section 3.2.2 .
Formally, therefore, the adjoint is the map @xmath , where @xmath is the
dual space of @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath . The bracket @xmath denotes the evaluation of
an element in @xmath on an element of @xmath while the bracket on the
LHS is just the inner product in @xmath .

It is useful to understand @xmath as a sum of Sobolev spaces on the
intervals @xmath . First we claim that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the evaluation functionals at @xmath and @xmath , which
are certainly contained in @xmath . The first equality is true from the
definitions of @xmath and @xmath on page 3.5 . Consider the orthogonal
complement @xmath of @xmath in @xmath , and fix some element @xmath .
Then the map taking @xmath (as an element of @xmath ) to its equivalence
class in @xmath is an isomorphism @xmath , establishing @xmath . It
follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall the definition @xmath of @xmath . Since @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the annihilator of @xmath in @xmath . Now, since @xmath
is the subset of @xmath consisting of sections with vanishing
terminating component which are also continuous across the @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the space of continuing vectors at @xmath .

We can now compute @xmath in terms of this decomposition, \ie as an
operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we restrict @xmath to some domain @xmath consisting of elements
@xmath with @xmath smooth on the interior of @xmath and continuous up to
the ends of the interval, then @xmath contains the cokernel, and
integration by parts like that at the start of Section 3.2.2 gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the dual of a vector @xmath , and @xmath is given
by @xmath . We will need this expansion in Section 3.2.4 .

Finally, we make a few remarks about the projection @xmath onto @xmath .
Since @xmath is Fredholm, it follows that its image is closed, so the
projection @xmath exists and @xmath . In addition, @xmath is injective,
so @xmath is surjective, and @xmath is invertible. The projection @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 3.2.4 Nahm’s equation and anti-self-duality

We want to show that when the Nahm data satisfies Nahm’s equation,
@xmath is anti-self-dual. The index calculation shows that the
connection @xmath defined by @xmath is a well-defined @xmath connection
on @xmath . Mimicking Proposition 1.22 , the curvature is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

so anti-self-duality follows if @xmath commutes with the @xmath
matrices. In equation @xmath the domain of @xmath is restricted to the
image of @xmath . Using the conditions for sections to be in the
cokernel of @xmath given at the start of Section 3.2.2 , it follows that
@xmath is only passed elements

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that have @xmath smooth on the interior of @xmath for all @xmath and
such that the continuing components of @xmath are continuous up to the
ends of the interval. Let @xmath be the inverse image of this subspace
of @xmath . Since @xmath is smoothing, sections in @xmath are even
‘nicer’, and on the domain @xmath , @xmath is given by @xmath . It is
therefore sufficient to prove that @xmath commutes with the @xmath
matrices on the domain @xmath , for which we take @xmath to be given by
@xmath .

Fix @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

using equation @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Expanding @xmath on
each interval gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath satisfy Nahm’s equation @xmath on the interior of each
interval @xmath , so the term involving the @xmath matrices vanishes
there. It remains to consider the components in @xmath . First consider
a point @xmath with @xmath . At such a point the continuing components
of @xmath and @xmath are continuous, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

(The RHS exists since @xmath .) If we replace @xmath with @xmath , the
RHS of equation @xmath is multiplied by @xmath , so this component of
@xmath commutes with the @xmath matrices. At a zero jump the continuing
component of @xmath is discontinuous, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first two terms on the RHS commute with the @xmath matrices, just as
for the @xmath case. However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and these terms cancel with the contribution from the @xmath in @xmath .
Substituting @xmath and @xmath into @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this map commutes with the @xmath matrices. It follows that @xmath
is ASD.

#### 3.2.5 Periodicity

Before considering how to frame @xmath , it is useful to make some
remarks about periodicity. In particular we will fix some notation
required later, and explain how to quotient @xmath to obtain a
connection on @xmath . As it stands, @xmath is a bundle and connection
over @xmath . Under translation in @xmath , @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the translation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath are unitary maps, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These maps are not well-defined for all @xmath : in general @xmath will
not be periodic in @xmath , so will fail to be an element of @xmath .
When @xmath is a multiple of @xmath , however, the maps are
well-defined, so fix @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 We can use @xmath Nahm data to
construct a caloron with @xmath times the expected period for @xmath by
taking @xmath to be @xmath . The point is, however, that while other
periods are possible, the Nahm data does give rise to a caloron of the
anticipated period. Changing the periodicity of the caloron in this way
maps @xmath and @xmath because in the quasi-periodic picture the
clutching function is composed with itself @xmath times. This should
correspond to some map between sets of @xmath Nahm data. Similarly,
given a set of @xmath Nahm data, we can simply glue together @xmath
copies of it to obtain a set of @xmath Nahm data with period @xmath .
This should correspond to some map between caloron configurations,
probably embedding the @xmath caloron @xmath times in @xmath . and the
corresponding maps @xmath . Of course, @xmath correspond to the gauge
transformation @xmath for the transform on the @xmath -torus. We will
often just write @xmath for @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath defines an action of @xmath on @xmath . It is easy to check
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the connection is compatible with this action. Quotienting by this
action gives an hermitian bundle on @xmath with a compatible connection.

Note that @xmath and @xmath are not determined uniquely: we can replace
them with @xmath and @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath still holds.
However, the choice @xmath is the only choice that allows the caloron to
be framed in the correct way.

#### 3.2.6 Remarks on the rotation map

The definition of the Nahm data for a caloron implicitly involves a
choice of origin for the circle @xmath . Suppose @xmath is the Nahm
operator constructed from some element of @xmath for some set of
boundary data @xmath . The inner product on @xmath is independent of the
choice of origin on @xmath , and so, as a bundle and connection over
@xmath , @xmath is also independent of this choice. Recall the rotation
map @xmath defined by @xmath . Rotation of the Nahm data by @xmath
defines a map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

but, as it stands, @xmath is insensitive to this action. However, the
way we frame @xmath does depend on the choice of origin: if the Nahm
data has boundary data @xmath then we want the corresponding caloron to
have boundary data @xmath too.

In fact, we only give a construction of calorons from Nahm data with
principal boundary data—for technical reasons the construction is much
harder if the data is not principal, essentially because we can only
recover @xmath when it is the smallest rank of the bundles @xmath .
Given a set of Nahm data with boundary data @xmath (not necessarily
principal), we can rotate it until its boundary data @xmath is
principal. Our construction will then give a framed caloron with
boundary data @xmath , but by applying the rotation map @xmath defined
in Section 2.2 to the caloron, we can transform it into a caloron with
boundary data @xmath as desired. This method of defining the
construction when @xmath is non-principal ensures the following diagram
commutes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The diagram commutes by definition when there is only one principal
rotation of the Nahm data. If there is more than one principal rotation,
then without loss of generality we can assume @xmath and @xmath are both
principal (by replacing the rotation maps @xmath with @xmath for some
@xmath ) The two calorons on the RHS of the diagram must be equivalent
as quasi-periodic connections over @xmath —in other words they are
related by a large gauge transformation—since @xmath is insensitive to
the action of @xmath . It is easy to see the large gauge transformation
must be @xmath .

### 3.3 The model operator @xmath

#### 3.3.1 Strategy

The aim of the remainder of this Chapter is to show that the bundle and
connection @xmath extends to @xmath , and is framed there. This will
complete the proof that the Nahm construction on an element of @xmath
produces an element of @xmath . The method adopted is to consider a
deformation @xmath of @xmath , and prove that @xmath extends to @xmath
and is a framed bundle @xmath with invariant @xmath . We then prove that
the framing and the invariant @xmath are independent of the deformation,
and so deduce that @xmath . The first task is to define the model
operator @xmath and prove that it is injective and Fredholm with index
@xmath , which forms Section 3.3 . In Section 3.4 we prove that @xmath
is a framed caloron configuration, and in Section 3.5 calculate @xmath .
This shows that @xmath is an element of @xmath . Finally, in Section 3.6
, we prove that @xmath can be deformed into @xmath in such a way that
the framing is independent of the deformation, and deduce that @xmath is
an element of @xmath . This method is based on Hitchin’s proof that a
connection and Higgs field constructed from monopole Nahm data satisfy
the monopole boundary conditions [ 17 , Section 2] .

From this point on fix the following notation. Fix a set of @xmath
caloron Nahm data with principal boundary data @xmath . If the boundary
data is not principal then we apply the rotation map @xmath to the Nahm
data to obtain a set of principal Nahm data; we then apply the
corresponding rotation map @xmath to the caloron constructed to obtain
the correct framing, just as we explained in Section 3.2.6 . Let @xmath
be the connection and Higgs field at infinity determined by @xmath . Let
@xmath be the Nahm operator.

Any generic choice of model operator @xmath will be injective (since the
space of non-injective operators is in some sense small). The problems
encountered when defining @xmath are therefore to ensure @xmath is
framed and that @xmath . Much of the ‘engineering’ we do is to make the
proof that @xmath straightforward. Note that throughout this Section we
make no claims that the model operator @xmath is a deformation of @xmath
; often @xmath will be defined in terms of a deformation, but we delay
the proof of the existence of a path joining the two until later.

When defining the model operator @xmath it is easiest to consider two
special cases first. The first is the case of vanishing monopole
charges—the case that @xmath for all @xmath but @xmath . (Calorons of
this type were introduced in Section 1.2.2 .) The second case is the
opposite of this: the case that there are no zero jumps in the lowest
rank block (we will make this precise later). We call this the case of
‘no zero jumps in the instanton block’. In the remaining cases, the
model operator is very similar to that for no zero jumps in the
instanton block, so the reader may prefer to concentrate on that case.

#### 3.3.2 Defining @xmath: the case of vanishing monopole charges

Suppose that @xmath for all @xmath but @xmath \ie that every singularity
@xmath in the Nahm data is a zero jump. By gluing together the bundles
@xmath , a single continuous vector bundle @xmath over @xmath with rank
@xmath is obtained. Similarly we can glue together the @xmath to obtain
a vector bundle @xmath over @xmath . Elements of @xmath are sections of
@xmath that are periodic, @xmath , and continuous across the
singularities @xmath . Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis of sections of
@xmath that are periodic, smooth on each interval @xmath , and
continuous across each @xmath . Let

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.39)
  -- -- -- --------

Working in this gauge fix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some pairwise distinct @xmath , and @xmath . Given @xmath , consider
the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the projection @xmath is that determined by @xmath , as in
equation @xmath .

We want @xmath to be injective for all @xmath , so consider the
conditions for @xmath to lie in the kernel of @xmath . We have @xmath if
@xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , and if @xmath is continuous and
periodic. Parallel translation by the @xmath round @xmath determines a
holonomy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider finding solutions to this parallel transport problem that are
continuous and periodic in @xmath . Such solutions exist if and only if
@xmath has eigenvalue @xmath \ie iff @xmath is singular. This occurs if
and only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We call such points resonating points , and label them @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath . As it stands, @xmath is therefore injective away from the
resonating points. When @xmath , there is a @xmath -dimensional space of
solutions to the parallel transport problem that is spanned by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

To exclude the possibility that these could be solutions to @xmath , we
adjust the projection @xmath to be non-zero on @xmath by deforming the
vectors @xmath used to define @xmath in a small neighbourhood of each
resonating point. (Recall the definition of the components of @xmath ,
equation @xmath .) For @xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath have components @xmath . Fix an open @xmath -ball @xmath
around each resonating point, sufficiently small that the balls do not
overlap. We deform @xmath only inside the union @xmath : define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath . Then, for each @xmath , pick @xmath such that @xmath .
Inside @xmath arrange the @xmath so that near @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The third condition is not required for injectivity, but simplifies the
calculation of @xmath for @xmath . Equations @xmath and @xmath imply
that at a resonating point @xmath , @xmath and @xmath cannot both be
zero on non-trivial linear combinations of @xmath and @xmath . This
ensures that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is injective for all @xmath . We can arrange the deformation of the
vectors @xmath so that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , which ensures
that @xmath satisfies @xmath under translation by @xmath . Note that
@xmath is a controlled deformation of @xmath (recall Definition 3.25 ).
Corollary 3.26 therefore implies that @xmath is Fredholm with index
@xmath for all @xmath . As a final remark, note that, unlike @xmath ,
@xmath is continuous across the zero jumps: the discontinuity in @xmath
is required to ensure @xmath is anti-self-dual, but it is not required
to ensure @xmath is framed.

#### 3.3.3 Defining @xmath: the case of no zero jumps in the instanton
block

Moving on to the second special case, we first explain what is meant by
‘no zero jumps in the instanton block’. A zero jump in the instanton
block is a point @xmath for which @xmath which is also a zero jump ( \ie
@xmath ). The condition of no zero jumps in the instanton block is the
opposite of the condition of vanishing monopole charges, for which every
singularity was a zero jump in the instanton block. Figure 3.1
illustrates the situation, plotting the rank of the Nahm data versus
@xmath for three examples.

We assume, therefore, that the Nahm data has no zero jumps in the
instanton block. We can split off a bundle over @xmath of constant rank,
and thereby decompose each bundle @xmath into two sub-bundles, in the
following way. Recall that we are assuming that the Nahm data is
principal so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There exists a set @xmath of sections of the bundles @xmath that are
defined over all of @xmath , that are periodic, smooth on each interval
@xmath , continuous across each singularity @xmath , orthogonal for each
@xmath , normalised with respect to the @xmath inner product, and
linearly independent. In other words, we can find a @xmath -dimensional
sub-bundle @xmath of each @xmath such that the @xmath glue together to
give a continuous bundle over @xmath . Note that this decomposition is
not unique: if rank @xmath then there is some choice for the @xmath over
@xmath . Define @xmath and @xmath by @xmath . We can choose the @xmath
so that for all @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is possible because each zero jump occurs in a block with rank
greater than @xmath . Thus we have a decomposition of each block @xmath
of Nahm data into a subspace @xmath spanned by @xmath and the orthogonal
complement @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The bundle formed by gluing together the @xmath is called the instanton
block , and its orthogonal complement is called the monopole block . The
spaces @xmath and @xmath decompose in a similar way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the Sobolev space of @xmath sections of @xmath \etc
Note that we impose the condition @xmath to ensure that the jumping
space @xmath spanned by @xmath at a zero jump @xmath is contained in the
monopole block @xmath , so that there really are no zero jumps in the
instanton block.

Next we want to specify the model operator @xmath which we construct
using the decomposition into monopole and instanton blocks. Define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for some pairwise distinct @xmath . Just as we saw for the
case of vanishing monopole charges, @xmath is injective, apart from at
the resonating points defined by @xmath .

Restriction of the caloron Nahm data to the monopole block determines a
set of @xmath monopole data, \ie an element of @xmath , and the
associated Nahm operator @xmath . (Note that this data does not
necessarily satisfy Nahm’s equation.) At a singularity @xmath with
@xmath the Nahm data determines a @xmath -dimensional residue @xmath .
We deform @xmath so that near such singularities it is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the terminating component and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the continuing component. Near zero jumps we deform so that @xmath is
also given by @xmath . Thus @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a bump function equal to @xmath on some neighbourhood of
@xmath and zero elsewhere. We interpret @xmath as acting on each
terminating component in the obvious way. Note that without condition
@xmath , @xmath would not be a well-defined @xmath monopole Nahm
operator, since @xmath would be non-zero on the instanton block. Lemma
3.10 implies that @xmath defined in this way is injective and Fredholm
with index @xmath for all @xmath .

Consider the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is injective away from the resonating points @xmath . We want to put
something into the off-diagonal entries, supported near the resonating
points, that will ensure the new operator is injective everywhere. We
need the following:

###### Lemma 3.52.

Let @xmath be the Nahm operator for some set of @xmath ( @xmath ) Nahm
data in @xmath , and let @xmath . Then we can find two non-trivial
orthogonal continuous sections @xmath of the bundle @xmath defined on
some open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath , such that, for all @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are continuous across each zero jump so have zero
component in @xmath .

Proof: For any set of @xmath monopole Nahm data the singularities @xmath
and @xmath cannot be zero jumps, so there are at most @xmath zero jumps
in the data. The restriction that solutions be continuous across the
zero jumps therefore rules out at most @xmath dimensions, and so @xmath
and @xmath can be chosen from a @xmath -dimensional subspace of @xmath .
Moreover, this can be done smoothly on some neighbourhood @xmath of
@xmath . @xmath

Let @xmath be a set of bump functions on @xmath that are equal to @xmath
on some @xmath -ball with centre @xmath and zero outside some @xmath
-ball with centre @xmath . We can make the support of each bump function
sufficiently small that they are disjoint, and arrange them so that
@xmath . At @xmath , @xmath has two solutions @xmath defined by @xmath
and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the elements of @xmath fixed by
Lemma 3.52 defined on some neighbourhood of @xmath . Adjust the bump
functions so they are supported within these neighbourhoods, and extend
@xmath periodically by defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We chose @xmath and @xmath to have no component in the jumping spaces so
that all inner products can be made inside @xmath —this simplifies the
definition of @xmath . Define the model operator @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Lemma 3.56.

@xmath is injective for all @xmath .

Proof: We have already shown @xmath is injective outside @xmath , so it
remains to consider what happens near resonating points.

First we show that there are no non-trivial solutions to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We know @xmath has periodic solutions only when @xmath for some @xmath .
At such a point, the solutions have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constants @xmath . Then @xmath , which is zero if and only if
@xmath .

Next, note that the image of @xmath is contained in @xmath and so is
orthogonal to the image of @xmath . Hence, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath , and so @xmath because @xmath is injective. We conclude
that @xmath is injective because there are no non-trivial solutions to
@xmath . @xmath

Consider the behaviour of @xmath with respect to translation @xmath by
one period in @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath satisfies a similar formula, and this ensures that @xmath
satisfies @xmath under translation.

By construction, @xmath satisfies the conditions of Definition 3.25 so
is a controlled deformation of @xmath . Corollary 3.26 then implies that
@xmath is Fredholm with index @xmath . Note that the model operator for
a set of monopole Nahm data is implicitly dealt with by the case of no
zero jumps in the instanton block—we simply take the instanton block to
be trivial.

#### 3.3.4 Defining @xmath: the remaining case

We now generalize the model operator defined in Section 3.3.3 to deal
with the remaining case: that of zero jumps in the instanton block
together with a non-trivial monopole block. The following classification
of the singularities @xmath is required. Recall that we are assuming
that the Nahm data is principal and that @xmath is the set of zero
jumps. Define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Table 3.1 lists these sets for the examples shown in Figure 3.1 . Let
@xmath and @xmath . We assume that @xmath \ie we are not dealing with
the case of vanishing monopole charges so there is a non-trivial
monopole block. It follows that @xmath , because we cannot have all but
one @xmath being zero jumps.

Next pick a basis @xmath for the instanton block in the usual way, such
that for each @xmath condition @xmath holds for each @xmath . (We cannot
make @xmath hold for every @xmath when there are zero jumps in the
instanton block.) This splits the data into instanton and monopole
blocks as in equation @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The projection @xmath also decomposes: let @xmath have components @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath have components @xmath for @xmath . We can then
define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Projection onto the monopole block determines a set of @xmath monopole
Nahm data (recall @xmath since the case of vanishing monopole charges is
excluded). In particular, it determines a residue @xmath for each @xmath
. Like the case of no zero jumps in the instanton block, define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath acts on the terminating component. Then Lemma 3.10 implies
that @xmath is injective and Fredholm with index @xmath . We impose
condition @xmath for every @xmath to ensure that these zero jumps really
do occur in the monopole block, and that @xmath is the Nahm operator of
some (deformed) @xmath Nahm data.

Consider the operator @xmath ; it is injective away from the resonating
points @xmath and we want to use the tricks from Sections 3.3.2 and
3.3.3 to make it injective at the resonating points. As in the case of
no zero jumps in the instanton block, we add an off-diagonal term. Lemma
3.52 proves the existence of sections @xmath of @xmath with zero
component in @xmath . These can be used to define @xmath and @xmath as
in equations @xmath and @xmath . Defining @xmath by equation @xmath , we
see that @xmath is injective by applying Lemma 3.56 .

We added the off-diagonal term to prevent @xmath and @xmath being
solutions at the resonating point @xmath ; in fact the projection @xmath
may prevent them from being solutions to @xmath at the resonating point,
so adding the diagonal term may have been unnecessary. However, when we
come to recover @xmath for the model operator, it is convenient to
assume that @xmath and @xmath are solutions to @xmath at @xmath . We can
deform @xmath to ensure this, rather like the deformation performed in
the case of vanishing monopole charges. For each @xmath replace @xmath
with an @xmath -dependent vector @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

in some neighbourhood of @xmath containing @xmath , and @xmath away from
this neighbourhood. Changing the definition of @xmath in this way does
not affect the proof of injectivity.

Finally, note that @xmath is a controlled deformation of @xmath , and so
Corollary 3.26 proves @xmath is Fredholm with index @xmath . We also
obtain a formula like @xmath for @xmath in exactly the same way as
previously.

#### 3.3.5 The adjoint of the model operator

We need to be able to identify the cokernel of the model operator @xmath
. To do this it is easiest to write down the adjoint @xmath on some
domain @xmath of suitably smooth elements of @xmath which contains the
cokernel, just as we did in Section 3.2.3 for @xmath . Since this is
analogous to what we did in Section 3.2.3 we will not dwell on the
details but just write down @xmath directly.

The adjoint is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of vanishing monopole charges the monopole block is trivial
and this reduces to @xmath . The spaces @xmath and @xmath are defined by
@xmath and @xmath , while

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the continuing component of @xmath at @xmath \etc The
off-diagonal blocks @xmath are defined by @xmath and @xmath (extended to
zero on the @xmath and @xmath component of @xmath and @xmath
respectively). Given @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, given @xmath we have

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.65)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the terminating component near @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

elsewhere.

### 3.4 Framing for @xmath

The aim of this Section is to show that the bundle and connection @xmath
on @xmath extend to @xmath and determine a quasi-periodic connection
framed by @xmath . We do this by finding ‘approximate solutions’ to
@xmath , by which we mean sections of the trivial bundle @xmath that are
asymptotically close to elements of @xmath as @xmath . Near infinity,
the solutions of @xmath correspond in some sense with the singularities
@xmath in the Nahm data. We construct an approximate solution for each
singularity in the monopole block in Section 3.4.1 . For singularities
in the instanton block, we can in fact write down an exact solution,
which we do in Section 3.4.2 . In Section 3.4.3 we show the approximate
solutions are exponentially close to exact solutions of @xmath . In
Section 3.4.4 we show that in the gauge determined by these exact
solutions the matrices representing the connection @xmath extend to
@xmath and are framed there. This is based on Hitchin’s proof that
@xmath monopoles constructed from Nahm data satisfy the BPS boundary
conditions [ 17 , Section 2] . In particular the representation theory
in Section 3.4.1 is taken directly from [ 17 , Section 2] .

#### 3.4.1 Approximate solutions for @xmath in the monopole block

Fix a singularity @xmath in the monopole block of the Nahm data ( \ie
@xmath ). For large @xmath , we construct an approximate solution to
@xmath supported near @xmath which is characterized by the sign of
@xmath —we will deal with each case in turn. Let @xmath , and let @xmath
.

The case @xmath : We continue the representation theory started in
Section 3.2.2 . Fix a unit vector @xmath , and let @xmath . Then @xmath
generates a circle in @xmath and decomposes @xmath into weight spaces
with weight @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Recall that @xmath
is the representation of @xmath on homogeneous polynomials of degree
@xmath . If @xmath are homogeneous coordinates on @xmath , it is easy to
check that the polynomial

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the highest weight vector when @xmath . The action of @xmath commutes
with the action of @xmath so @xmath preserves the weight spaces with
weights @xmath since they occur with multiplicity one. Let @xmath be
elements of @xmath with unit norm and weights @xmath respectively. Now
@xmath , so @xmath and @xmath . In fact using the explicit form @xmath
of the highest weight vector, we have @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath
varies, @xmath spans out a line bundle @xmath over @xmath , and using
@xmath it follows that @xmath has Chern class @xmath . The action of
@xmath on the direction vector @xmath lifts to the adjoint action of
@xmath on @xmath . Hence, on a neighbourhood of @xmath , we can choose
the highest weight vector @xmath according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath acts by some unitary endomorphism on @xmath .

Next, we use @xmath to write down an approximate solution to @xmath . As
previously, let @xmath be the residue of @xmath at @xmath . Near @xmath
, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the terminating component, where @xmath is the usual polar coordinate
on @xmath . From @xmath we have that @xmath and @xmath , so a solution
is given on some interval @xmath by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.67)
  -- -- -- --------

Note that @xmath in the expression above could be replaced by @xmath for
any @xmath and @xmath would still be a solution. We chose @xmath as
above so that the result of translating by one period @xmath is given by
the action of @xmath (where @xmath is defined by @xmath ). This will
ensure that the quasi-periodic connection we eventually obtain has a
clutch map that is the identity on the boundary. Also note that we could
have used @xmath to construct a solution. However, such a solution would
blow up in the limit @xmath , and so fails to be @xmath .

We want our approximate solutions to be smooth and have compact support,
so we multiply by a bump function @xmath supported on @xmath that takes
value @xmath on @xmath . We also want the approximate solutions to have
unit norm, so define @xmath , the approximate solution associated to
@xmath , to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Consider the element of @xmath which is @xmath on the
interval @xmath and zero otherwise; abusing notation, let @xmath denote
this element.

It will be useful to obtain an estimate for @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating by parts gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some polynomial @xmath of degree @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some constant (used in the generic sense). Thus, using
@xmath , we have an estimate @xmath exponentially decaying term.

The case @xmath : This is entirely analogous to the case @xmath . We can
repeat the representation theory on @xmath to obtain vectors @xmath in
the same way so that @xmath has weight @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
determines a line bundle with Chern class @xmath . Define the
approximate solution to be @xmath where @xmath is a bump function
supported on @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Just as for the case @xmath , there is an analogous estimate on @xmath .

The case @xmath : Fix a unit vector @xmath and let @xmath . Consider
solutions to @xmath where @xmath is defined by @xmath . These must
satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath for @xmath . The general solutions are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some vectors @xmath . We want the solutions to match the conditions
to be in @xmath \ie we want a discontinuity at @xmath such that the jump
is a multiple of @xmath . Now, @xmath has eigenvalues @xmath and let
@xmath denote projection onto these eigenspaces. Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath and

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.74)
  -- -- -- --------

on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally we smooth off by bump functions @xmath and normalize to define
the approximate solution @xmath by

[]

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the definition of the approximate solution @xmath for
@xmath .

#### 3.4.2 Solutions for @xmath in the instanton block

For each @xmath ( \ie for each zero jump in the instanton block) we can
write down an exact solution to @xmath that lies wholly in the instanton
block and is defined away from the resonating points. A solution @xmath
to @xmath must satisfy @xmath , where @xmath is defined by @xmath .
Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath , and @xmath is continuous across the @xmath , except at
any zero jump @xmath in the instanton block, at which @xmath can jump by
a multiple of @xmath . (Recall that the vectors @xmath are deformed to
give @xmath -dependent vectors @xmath in the definition of @xmath .)
Solving @xmath round @xmath gives a holonomy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

We know that @xmath is invertible away from the resonating points @xmath
, so define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

for each @xmath , and for @xmath . It is easy to check that this is a
solution to @xmath , jumping by @xmath at @xmath . Define the exact
solution @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath lies in the component of @xmath corresponding to the jump
@xmath , and @xmath is a constant that normalizes @xmath . Note that in
the case of vanishing monopole charges, the @xmath are well-defined
solutions to @xmath on the complement of the resonating points. In the
other cases, when the model operator has an off-diagonal block @xmath ,
the @xmath are well-defined solutions to @xmath on the complement of
@xmath . Also note that where some vector @xmath has been deformed to
zero, @xmath is just the corresponding vector in @xmath .

Although we have written down an exact solution to @xmath corresponding
to each singularity @xmath with @xmath , it is often more convenient to
work with an approximate solution. Define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some bump function @xmath on @xmath , and

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.80)
  -- -- -- --------

for some bump function @xmath on @xmath . (Compare with @xmath and
@xmath .) We can then define an approximate solution @xmath constructed
from @xmath so that the @xmath component of @xmath matches the jump at
@xmath . A short calculation shows that @xmath is exponentially close to
the exact solution @xmath in the limit @xmath . This is because in the
limit the exact solution @xmath becomes more and more peaked about the
discontinuity at @xmath .

#### 3.4.3 How good is the approximation?

We need to consider in what sense the set of approximate solutions
@xmath approximate the cokernel of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the
orthogonal projection onto @xmath and consider @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so we need to calculate @xmath in each of the cases @xmath . For
example, in the case @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is supported on some interval @xmath , and @xmath is
defined by @xmath . Using integral estimates just like those on page
3.70 , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath . The norm of @xmath is bounded as @xmath (we
prove this later: see equation @xmath ) and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The other cases @xmath and @xmath are entirely analogous, and so we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

as a map @xmath .

We would like, however, to replace @xmath with a unitary isomorphism
between these spaces, so that the trivialisation @xmath is orthonormal.
We know that the set @xmath is orthonormal by definition (by making the
supports of the bump functions disjoint), so replacing @xmath with a
unitary map will ensure we obtain a unitary basis of @xmath . Recall the
‘polar decomposition’ of an invertible matrix @xmath : let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath is a positive-definite self-adjoint matrix and @xmath is
unitary, and these satisfy @xmath . Variational methods show that this
decomposition minimizes @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath is a unitary map @xmath . Equation @xmath implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so if we define @xmath , then @xmath exponentially decreasing term.
Hence the approximate solutions @xmath are exponentially close to a
unitary basis @xmath of @xmath in the limit @xmath . Recall that the
exact solutions corresponding to zero jumps in the instanton block are
exponentially close to the corresponding approximate solutions. Hence
for @xmath we have @xmath exponentially decreasing term.

#### 3.4.4 Proof that @xmath is framed

We want to show that @xmath extends to the boundary @xmath and is framed
by @xmath . The exact statement is as follows:

###### Definition 3.82.

Let @xmath be a @xmath bundle and connection on @xmath and let @xmath be
some @xmath framed quasi-periodic connection on @xmath . The pair @xmath
is the interior restriction of @xmath if there is a unitary isomorphism
@xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.83.

@xmath is the interior restriction of @xmath where @xmath is some @xmath
quasi-periodic connection which is smooth up to the boundary and which
is framed by @xmath .

Proof: First fix local trivialisations of @xmath in the following way.
Fix a direction vector @xmath . Each approximate solution @xmath is
associated to a vector @xmath that spans out a line bundle @xmath over
@xmath . In the case @xmath , @xmath is the highest weight vector @xmath
; for @xmath , @xmath is the vector @xmath ; and for @xmath , @xmath is
the constant vector @xmath . Since @xmath the vectors @xmath form a
local trivialisation of the trivial bundle @xmath over @xmath on some
neighbourhood of @xmath . By construction, there is a unitary action of
@xmath on the @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

To prove the Proposition it is sufficient to show that in the local
trivialisation @xmath of @xmath , the matrices @xmath representing
@xmath extend smoothly to the boundary @xmath and are appropriately
framed there. In particular, we claim that

-   @xmath on @xmath ,

-   @xmath on @xmath ,

-   @xmath on @xmath for @xmath .

These conditions are sufficient to deduce that @xmath is the interior
restriction of some connection @xmath framed by @xmath . In addition, we
also have to verify that there is some clutching map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that in the gauge @xmath , @xmath as @xmath . It follows that @xmath
is the interior restriction of a quasi-periodic connection @xmath framed
by @xmath .

To prove the claim about the framing we have to calculate the matrices
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath using a formula like @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath exponentially decaying term, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence it is sufficient to consider the matrices @xmath for @xmath . By
making the supports of the bump functions @xmath used to define the
approximate solutions sufficiently small, these matrices are diagonal,
and since the approximate solutions are orthonormal, the diagonal
entries in the matrices must be imaginary. Fix some @xmath and consider
the @xmath ’th diagonal element of each matrix. Let @xmath and @xmath .

First consider @xmath . When @xmath , @xmath is defined by @xmath , and
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is a real integral, and so must vanish since it is also
imaginary. Hence @xmath is smooth up to the boundary and vanishes there.
The cases @xmath and @xmath are entirely similar.

Next consider @xmath . We want to show that @xmath is smooth up to the
boundary and has value @xmath when @xmath . The proof depends on whether
@xmath , @xmath , or @xmath ; start by assuming @xmath so that @xmath is
given by @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This last term is independent of @xmath , and because of the @xmath
invariance @xmath , independent of @xmath ; we want to show it is a
smooth function of @xmath and tends to zero as @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined by @xmath . So @xmath implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which completes the case @xmath . The cases @xmath and @xmath are dealt
with via very similar estimates.

Finally, consider @xmath for @xmath . Fix @xmath and let @xmath . It is
sufficient to show that @xmath on @xmath . As usual, we have to deal
case-by-case with the sign of @xmath . When @xmath or @xmath this can be
seen immediately from the definition of @xmath . For example, when
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath and assuming the zero jump is in the monopole block, we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

But integral estimates show @xmath as @xmath . Hence @xmath as @xmath .
However, @xmath since @xmath , and so @xmath extends smoothly to @xmath
where it equals @xmath . When the zero jump is in the instanton block
the exact solution defined by @xmath and @xmath gives exactly the same
result. This completes the proof of the claim about the framing.

It remains to prove that @xmath clutches correctly. The map @xmath
defined by @xmath gives a map from @xmath to @xmath since @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the gauge @xmath of @xmath , @xmath is given by the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction, however, @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath clutches correctly: @xmath is the interior
restriction of a framed quasi-periodic connection @xmath with clutching
function @xmath , where @xmath extends smoothly to infinity and is the
identity there. @xmath

### 3.5 Calculating @xmath for @xmath

Proposition 3.83 shows that @xmath determines an element of @xmath for
some @xmath . In this Section we prove that @xmath , where @xmath is the
boundary data for the Nahm data fixed at the start of Section 3.3 . We
do this by calculating @xmath and using @xmath .

The calculation is slightly different in each of the cases, but uses the
following scheme. The basic idea is to compare @xmath with a caloron
configuration @xmath which has the same framing @xmath as @xmath , but
which has @xmath , and so is a deformation of a monopole. Regard @xmath
as a bundle and connection over @xmath . Then @xmath is the interior
restriction of a framed quasi-periodic connection with boundary data
@xmath , so

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.85)
  -- -- -- --------

using @xmath . Suppose @xmath is a bundle and connection on @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, suppose that on the complement @xmath of some closed region
@xmath there is a unitary isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using @xmath and @xmath we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose the isomorphism @xmath is such that @xmath is the disjoint union
of some small closed balls @xmath for @xmath , with each ball containing
one resonating point. For each @xmath construct a bundle and connection
@xmath over @xmath by gluing @xmath and @xmath at their boundaries via
the isomorphism @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the second Chern class, so if we can show @xmath then
@xmath . This is done by calculating the transition function @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath , and using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transition function @xmath is found by fixing gauges on @xmath and
@xmath . The precise nature of these gauges differs for the different
types of model operator @xmath . In many ways, the case of no zero jumps
in the instanton block is the most illustrative, and the reader may
prefer to concentrate on that case first.

The calculation of @xmath for the model operator @xmath suggests another
way of thinking about the topology of caloron configurations, which we
call the ‘spotted dick’ model. (The term ‘spotted dick’ refers to a type
of pudding consisting of a cylinder of sponge containing currants, often
served with custard.) The idea is that away from a small neighbourhood
of each resonating point, @xmath is isomorphic to a monopole
configuration. The obstruction to extending this to a global isomorphism
comes at the resonating points. Near each resonating point @xmath
resembles a charge- @xmath instanton. Thus, up to deformation, we can
think of a caloron as the pull-back of a monopole to @xmath with @xmath
charge- @xmath instantons embedded in it. This explains the name: the
‘sponge’ is a monopole configuration while the ‘currants’ are charge-
@xmath instanton configurations.

#### 3.5.1 The case of no zero jumps in the instanton block

The main idea here is that restricting to the monopole block gives a
@xmath monopole Nahm operator @xmath , and we take @xmath . This
monopole configuration is framed in the same way as @xmath , and so we
can apply the scheme outlined above.

Recall the definition of @xmath from Section 3.3.3 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath . We showed in Section 3.3.3 that @xmath is injective and
Fredholm with index @xmath . Lemma 3.11 gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, recall the definition of @xmath , equation @xmath . Outside @xmath
( \ie away from the resonating points)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath for @xmath outside @xmath , because @xmath has no solutions.
(From equation @xmath we see that a solution to @xmath must be
continuous across all the @xmath and be in the kernel of @xmath . There
are no such solutions away from the resonating points.) Setting @xmath
and @xmath we can then use the scheme described at the start of Section
3.5 : @xmath is given by @xmath , and for each @xmath we want to find
the transition function @xmath from @xmath to @xmath where @xmath , and
@xmath are the bump functions used to define @xmath .

We have to identify @xmath on @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

be an orthonormal basis of @xmath over @xmath , where @xmath are the
monopole solutions used to define @xmath . Note that @xmath are all
solutions of @xmath on @xmath because @xmath for all @xmath . We know
@xmath is @xmath -dimensional, so there are still @xmath solutions to
find. Suppose @xmath and decompose @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is perpendicular to @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath are
functions of @xmath . Then for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath has solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

We want to extend the solutions @xmath by two further solutions @xmath
to give a gauge for @xmath . Consider taking

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.93)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are some constants, @xmath and @xmath is a bump
function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath and @xmath are well defined everywhere on @xmath for any
choice of @xmath . We define @xmath and @xmath by taking

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and using @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a gauge for @xmath which is unitary on the boundary of @xmath , but
not necessarily unitary on the interior. Equation @xmath was constructed
to ensure that the gauge was unitary on the boundary but well-defined on
the interior of @xmath . There is no obstruction to taking the
unitarisation over @xmath , without affecting the gauge near the
boundary. Using @xmath we can compare this trivialisation with the
trivialisation @xmath , and see that the transition function @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this into @xmath gives @xmath , since with our definition
of @xmath , the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has degree @xmath . Thus, using @xmath , we have shown that @xmath .

#### 3.5.2 The case of vanishing monopole charges

Following the scheme outlined at the start of Section 3.5 , we want to
identify the bundle and connection @xmath . Since there is no monopole
block, this is rather different to the case of no zero jumps in the
instanton block, where @xmath was the cokernel of the restriction of
@xmath to the monopole block. Essentially, we calculate the transition
functions @xmath by taking a trivialisation consisting of the exact
solutions @xmath away from the resonating points, while at the
resonating point @xmath two of these solutions are replaced by @xmath to
give a local trivialisation. We take @xmath to be the trivial bundle
@xmath over @xmath . Let @xmath be a collection of closed balls round
the resonating points @xmath , on which conditions @xmath – @xmath hold,
and let @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath denote the complement. The
exact solutions @xmath defined in Section 3.4.2 determine a bundle
isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After applying the Gram-Schmidt algorithm to @xmath we obtain a unitary
bundle isomorphism @xmath in the same way. Define a connection @xmath on
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and continue @xmath arbitrarily over @xmath . It follows that @xmath is
the interior restriction of a framed quasi-periodic connection, and that
@xmath extends to the boundary in the same way as @xmath . If @xmath
denotes the framing at infinity, then since @xmath has vanishing
monopole charges, equation @xmath implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, we claim that @xmath has trivial clutching function, so that
the RHS is zero. Now @xmath on @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is
translation by @xmath in @xmath , so

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

However, the exact solutions @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Gram-Schmidt process gives some @xmath function @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and equation @xmath implies that @xmath . Substituting this into @xmath
shows that @xmath has trivial clutching function, so we have proved our
claim, and shown that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we want to find a trivialisation of @xmath for each @xmath .
Comparing this with the gauge @xmath on @xmath will give the transition
function @xmath on @xmath between @xmath and @xmath . Start by fixing
some @xmath . From the definition of the model operator in Section 3.3.2
, there exist @xmath satisfying conditions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
. Condition @xmath implies that for @xmath the solution @xmath is
well-defined everywhere on @xmath , since @xmath is just some vector in
@xmath . The set @xmath can therefore be extended by two sections @xmath
to give a trivialisation of @xmath over @xmath . Consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We want to show that @xmath and @xmath are well-defined
at @xmath , and that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a trivialisation of @xmath on @xmath . This is clearly a
trivialisation away from @xmath , so we only have to understand what
happens at the resonating point.

Recall the definition of the exact solution @xmath given by equations
@xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath near the resonating point (condition
@xmath ), and using @xmath , the exact solution @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath . Note that all the terms in this expression commute. Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined for all @xmath and @xmath . Similarly, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We want to estimate @xmath and @xmath near the resonating point. Let
@xmath . Then @xmath as @xmath , and @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that @xmath and @xmath have unit norm. Next, consider @xmath in the
limit @xmath . Equation @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

exists. Moreover,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Combining @xmath and @xmath shows that the right-hand side of @xmath is
well defined as @xmath . Thus @xmath , and @xmath are well-defined in
the limit @xmath , and at @xmath are given by some multiples of @xmath
respectively. The set @xmath is therefore a trivialisation of @xmath
over @xmath .

We can now calculate the transition function @xmath . Comparing the
trivialisation @xmath with the exact solutions @xmath , we see that (up
to some re-ordering)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The two trivialisations @xmath and @xmath are not unitary, but applying
the Gram Schmidt process is equivalent to replacing @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . This does not affect the degree. Comparing @xmath with
the calculation of @xmath in the case of vanishing monopole charges, we
have @xmath and so @xmath . This completes the proof that @xmath for
vanishing monopole charges.

#### 3.5.3 The case @xmath

The calculation is very similar to that in Section 3.5.1 . Recall the
definition of the model operator in Section 3.3.4 , the definition of
the adjoint in Section 3.3.5 , and the definition of the exact solutions
@xmath , @xmath , given in Section 3.4.2 . In Section 3.4.2 we showed
that the @xmath are well-defined solutions to @xmath on the complement
of @xmath , where @xmath is the off-diagonal block of the model
operator. In fact the @xmath are well-defined on @xmath , and are just
vectors in @xmath , because @xmath on @xmath . It follows that @xmath
for each @xmath , and since the @xmath solve @xmath everywhere they are
solutions of @xmath for all @xmath . The @xmath therefore define a rank
@xmath sub-bundle @xmath of @xmath , which is equipped with a connection
@xmath given by projection from @xmath onto @xmath . The proof of
Proposition 3.83 shows that @xmath is the interior restriction of a
framed @xmath quasi-periodic connection with vanishing monopole charges
and clutching function @xmath . The @xmath give a global trivialisation
of @xmath in which @xmath is framed. Since @xmath , using the definition
of the clutching function in Proposition 3.83 we have @xmath , and so
@xmath where @xmath is the framing determined by the exact solutions
@xmath . Moreover, since the @xmath span trivial line bundles in @xmath
, using @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now @xmath is the Nahm operator of some @xmath monopole Nahm data. Let
@xmath . Then Lemma 3.11 implies that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath for all @xmath . We can then define @xmath . On the
complement of the region @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath satisfies @xmath .

It remains only to specify gauges on @xmath and @xmath near each
resonating point and calculate the degree of the transition function.
Let @xmath and @xmath be the solutions of @xmath used to define the
off-diagonal blocks of @xmath . Then, as in Section 3.5.1 , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a gauge for @xmath where @xmath are solutions of @xmath . Again,
following Section 3.5.1 and reproducing equations @xmath to @xmath , we
construct @xmath in exactly the same way, so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a gauge for @xmath , and so that the transition function @xmath has
@xmath . This completes the proof that @xmath .

### 3.6 Deforming @xmath to @xmath

The last step of the construction of calorons is to prove that the Nahm
operator @xmath can be deformed into the model operator @xmath in such a
way that we can deduce that @xmath is a framed caloron configuration. In
Section 3.6.1 we prove the existence of a path of injective Fredholm
operators between @xmath and @xmath , and in Section 3.6.2 we use this
to deduce that @xmath is a framed caloron configuration. Finally, in
Section 3.6.3 , we use the boundary conditions and the anti-self-duality
equation to prove that @xmath can be equipped with a compatible volume
form.

#### 3.6.1 Existence of a path between @xmath and @xmath

We want to show that we can deform @xmath to @xmath with a path @xmath
in the space of injective Fredholm operators with index @xmath . Let
@xmath denote the space of Fredholm operators from @xmath to @xmath with
index @xmath , and let @xmath denote the subset of injective operators.
Thus @xmath and @xmath are maps from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.106.

If @xmath is a controlled deformation of @xmath (in the sense of
Definition 3.25 ) then there is a path @xmath in @xmath between the two,
such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath were defined in Section 3.2.5 , and Definition 3.24 gave
the notion of a framed deformation.

In Section 3.6.2 we show that conditions @xmath and @xmath ensure that
@xmath is a framed caloron configuration for each @xmath .

Proof: We first prove the existence of a path @xmath satisfying @xmath
and @xmath that lies in @xmath and then perturb it so that it lies in
@xmath . Recall that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath satisfying the conditions of
Definition 3.25 . Let @xmath denote a deformation of @xmath to @xmath
given by deforming the vectors @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, for each @xmath , @xmath is a controlled deformation of @xmath ,
so condition @xmath is met (controlled implies framed) and Corollary
3.26 implies that @xmath lies in @xmath for each @xmath . Since @xmath
and @xmath satisfy @xmath , if we make the deformation @xmath strictly
periodic in @xmath , then @xmath satisfies condition @xmath for all
@xmath .

Next we want to perturb this deformation so that it lies in @xmath . The
deformation corresponds to a five (real) dimensional surface @xmath
lying in @xmath which is the image of a map @xmath . Note that @xmath is
not a smooth manifold, but is stratified, with the strata corresponding
to the dimension of the kernel. Let @xmath denote the subset of
operators that are not injective. If the codimension of @xmath is
sufficiently large, then the surface @xmath can be deformed into @xmath
. To perturb @xmath into @xmath we require one dimension orthogonal to
@xmath and @xmath at each point on @xmath , \ie we require the
codimension of @xmath to be at least six (real) dimensions. The
codimension of @xmath can be calculated in the following way. Fix @xmath
. Since @xmath is not injective, it has a non-trivial kernel which is
finite dimensional, so suppose @xmath is a basis for the kernel, where
@xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath is @xmath dimensional, so fix a basis
@xmath for the cokernel. Note that @xmath because @xmath . The paths

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath define a tangent plane to @xmath at @xmath , contained in
@xmath . The condition @xmath implies that the three paths are well
defined. Hence the (real) codimension of @xmath is at least six, and so
the deformation can be shifted into @xmath .

A problem might arise: we do not want to perturb @xmath when @xmath or
@xmath , because the perturbed path would no longer join @xmath to
@xmath . Similarly, the other components of @xmath might be affected.
First consider what happens for large @xmath . We want the path @xmath
to consist of framed deformations of @xmath , which is certainly true
before we perturb @xmath . For sufficiently large @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a multiplicative operator independent of @xmath .
Equation @xmath implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for large @xmath and some constant @xmath , because @xmath is uniformly
bounded. Hence for sufficiently large @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath is injective for sufficiently large @xmath . Thus, combining
the three boundary components, we only have to perturb @xmath on some
compact subset of @xmath to move @xmath into @xmath . Finally consider
@xmath . If we perturb @xmath into @xmath for @xmath then the
periodicity rule @xmath fixes the perturbation for @xmath . Thus we have
some fixed perturbation of @xmath in some neighbourhood of the boundary
of @xmath , and we want to extend this to a perturbation of the whole of
@xmath . The Proposition follows from the Lemma below. @xmath

###### Lemma 3.109.

Suppose @xmath is the image of some map @xmath and @xmath is a
neighbourhood of the boundary of @xmath . We know that while @xmath is
@xmath -dimensional, the complement of the space of non-injective
Fredholm operators has codimension @xmath . Then any deformation of
@xmath into @xmath extends to a deformation of @xmath into @xmath .

Proof: Milnor [ 29 , Theorem 1.35] proves an equivalent result for
smooth manifolds which extends to spaces of Fredholm operators readily.
@xmath

#### 3.6.2 Recovering the boundary conditions

We have a deformation @xmath of @xmath together with bundles and
connections

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given that @xmath extends to @xmath in the sense of Proposition 3.83 ,
our aim is to prove that @xmath extends to @xmath and is framed there,
by comparing the two connections and showing that @xmath is
asymptotically close to @xmath . The precise statement is as follows:

###### Proposition 3.110.

The bundle and connection @xmath is the interior restriction of @xmath
where @xmath is some @xmath quasi-periodic connection which satisfies
the smoothness conditions of Section 2.1.6 and which is framed by @xmath
.

Proof: The aim is to construct a unitary isomorphism @xmath and framed
quasi-periodic connection @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . We start
by comparing the projections @xmath and @xmath from @xmath onto @xmath
and @xmath respectively, and show that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as @xmath . It follows that for sufficiently small @xmath , @xmath is an
isomorphism as a map from @xmath to @xmath . We can then compare @xmath
with the pull-back of @xmath under @xmath .

The proof of @xmath is taken almost directly from [ 17 , Section 2] and
follows from estimates on the Green’s function @xmath of @xmath .
Equations @xmath and @xmath imply that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath and for sufficiently small @xmath . (Throughout, @xmath
is a constant used in the generic sense.) Since @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Strictly speaking, @xmath is a map @xmath , so @xmath is the norm of the
composition of @xmath with inclusion into @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is
a map @xmath , so @xmath is the norm of the restriction of @xmath to
@xmath . Fixing an element @xmath of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a multiplicative operator that is independent of @xmath for
sufficiently small @xmath . Since @xmath is uniformly bounded and
smooth, @xmath is @xmath , and together with estimate @xmath this proves
equation @xmath .

The next step is to compare @xmath and @xmath . Equation @xmath implies
that @xmath is an isomorphism as a map @xmath for sufficiently small
@xmath . Let @xmath be some region @xmath on which @xmath is an
isomorphism. Consider the pull-back of @xmath under @xmath : the
difference between the connections on @xmath is an endomorphism-valued
@xmath -form @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the inverse of @xmath as a map @xmath , so that @xmath .
Expanding @xmath using @xmath and @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a section of @xmath . Using the identity @xmath and the
fact that @xmath , this gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Our aim is to prove that @xmath is @xmath and that the @xmath components
of @xmath vanish at the boundary—this will imply that @xmath and @xmath
are framed in the same way on @xmath . Now,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and similarly for @xmath . Since @xmath on @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By making the region @xmath sufficiently small, @xmath is multiplicative
and therefore smooth on each interval. Thus @xmath is only passed @xmath
sections in equation @xmath , so we regard @xmath as being restricted to
@xmath sections. A similar comment applies to the image of @xmath , so
@xmath can be regarded as a map from @xmath sections to @xmath sections
rather than @xmath . As such, equations @xmath and @xmath give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It follows from @xmath that the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath components
of @xmath are @xmath , and similarly any derivative of these components
of the form @xmath is @xmath . Hence the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
components of @xmath are @xmath and vanish on the boundary.

Next consider the @xmath component of @xmath : using equation @xmath ,
it is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the unit vector in direction @xmath . In the basis
@xmath of @xmath , @xmath is given by the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, up to @xmath , the @xmath component is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the limit @xmath the @xmath become ‘square roots of @xmath
-functions’: integral estimates like those in Section 3.4.1 show that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.118)
  -- -- -- ---------

for any multiplicative operator @xmath that is independent of @xmath ,
where @xmath is the gauge on @xmath fixed in Proposition 3.83 . Hence
the limit of @xmath exists as @xmath which shows that the @xmath
component of @xmath is continuous up to the boundary. In fact it shows
the @xmath component is diagonal on the boundary and independent of
@xmath —so the @xmath component satisfies the conditions given in
Section 2.1.6 . Similarly, by considering derivatives in @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath , it can be shown that the @xmath component of @xmath is
@xmath up to the boundary. The same method shows that the @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath components of @xmath are @xmath : differentiating
@xmath with respect to @xmath , the coefficients of the @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath components are of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so extend to the boundary. Thus @xmath is @xmath .

Let @xmath be the isomorphism @xmath whose existence was proved in
Proposition 3.83 . Let @xmath , so that @xmath is an isomorphism @xmath
defined on @xmath . We have shown that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a @xmath connection on @xmath framed by @xmath . The
isomorphism @xmath can be extended to the interior of @xmath so that
@xmath holds everywhere on @xmath . (Given @xmath , this determines
@xmath on the interior.) To complete the proof of the Proposition, it
remains to be shown that @xmath is quasi-periodic, and that @xmath can
be replaced with some unitary isomorphism.

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equation @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

on @xmath . We want to show that @xmath as @xmath and that @xmath is
@xmath . In the gauge @xmath on @xmath , @xmath is given by the matrix

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

because @xmath and @xmath is unitary. Now @xmath implies that the RHS is
given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the approximate solution associated to the solution
@xmath of @xmath . Hence @xmath as @xmath . Equation @xmath implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath is @xmath it follows that @xmath is @xmath .

The final step is to replace @xmath with a unitary isomorphism and show
that this does not affect the framing or clutching adversely. As in
Section 3.4.3 we replace @xmath with the unitary approximation @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and compare @xmath with the pull-back of @xmath under @xmath . A
calculation similar to the comparison above shows that the difference of
the two connections is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We can calculate @xmath quite explicitly as follows. Equation @xmath
implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can use a power series expansion for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can then calculate @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second term in this equation simplifies:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is then easy to apply the arguments used to prove that @xmath is
@xmath to @xmath , and conclude that @xmath is also @xmath . This shows
that @xmath is a @xmath connection. Moreover, it also follows that the
@xmath component of @xmath is diagonal and independent of @xmath on the
boundary, so @xmath satisfies the conditions defined in Section 2.1.6 .

The final check is to ensure that the clutching behaviour of @xmath has
not been disturbed by the change to a unitary isomorphism. The equation
for the matrix of @xmath , equation @xmath , becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because of equation @xmath . But the RHS is @xmath so @xmath as @xmath ,
and @xmath is still @xmath . @xmath

It seems that the Proposition could be extended quite readily to show
that @xmath is the interior restriction of a framed quasi-periodic
connection @xmath that is smooth up to the boundary, rather than @xmath
. First we should indicate why this seems difficult initially. The
difficulty comes when one considers @xmath derivatives of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To prove smoothness, all the @xmath derivatives of @xmath must extend
continuously to @xmath . However, the @xmath derivative of @xmath
includes terms like @xmath , and it is unclear how to make these terms
cancel to obtain the desired smoothness result. However, the method used
in the Proposition to show that the @xmath component of @xmath is @xmath
could be used to obtain smoothness in the following way. The proof of
the Proposition included the calculation of the first few terms in the
@xmath power series expansion of @xmath : the proof relied on the fact
that the leading coefficients for @xmath vanished, and that the leading
coefficient in @xmath was multiplicative. Equation @xmath showed how
this multiplicative term extended to the boundary—a more general
operator would not have a limit like @xmath . However, all the
coefficients in the power series expansion of @xmath will be
‘differential operators of negative degree’, so should have limits like
@xmath . Some careful analysis of the smoothing properties of the
Green’s function @xmath could therefore lead to the stronger result.

We can use the Proposition to prove Lemma 3.11 for Nahm data in @xmath .
(Recall that we have not yet proved Lemma 3.11 for monopole Nahm data
that does not satisfy Nahm’s equation and that might be continuous
accross zero jumps.) Suppose that @xmath is the Nahm operator associated
to an element of @xmath . Then Proposition 3.110 implies that @xmath is
the interior restriction of a @xmath quasi-periodic connection framed by
@xmath . However, @xmath is translation invariant, and so must have
@xmath . Applying @xmath therefore gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we have proved Lemma 3.11 .

Next we apply the Proposition to our deformation @xmath :

###### Corollary 3.124.

Consider the path @xmath defined by Proposition 3.106 , and fix some
@xmath . The proof of Proposition 3.110 goes through if we replace
@xmath by @xmath since it only relies on properties @xmath and @xmath .
Hence for each @xmath there exists a quasi-periodic connection @xmath on
@xmath which is framed by @xmath and which is @xmath , such that @xmath
is the interior restriction of @xmath .

Recall that @xmath was constructed from a set of Nahm data with boundary
data
@xmath . Since @xmath is framed by @xmath for each @xmath , it must have
boundary data @xmath where @xmath for each @xmath , and so equation
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

But the LHS of this equation is continuous in @xmath , and since @xmath
are constant, @xmath is constant. From Section 3.5 we know @xmath , so
@xmath , and we have proved the following:

###### Theorem (Nahm data @xmath caloron, @xmath version).

Suppose @xmath is a set of principal @xmath caloron boundary data. Given
an element of @xmath let @xmath be the corresponding Nahm operator.
Then, up to gauge transformation, @xmath is the interior restriction of
a @xmath framed quasi-periodic connection @xmath on @xmath with boundary
data @xmath , \ie an element of @xmath . This construction takes
elements of @xmath to anti-self-dual connections \ie elements of @xmath
. Moreover, using the rotation maps @xmath and @xmath , the construction
extends to non-principal boundary data as explained in Section 3.2.6 .

#### 3.6.3 Volume forms

A periodic volume form on @xmath , parallel with respect to @xmath ,
corresponds to a volume form @xmath on @xmath , parallel with respect to
@xmath , and clutching according to the rule

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are defined by Proposition 3.110 . Our aim is to
prove that such a volume form exists when the boundary data @xmath is
@xmath and the caloron configuration @xmath is anti-self-dual.

Let @xmath denote the curvature of @xmath ; a parallel volume form
exists on @xmath if @xmath . If @xmath is anti-self-dual, then @xmath is
the curvature of an anti-self-dual finite action abelian field on @xmath
, and so vanishes. Hence @xmath can indeed be equipped with a parallel
volume form @xmath . Since @xmath is parallel and @xmath is compatible
with the clutching map @xmath , it follows that there exists a constant
@xmath with @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any sections @xmath of @xmath . We want to show that @xmath , so
that @xmath corresponds to a periodic object on @xmath . Since @xmath is
independent of @xmath and all the objects are continuous up to the
boundary, we can evaluate @xmath by working on @xmath .

Suppose that the sections @xmath are parallel in the @xmath direction
\ie satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is easy to construct parallel solutions on @xmath : in the gauge
@xmath on @xmath , the @xmath component of @xmath is @xmath . Hence
@xmath defines a linearly independent set of sections that are parallel
in the @xmath direction. Substituting these sections into equation
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.128)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

since @xmath . However, the clutching map @xmath is the identity on the
boundary, so equation @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Together, equations @xmath and @xmath imply that @xmath , and so we have
shown that the volume form corresponds to a periodic object on @xmath .
Hence we have established:

###### Theorem (Nahm data @xmath caloron, @xmath version).

Suppose @xmath is a set of @xmath caloron boundary data. Given an
element of @xmath let @xmath be the corresponding Nahm operator. Then
@xmath is the interior restriction of an @xmath framed quasi-periodic
connection @xmath on @xmath corresponding to some element of @xmath .

## Chapter 4 From Calorons to Nahm Data

We present the Nahm transform from calorons to Nahm data: our aim is to
prove that the Nahm transform is a well-defined map from @xmath to
@xmath . Throughout this Chapter we work with a fixed @xmath
anti-self-dual caloron configuration, \ie a bundle and connection @xmath
in @xmath , framed by the pair @xmath .

### 4.1 Generalizing the @xmath-torus Nahm transform

Many of the more formal aspects of the Nahm transform carry over
directly from the @xmath -torus case described in 1.1.5 to the caloron
case. We cover these in this Section, delaying the real difficulties—the
calculation of the index of the Dirac operators involved, and recovering
the behaviour of the Nahm data at singularities—till later.

#### 4.1.1 Defining the transform

Given the caloron @xmath , recall the definitions @xmath and @xmath of
the Dirac operators @xmath on @xmath . Following the ideas of Section
1.1.5 , the transform from the caloron to its Nahm data involves the
kernel of a family of Dirac operators parameterized by the dual torus
@xmath . For each @xmath , let @xmath denote the Dirac operators coupled
to @xmath via the connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that, since @xmath for @xmath , the two Dirac operators can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath are the components of @xmath in the frame @xmath . We use the
same symbols @xmath \etc to denote the extension of these operators to
Sobolev spaces of sections:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the space of sections with @xmath derivatives in @xmath
.

###### Definition 4.3.

The set of singular values, @xmath , for @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 4.4.

When @xmath is anti-self-dual, @xmath is injective provided @xmath .

Proof: Applying the Weitzenböck formula 1.14 , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath implies that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . By definition,
@xmath is framed on @xmath and we can extend the framing to a
neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath , to give an identification of @xmath
with @xmath . In this identification we can write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for each @xmath , and @xmath as @xmath . When @xmath there
exists a compact subset of @xmath outside which @xmath has distinct
eigenvalues, none of which equals an integer multiple of @xmath . Thus,
on the complement of this compact set, @xmath has no non-trivial
periodic solutions, and so any solution to @xmath must have compact
support. However, any solution @xmath must also satisfy @xmath . This is
a first order ODE, so if @xmath has compact support, it must be
identically zero. It follows that, provided @xmath , @xmath is
injective. @xmath

###### Proposition.

@xmath is Fredholm iff @xmath .

We prove this result in Section 4.2 .

From these two results it follows that @xmath is finite dimensional and
has rank independent of @xmath on each of the component intervals of
@xmath . As @xmath varies, the vector spaces @xmath define a vector
bundle on each interval in @xmath . Let @xmath be the interval @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath . Let @xmath denote the bundle
@xmath over the interval @xmath . The bundles inherit an hermitian inner
product from @xmath . We define a connection and three endomorphisms on
each bundle in the following way. Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a section of @xmath and @xmath is the projection @xmath
onto @xmath . Here @xmath denotes the @xmath -th coordinate function of
@xmath . Note that if @xmath is @xmath then @xmath is not necessarily
@xmath so these endomorphisms may not be well-defined. However, in
Section 4.2.3 we prove that sections in @xmath are necessarily
exponentially decaying, so this problem does not arise, and the
endomorphisms @xmath are in fact well-defined. The connection and
endomorphisms are skew-hermitian by definition. In Section 4.1.2 we
check that they satisfy Nahm’s equation on the intervals @xmath , and we
check that the transform gives periodic Nahm data in Section 4.1.3 .

#### 4.1.2 Nahm’s equation

We want to show that the connection @xmath and endomorphisms @xmath
satisfy Nahm’s equation on the interval @xmath for each @xmath . This is
an adaptation of Proposition 1.22 , and relies on the fact that @xmath
commutes with the Clifford matrices @xmath , @xmath . For the present we
assume that sections in @xmath are exponentially decaying so that the
endomorphisms @xmath are well-defined.

For brevity we fix the notation @xmath and @xmath in this Section. Note
that if @xmath is a section of @xmath ( \ie if @xmath ) then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking the adjoint of this expression gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using these formulae and definition @xmath , we can calculate the
commutator @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

From @xmath , @xmath commutes with @xmath for @xmath , and since @xmath
we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, consider the left-hand side of Nahm’s equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath . But @xmath so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting this back into @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Comparing this with equation @xmath , we have Nahm’s equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 4.1.3 Periodicity

We have seen how to construct the Nahm data over the intervals @xmath .
In this Section, we explain how to identify the fibre @xmath with @xmath
, so that the Nahm data is defined on @xmath . This is entirely
analogous to Section 3.2.5 , where we showed that @xmath is periodic for
a given Nahm operator @xmath .

Define the translation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Compare this with equation @xmath .) Then @xmath is a unitary periodic
bundle isomorphism of @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that just as in Section 3.2.5 there is some choice for the map
@xmath : it can be replaced with any map of the form @xmath . It follows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the projection onto @xmath for each @xmath .
Substituting this back into definitions @xmath and @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have dropped the subscript @xmath on the Nahm data. Thus @xmath
defines an action of @xmath on the collection of bundles @xmath , and
the connection and endomorphisms defined by @xmath and @xmath are
compatible with this action. Quotienting by the action, the data reduces
to a collection of hermitian bundles @xmath defined on the intervals
@xmath , where @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath . Since the connection and
endomorphisms are compatible with this action, under the quotient they
map to a connection @xmath and endomorphisms @xmath , @xmath , on each
bundle @xmath .

#### 4.1.4 Further remarks on the rotation map

In analogy with Section 3.2.6 , we want the following diagram to
commute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath were defined in Section 2.2 , and @xmath is
defined by rotating the Nahm data by @xmath as in equation @xmath .
Given our caloron @xmath , traversing the diagram round the top right (
\ie performing the Nahm transform followed by a rotation) is equivalent
to performing the Nahm transform with the Dirac operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

rather than the Dirac operator @xmath , where @xmath . By ‘equivalent’
we mean the two sets of Nahm data are isomorphic over @xmath with a
fixed origin. In the quasi-periodic picture suppose that @xmath are
framed quasi-periodic connections on @xmath corresponding to @xmath and
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . If @xmath has clutching function @xmath , then so does
@xmath since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath acts trivially as a gauge transformation. (Recall that
clutching functions must be the identity at spatial infinity.)

Conversely, traversing around the bottom left of the diagram is just the
Nahm transform on @xmath . The quasi-periodic pull-back of @xmath is
@xmath where @xmath is the bundle automorphism of @xmath defined in
Section 2.2 . We know that @xmath is a bundle automorphism of @xmath
taking @xmath to @xmath . If @xmath descends to give a strictly periodic
isomorphism identifying @xmath with @xmath then the diagram commutes. A
section @xmath of @xmath descends to a periodic section under the
quotient by a clutching function @xmath , if and only if it satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, @xmath has clutching function @xmath given by @xmath , so consider
a section of @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then under the action of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the clutching function of @xmath , and so @xmath
descends to a periodic section under the quotient by @xmath . Thus
@xmath descends to a strictly periodic bundle isomorphism taking @xmath
to @xmath and we have shown that the diagram commutes.

### 4.2 The Fredholm condition

We need to prove the Fredholm condition stated in Section 4.1.1 :

###### Proposition 4.11.

@xmath is Fredholm iff @xmath .

This ensures that the bundles @xmath are well-defined. We also need to
calculate the rank of these bundles. Since @xmath is injective, the rank
of @xmath is given by minus the index of @xmath for any @xmath , and so
the problem is equivalent to finding the index of @xmath , which we
calculate in Section 4.3 . The proof of the Fredholm condition and the
index calculation have been published jointly with my supervisor in [ 36
] —the material in this Section and Section 4.3 is taken more-or-less
directly from that paper.

We give two proofs of Proposition 4.11 : the first uses Anghel’s
criterion [ 2 ] , while the second uses the machinery of
pseudo-differential operators ( @xmath DO’s) on manifolds with fibred
boundary [ 27 ] . Using this machinery in Section 4.2.3 we prove that
solutions in @xmath are exponentially decaying in @xmath , so that
@xmath makes sense.

#### 4.2.1 Proof of the Fredholm condition using Anghel’s criterion

Theorem @xmath of [ 2 ] gives conditions for @xmath to be Fredholm:
@xmath is Fredholm if and only if there is a compact set @xmath and a
constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath is Fredholm if and only if @xmath is Fredholm. Now for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath is the adjoint of @xmath and vice versa. Using ( 4.1 ), we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The third term here is clearly positive because @xmath is self-adjoint,
and the boundary conditions allow us to estimate the other two as
follows.

The first term. As in the proof of Lemma 4.4 , extend the framing @xmath
to a neighbourhood of @xmath . In this identification we can define
@xmath using @xmath . As the boundary @xmath is approached the
eigenvalues of @xmath converge to the eigenvalues of @xmath . Using
spherical polar coordinates on @xmath , let @xmath be the eigenvalues of
@xmath , and @xmath be the eigenvalues of @xmath ( @xmath ) such that
@xmath as @xmath . Let @xmath be the smallest element in @xmath and
@xmath be the smallest element of the set @xmath . The condition @xmath
implies that @xmath , so there exists a compact set @xmath such that
@xmath on @xmath .

Suppose @xmath and @xmath . Using the isomorphism @xmath , @xmath can be
written as a Fourier series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a section of @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a pointwise estimate. (Since @xmath , @xmath is actually continuous
so both sides of the inequality exist.) Since the inequality is
independent of @xmath it holds for general @xmath and we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the interior product with a tangent vector @xmath ,
@xmath is defined by @xmath , and @xmath is defined by @xmath . But,
using @xmath , @xmath as @xmath , so there exists a compact set @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let @xmath be a compact set containing @xmath and @xmath . Combining
@xmath and @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A similar bound is obtained for @xmath , and so we obtain the following
bound for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By density, the inequality in fact holds for @xmath . This completes the
verification of Anghel’s criterion and gives a proof of the ‘if’ part of
the Proposition. When @xmath it is possible to use Anghel’s criterion
and some analysis similar to that above to prove that @xmath is not
Fredholm, but we choose to omit this. In fact the converse statement
follows much more easily if we use @xmath DO’s, as we will see below.
@xmath

#### 4.2.2 Pseudo-differential operators on manifolds with fibred
boundaries

Mazzeo and Melrose [ 27 ] study pseudo-differential operators ( @xmath
DO’s) on manifolds with fibred boundaries. These operators are
particularly suitable for problems like our Fredholm condition and index
theorem: [ 27 , Proposition 9] contains a necessary and sufficient
condition for a @xmath DO on a manifold with boundary to be Fredholm,
which we apply to our operator @xmath . I am indebted to my supervisor
for explaining @xmath DO’s on manifolds with boundary to me; the proof
of the Fredholm condition using @xmath DO’s is due to him.

The general situation considered in [ 27 ] is a fibration of the
boundary @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the fibre, and @xmath is projection onto the base @xmath
. In our example,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so the fibration is trivial. Mazzeo and Melrose assume @xmath has a
boundary defining function @xmath \ie a function @xmath such that @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath on @xmath . They consider differential operators
of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

near @xmath , where @xmath is smooth in the first three variables and
polynomial in the last three variables. Here @xmath and @xmath are
coordinates on @xmath and @xmath respectively. These operators form the
algebra of @xmath -differential operators. (Note that this @xmath has
nothing to do with the @xmath component of @xmath , but stands for
‘fibred cusp’ in [ 27 ] .) In [ 27 , Proposition 9] it is shown that
such an operator is Fredholm in @xmath if and only if it is fully
elliptic in the following sense. First, ( 4.14 ) must be elliptic in the
usual sense over @xmath . This will always be the case for Dirac
operators. Secondly, the associated indicial family must be invertible
on every fibre @xmath . Given such a fibre, the indicial family on
@xmath is defined by picking a real number @xmath and a real cotangent
vector @xmath , and defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a differential operator on @xmath . To say that the indicial family
is invertible is to say that @xmath is invertible (in any reasonable
space of sections over @xmath ), for each choice of @xmath as above.

For our example, we work with the boundary-adapted coordinates @xmath
and denote the components of @xmath in these coordinates by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Relative to a suitable choice of basis for the spin-bundles, we have
then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Strictly speaking, we are making a choice of normal coordinates here;
otherwise there will be additional zero-order terms coming from
connection coefficients. Hence @xmath is a @xmath -differential operator
as defined by [ 27 ] . Following the recipe for the indicial family for
@xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are real numbers. This operator in @xmath is a sum of two
terms @xmath , where @xmath is self-adjoint, @xmath is skew-adjoint and
@xmath . It follows by considering @xmath that @xmath if and only if
@xmath and @xmath . Now @xmath has a non-trivial null-space only if
@xmath . Hence under the assumption of the Proposition, @xmath is
injective. Similarly the adjoint @xmath is injective, so that @xmath
implies that the indicial family is invertible, and so @xmath is
Fredholm in @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath , then @xmath is not
invertible, and nor is @xmath when @xmath . So in this case @xmath is
not fully elliptic and hence cannot be Fredholm in @xmath . This
completes the proof of Proposition 4.11 using material from [ 27 ] .

The result that a @xmath DO @xmath is Fredholm if and only if fully
elliptic holds in a very strong sense. If @xmath has degree @xmath then
@xmath makes sense as an operator between Sobolev spaces of degree
@xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Mazzeo and Melrose prove that if
@xmath is fully elliptic it is Fredholm between any such spaces, and the
index is independent of this choice. In fact, they show that if @xmath
is fully elliptic, if @xmath , and if for some real @xmath , @xmath ,
then @xmath and @xmath vanishes to all orders in @xmath at @xmath .
There is a similar statement for the cokernel. In particular, it follows
that @xmath is Fredholm as an operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

( \ie restricted to @xmath ) if and only if it is Fredholm as a @xmath
DO on @xmath . These strong decay conditions also imply the following:

###### Lemma 4.16.

Let @xmath be two caloron configurations on @xmath , framed by @xmath .
Then @xmath is Fredholm if and only if @xmath is Fredholm. When the two
operators are Fredholm their @xmath -indices coincide.

Proof: That @xmath is Fredholm if and only if @xmath is Fredholm follows
directly from Proposition 4.11 . It remains to prove that the operators
have the same @xmath -index. Consider the linear deformation of @xmath
into @xmath . This clearly gives rise to a norm-continuous path of Dirac
operators between Sobolev spaces

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the volume form @xmath in terms of the usual
boundary-adapted coordinates. However, @xmath is equipped with the
volume form @xmath near @xmath , so it does not necessarily follow that
the deformation is norm-continuous between

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, the decay properties stated above imply that @xmath is Fredholm
as an operator between spaces ( 4.17 ) if and only if it is Fredholm as
an operator between spaces ( 4.18 ), and the index is the same. Thus the
deformation from @xmath to @xmath preserves the @xmath -index. @xmath

We can prove the Lemma without using [ 27 , Proposition 9] in fact. Let
@xmath be the linear path joining @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using an expansion like @xmath and working in some fixed gauge. It
follows that the path of operators @xmath is continuous provided @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath are bounded. Since the volume form near the
boundary is @xmath , this follows provided we have pointwise estimates
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath as @xmath . However, this is true because
@xmath and @xmath are framed in the same way (using the smoothness
assumptions of Section 2.1.6 ).

#### 4.2.3 Decay properties of zero modes

We want to show that the solutions to @xmath are exponentially decaying
as @xmath so that the Nahm matrices @xmath @xmath are well-defined by
@xmath . Define @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Lemma 4.20.

Fix some @xmath , and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then @xmath is @xmath for all @xmath such that @xmath .

This Lemma is certainly sufficient to deduce that the Nahm matrices are
well-defined. To prove the Lemma we introduce the ‘weighted’ operators

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided @xmath . Next we prove that the weighted operators are Fredholm
provided @xmath :

###### Lemma 4.22.

@xmath is Fredholm iff @xmath .

Proof: Using the ideas in Section 4.2.2 we prove that the indicial
family is invertible iff @xmath , which is sufficient for the claim.
Take @xmath to be the @xmath -differential operator @xmath .
Constructing the indicial family @xmath as described in Section 4.2.2
gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as an operator on @xmath , in some suitable choice of basis for the
spin-bundles. We can perform a Fourier decomposition in @xmath : @xmath
maps each Fourier mode to itself, and on the @xmath ’th mode is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath is invertible if and only if @xmath is invertible for
all @xmath . Working on the eigenspace of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath
for some @xmath , @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This matrix has determinant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence @xmath is Fredholm if and only if @xmath is non-zero for all
@xmath , @xmath , and for all @xmath . However, the real part of the
terms @xmath is strictly negative whenever

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath , \ie whenever @xmath . Conversely, when
@xmath there exist @xmath that make the determinant @xmath vanish for
some values of @xmath and @xmath . Hence @xmath is invertible if and
only if @xmath , completing the proof of the Lemma. @xmath

Fixing some @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is Fredholm and has
the same index as @xmath , since @xmath is a continuous path of Fredholm
operators. It follows that @xmath . Combining this with @xmath completes
the proof of Lemma 4.20 .

### 4.3 The index theorem

We want to prove the following:

###### Theorem 4.24.

Suppose @xmath is a @xmath caloron configuration framed by @xmath . If
@xmath is Fredholm then the @xmath -index is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for each @xmath , @xmath is the sub-bundle of @xmath on which
@xmath is positive definite.

The Theorem implies the following:

###### Corollary 4.26.

Suppose @xmath is a framed @xmath caloron configuration with boundary
data @xmath . When @xmath the index of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is defined by @xmath . Thus the
bundles @xmath with fibre @xmath have the correct dimension to
correspond to Nahm data in @xmath .

To see that Theorem 4.24 implies the Corollary, replace @xmath in the
Theorem with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . Then, when @xmath it
follows that @xmath is the direct sum of the eigenbundles with
eigenvalues @xmath , while @xmath is trivial for all @xmath . Hence
@xmath , and @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which is @xmath .

The proof of the Theorem involves two main steps. The first is a
calculation of the index in the case that there is a trivialisation of
@xmath in which @xmath is independent of @xmath . By Fourier analysis in
@xmath , the index problem reduces to a problem on @xmath which can be
dealt with using Callias’ index theorem, which we introduced on page
1.1.6 . By a deformation argument, this calculation gives the index for
any caloron configuration when @xmath , completing the first step. The
precise statement of Callias’ theorem we will use is:

###### Theorem.

Let @xmath be a @xmath monopole configuration on @xmath framed by @xmath
in the sense of Definition 2.4 , and let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spin bundle on @xmath . Then @xmath is Fredholm iff
@xmath is invertible, and the index is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sub-bundle of @xmath on which @xmath is
positive-definite.

This follows immediately from Råde’s version of Callias’ theorem [ 38 ]
.

The second step in the proof of Theorem 4.24 invokes an excision theorem
for operators of Dirac type due to Anghel [ 2 ] and Gromov–Lawson [ 14 ]
. In our case, this result gives @xmath if @xmath is any caloron
configuration agreeing with @xmath near @xmath but living on a new
framed bundle @xmath , with @xmath . Since we calculated @xmath in the
first step, that completes the proof of Theorem 4.24 .

#### 4.3.1 Proof when @xmath

In this case, by Lemmas 2.20 and 4.16 it is enough to compute the index
when @xmath and @xmath is the pull-back of a monopole. Then the
coefficients of @xmath are independent of @xmath and we can use Fourier
analysis in @xmath to reduce the calculation of the index to that of a
collection of operators of the form ( 4.28 ).

Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using identification @xmath . Since by assumption the coefficients are
independent of @xmath , @xmath maps @xmath into @xmath and, using @xmath
, its restriction to this subspace is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Dirac operator on @xmath coupled to @xmath via
@xmath . Using the statement of Callias’ index theorem on the previous
page, and using Proposition 4.11 , @xmath is Fredholm for every @xmath
iff @xmath is Fredholm. Equation @xmath shows that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the subbundle of @xmath on which @xmath has positive
eigenvalues. Since @xmath if @xmath , the index of @xmath is the sum of
the indices of the @xmath , \ie

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This sum is finite because @xmath is trivial when @xmath is sufficiently
large. That completes the proof of Theorem 4.24 when @xmath .

#### 4.3.2 Proof when @xmath

Anghel [ 2 ] , generalizing work of Gromov and Lawson [ 14 ] , has given
an excision theorem which compares the @xmath -indices of a pair of
Dirac operators over a complete manifold that agree near infinity. In
our case this result yields the following statement. Let @xmath and
@xmath be a pair of bundles over @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be
unitary connections on @xmath and @xmath respectively. Suppose that
there is a bundle isometry @xmath which carries @xmath to @xmath outside
some compact set @xmath . Then

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.31)
  -- -- -- --------

We will deduce Theorem 4.24 by taking for @xmath a connection which
agrees with @xmath near @xmath , but which lives on a framed bundle
@xmath with @xmath . This will complete the proof in view of the results
of Section 4.3.1 .

Let @xmath be a framed bundle and @xmath a framed @xmath caloron
configuration on @xmath . Let @xmath be a quasi-periodic pull-back of
@xmath (in the sense of Section 2.1.4 ) with clutching function @xmath .
Let @xmath be a neighbourhood of @xmath so that @xmath where @xmath is a
compact set @xmath . Let @xmath be a bundle isomorphism of @xmath that
satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and which is arbitrary elsewhere (compare with the proof of Lemma 2.20
). By gauge transforming by @xmath we can assume that @xmath on @xmath .
Define @xmath on @xmath to agree with @xmath on @xmath , but extended
over @xmath to define a smooth quasi-periodic connection on @xmath with
trivial clutching function, @xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath are
framed in the same way. Let @xmath be the quotient of @xmath by @xmath ,
so that @xmath is a framed caloron configuration with @xmath .

Applying ( 4.31 ),

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

But

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From Section 4.3.1 we know that @xmath so we have proved that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof of Theorem 4.24 .

### 4.4 Extension to the singular points

The final problem we consider is how to prove the Nahm data constructed
from a caloron satisfies the correct gluing and singularity conditions
at the points @xmath . These conditions were specified in Sections 3.1.1
and 3.2.1 . Nakajima [ 34 , Section 2] showed how to obtain the
singularity conditions for Nahm data constructed from an @xmath
monopole, and our approach will follow his quite closely. Nahm data
corresponding to an @xmath monopole cannot contain zero jumps, and at
the two singularities the continuing component is trivial. (Recall the
definitions of the terminating and continuing components on page 3.5 .)
While Nakajima’s method therefore helps us to recover the behaviour for
the terminating component, it does not provide much insight into the
continuing component. Hurtubise and Murray’s proof [ 20 ] that the Nahm
data constructed from on @xmath monopole satisfies the gluing and
singularity conditions uses the spectral curve of the monopole. No
‘direct proof’ via analysis of Dirac operators exists to date. Indeed,
the proof for calorons would follow quite readily from a ‘direct’ proof
for monopoles. We start, in Sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 , by considering
the terminating component for @xmath monopoles, using Nakajima’s method
and filling in some of the details he misses. In Section 4.4.3 we show
how to extend these results for calorons, while in Section 4.4.4 we
consider the continuing component, giving only sketch results and
conjectures.

The main idea is that solutions to @xmath are characterized by their
asymptotic behaviour on @xmath close to each @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath is close to @xmath and let @xmath (we will use this definition of
@xmath for the remainder of the Chapter). We saw in Section 4.2.3 that
@xmath decays at least as fast as @xmath as @xmath . We will show that
solutions in the terminating component at @xmath are of the form @xmath
(non- @xmath function), while the motivation behind our results for the
continuing component is that the corresponding solutions decay like
@xmath for some @xmath , and so continue across @xmath as @xmath
sections.

#### 4.4.1 The model operator for monopoles

We need to recall the boundary conditions for @xmath monopoles from
Chapter 2 and the definition of the Nahm transform for monopoles. Let
@xmath be a @xmath monopole framed by @xmath with boundary data @xmath .
Just as in Section 2.1.6 , we need to assume some additional smoothness
conditions near the boundary. We assume that there are local gauges on
@xmath , defined over some region @xmath in which

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath is diagonal on @xmath , and

-   @xmath is @xmath and @xmath is @xmath .

These are entirely analogous to the smoothness conditions we assume for
calorons in Section 2.1.6 (compare with equations @xmath and @xmath ).
Next recall the definition of the Nahm transform for monopoles given in
Sections 1.1.6 and 1.1.8 . The transform is given by the cokernel of
@xmath as defined by equation @xmath , and the Nahm data is defined by
equations @xmath and @xmath .

Fix a singularity @xmath with @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath .
Nakajima’s method is similar to the way we recovered the boundary
conditions in Chapter 3. We define a model operator @xmath that
approximates @xmath and find @xmath solutions to @xmath , defined on
some neighbourhood @xmath , for some @xmath . We then show that these
solutions are arbitrarily close to solutions to @xmath in the limit
@xmath , thereby recovering the terminating component.

The definition of the model operator uses the following facts about
Dirac operators on @xmath , taken from [ 34 ] . The spin bundle @xmath
of @xmath decomposes into two line bundles @xmath and there are two
Dirac operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As previously, we can identify @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the hyperplane bundle on @xmath and @xmath is the space
of @xmath -forms. There is an identification @xmath so @xmath . The
Dirac operator @xmath is then a multiple of the Cauchy-Riemann operator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we can consider the Dirac operators coupled to the line
bundle @xmath via the homogeneous connection @xmath on @xmath , which we
denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equation @xmath becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath .

Next, consider @xmath equipped with coordinates @xmath and the metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(compare with the notation at the start of Chapter 2), so that @xmath is
isometric to @xmath , where @xmath is the closed @xmath -ball with
radius @xmath . Let @xmath be the projection @xmath . The spin-bundle of
@xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . Under this identification the Dirac
operator on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

in some suitable local gauges on @xmath , where @xmath are the Dirac
operators on @xmath . When we couple the Dirac operator on @xmath to
@xmath via the connection @xmath , equation @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this background material established we are in a position to define
the model operator. Given @xmath we work on the pull-back @xmath .
Recall that @xmath decomposes @xmath into eigenbundles, @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath are the monopole charges. For each @xmath define

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined by @xmath . Using the decomposition of @xmath
into line bundles, we can define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fixing some identification of @xmath with @xmath and working in the
local gauges on @xmath in which @xmath and @xmath satisfy the asymptotic
conditions stated at the start of this Section, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is given so explicitly, we can write down solutions and
these will be our approximate solutions to @xmath . Working near the
singularity @xmath (with @xmath ), @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath . Now @xmath , and every element @xmath determines a solution
of @xmath of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that these solutions are @xmath when @xmath but fail to be @xmath
when @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -dimensional (when @xmath ), taking
an orthonormal basis gives @xmath linearly independent orthogonal
solutions to @xmath of the form @xmath . Smoothing these off by a bump
function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and identifying @xmath over @xmath gives the approximate solutions
@xmath associated to the terminating component at @xmath . Note that the
approximate solutions are orthogonal (because the basis of @xmath is
orthogonal), but not normal.

We need some estimates as to how closely @xmath approximate solutions to
@xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath (used throughout in the generic sense), where
@xmath was used to define the bump function @xmath . These integrals are
the same (up to a change of variable) as the integral @xmath defined by
@xmath . We could estimate them using integration by parts, just as we
did on page 3.70 , but this time around it is easier to change variable
to @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, since @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Together, equations @xmath and @xmath give

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whenever @xmath , because the limits

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

both exist. However, this estimate does not hold in the cases @xmath
because the limit on the left does not exist—note that Nakajima does not
point this out. For the cases @xmath the estimates @xmath and @xmath
give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath , where ‘ @xmath ’ means that for sufficiently
small @xmath there exist @xmath such that LHS @xmath RHS and there exist
@xmath such that LHS @xmath RHS. Evaluating the integral in @xmath , the
RHS becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Thus we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, by very similar estimates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . At this stage it is convenient to normalise the approximate
solutions @xmath , @xmath , so that they are of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

#### 4.4.2 The terminating component for monopoles

We want to use the approximate solutions to recover the terminating
component of the Nahm data. The method used is very similar to the
proofs of Propositions 3.83 and 3.110 . First, however, we need the
following results from [ 34 ] .

###### Lemma 4.45 (Nakajima).

For any @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath and all @xmath , where @xmath .

Proof: Since @xmath is injective and Fredholm on @xmath for some
sufficiently small @xmath , @xmath is invertible and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

exists. (Nakajima gives a rather more involved argument.) For
sufficiently large @xmath and small @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

pointwise on @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Hölder’s inequality and the Sobolev inequality, Nakajima obtains

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Note that these inequalities hold for any @xmath .) Combining the
inequalities gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting @xmath into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

proving the Lemma. @xmath

###### Corollary 4.47.

When @xmath , the approximate solutions @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath projection onto @xmath . We also
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Put @xmath in Lemma 4.45 and use @xmath . @xmath

Note that (contrary to Nakajima) we do not obtain an estimate @xmath as
@xmath in the case @xmath . However, we expect the case @xmath to be
exceptional: when @xmath the irreducible representation of @xmath is
trivial, so the Nahm data should be analytic (rather than meromorphic)
in @xmath near @xmath . We therefore have to deal with the case @xmath
separately—see the remarks in Section 4.4.4 .

###### Lemma 4.48 (Nakajima).

Let @xmath be the endomorphism of @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath where @xmath is the standard cartesian coordinate on @xmath .
Then a non-zero constant multiple of the linear map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines an irreducible @xmath -dimensional representation of @xmath .

Proof: See the Appendix to [ 34 ] . @xmath

We are now in a position to prove the following:

###### Proposition 4.50.

Given a Bogomolny monopole @xmath with boundary data @xmath , then for
any singularity @xmath with @xmath there is a parallel gauge defined on
some neighbourhood @xmath of the singularity in which the matrices
@xmath , @xmath , defined by @xmath decompose as

[]

such that

1.  @xmath form an irreducible representation of @xmath following
    equation @xmath , and

2.   in the limit @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

We make no claims about the entries marked @xmath at this stage.

We deal with the top left block (the continuing component), and discuss
the off-diagonal blocks, the case @xmath , and analyticity in Section
4.4.4 . Of course, to satisfy the conditions for Nahm data stated on
page 3.1.1 , @xmath must be analytic—so in the cases @xmath it seems
disturbing that we can only prove @xmath is @xmath . However, Nahm’s
equations impose additional strong conditions on @xmath , which we will
discuss in Section 4.4.4 . Note that an entirely analogous statement to
4.50 holds for @xmath , essentially by replacing @xmath with @xmath in
the proof of the Proposition.

Proof: The proof has two main steps. First we work in the ‘approximate
gauge’ @xmath and evaluate the matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Then, using Corollary 4.47 , we use the approximate
matrices @xmath to deduce that the Nahm matrices decompose as described
in the claim.

First consider evaluating the matrix with entries @xmath . Since @xmath
, @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath when @xmath because @xmath is
orthogonal to @xmath , and the matrix is diagonal. Moreover, because
@xmath is an orthonormal set, the diagonal entries are imaginary. On the
other hand, the integral @xmath is real, and so the matrix must be zero.
Also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath ’th unit coordinate function on @xmath , and
@xmath @xmath were used to define the approximate solutions.
Substituting @xmath into the integrals, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some non-zero constant @xmath . Defining the matrix @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Nakajima’s Lemma 4.48 implies that some non-zero constant multiple
of the map @xmath (with @xmath ) is an irreducible @xmath -dimensional
representation of @xmath .

Corollary 4.47 shows that the projection @xmath on to the cokernel of
@xmath satisfies @xmath on the span of @xmath . Just as we did in
Proposition 3.110 , we can replace @xmath with its unitarization @xmath
, so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the span of @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can in fact obtain a better estimate in the case @xmath , but the
estimate above is sufficient for our purposes. Next define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows that @xmath is an orthonormal set of sections of the bundle
@xmath defined over some neighbourhood @xmath . The set can be extended
by @xmath further sections to give a local trivialisation of the bundle
@xmath .

For the time being we will assume @xmath and return to the cases @xmath
later. Now

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

because @xmath . The first term is bounded as @xmath because @xmath .
Similarly, the second term is @xmath , and the third term is bounded by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using @xmath . Thus we obtain a bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath for some fixed @xmath . Note that this bound might fail to
hold in the cases @xmath due to the weaker estimates. Let @xmath be the
matrix with entries @xmath . Then the gauge transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

because @xmath is bounded, and maps @xmath to a unitary parallel set of
sections. We will apply the gauge transformation later.

Next we consider the endomorphisms @xmath , @xmath . Extend @xmath by
@xmath further sections to form a gauge for @xmath on @xmath . In such a
gauge the endomorphisms are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

using equation @xmath . From @xmath , @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, estimating the RHS of ( 4.56 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is bounded as @xmath . Moreover, gauge transforming by
@xmath into a parallel gauge does not alter the form of @xmath because
@xmath has the form @xmath . Nahm’s equation implies that multiplying
the map @xmath by @xmath gives an irreducible @xmath -dimensional
representation of @xmath , as in equation @xmath . This completes the
proof when @xmath .

For the case @xmath or @xmath the analysis is very similar. Equation
@xmath becomes a bound @xmath , and the gauge transformation to the
parallel gauge, equation @xmath , becomes @xmath . Estimates on @xmath
give @xmath of the form @xmath but with @xmath . Gauge transforming by
@xmath does not alter the form of this expansion, and Nahm’s equation
fixes the constant for the irreducible representation. @xmath

We leave monopoles at this point to prove an analogue of Proposition
4.50 for calorons.

#### 4.4.3 The terminating component for calorons

We prove the following analogue of Proposition 4.50 :

###### Proposition 4.58.

Given an anti-self-dual caloron @xmath framed by @xmath and with
boundary data @xmath , then for any singularity @xmath with @xmath there
is a parallel gauge for @xmath defined on some neighbourhood @xmath of
the singularity in which the matrices @xmath , @xmath , defined by
@xmath decompose as

[]

such that

1.  @xmath form an irreducible representation of @xmath following
    equation @xmath , and

2.   in the limit @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

This follows almost directly from Proposition 4.50 applied to the
Fourier modes of @xmath , because up to @xmath a caloron is the
pull-back of a monopole configuration. We can extend the framing from
the boundary to the whole of @xmath , and apply the “ @xmath ”
decomposition @xmath to define @xmath . However, up to @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are exactly the same as a monopole configuration framed by
@xmath . Using @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the monopole model operator determined by @xmath .
Identifying the spin bundles @xmath of @xmath with @xmath and using the
Fourier decomposition @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We therefore take the model operator for @xmath to be @xmath on the
@xmath ’th Fourier mode.

Working near the singularity @xmath the approximate solutions @xmath ,
@xmath , defined in Section 4.4.1 pull-back to @xmath and satisfy @xmath
together with the analogue of the estimates @xmath . The proof of Lemma
4.45 goes through, replacing @xmath with @xmath and taking @xmath , as
does the proof of Corollary 4.47 . The proof of Proposition 4.50 then
gives 4.58 directly.

#### 4.4.4 The continuing component and decomposition for @xmath

We want to show that the continuing block of the Nahm data constructed
from a caloron is continuous across singularities with @xmath , and
obtain the full decomposition of the Nahm data at such a point, as
described on page 3.1.1 . While we also want to obtain the corresponding
decomposition at zero jumps, this Section concentrates on the case
@xmath and we will only make some brief remarks about the zero jump
case. At present, obtaining the decomposition of monopole Nahm data at
singularities via analysis of the Dirac operator is an open problem (of
course, Hurtubise-Murray obtained the decomposition via spectral
curves). It should be clear that if we could obtain the decomposition of
the Nahm data constructed from a @xmath monopole—defining the Nahm data
via the coupled Dirac operator rather than via spectral curves—then the
caloron case would be very similar. For the remainder of this Section we
therefore concentrate on the simpler case of @xmath monopoles rather
than calorons, although our conjectures and results will apply to
calorons in an obvious way. Fix a @xmath Bogomolny monopole @xmath on a
bundle @xmath , framed by @xmath and with boundary data @xmath . Let
@xmath be the coupled Dirac operator defined by @xmath and let @xmath be
the Nahm data defined in terms of @xmath : @xmath is the bundle with
fibre @xmath while @xmath and @xmath are defined by @xmath and @xmath .
The full claim we want to prove is:

###### Claim 4.59.

Let @xmath be a singularity with @xmath and let @xmath . Then there is a
parallel gauge on @xmath for some neighbourhood @xmath in which the
limits

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

exist for @xmath , and @xmath is analytic. Similarly, there is a
parallel gauge on @xmath for some neighbourhood @xmath in which there is
a decomposition

[]

The upper diagonal block is analytic in @xmath ; the lower diagonal
block is meromorphic in @xmath ; and the off-diagonal blocks are of the
form @xmath . The residues @xmath define an irreducible representation
of @xmath .

Working with the fixed monopole @xmath , fix some @xmath with @xmath and
let @xmath . It is easy to show that away from the singularities @xmath
solutions to @xmath decay at least as fast as @xmath as @xmath , by a
calculation analogous to that in Section 4.2.3 . On the other hand, the
‘Nakajima solutions’ @xmath that determine the terminating component at
@xmath are of the form @xmath . The following conjecture is based on the
idea that solutions in the continuing component decay like @xmath across
@xmath for some @xmath , and are in some sense small in the eigenbundle
with eigenvalue @xmath . Let @xmath be the exact solutions defined by (
4.53 ) that determine the terminating component.

###### Conjecture 1.

There is an orthonormal set @xmath of maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for all @xmath :

1.  @xmath when @xmath ,

2.  @xmath is continuous in @xmath

3.   for all @xmath , @xmath vanishes to all orders of @xmath in the
    limit @xmath , and

4.   for all @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath .

If Conjecture 1 holds, then using Proposition 4.50 the following
Conjecture immediately holds:

###### Conjecture 2.

There is a parallel gauge on @xmath for some neighbourhood @xmath in
which the limits @xmath defined by @xmath exist. There is also a
parallel gauge on @xmath for some neighbourhood @xmath in which the
@xmath decompose as in Proposition 4.50 , except the top left-hand block
has the form @xmath .

Proof: Condition @xmath of Conjecture 1 ensures that @xmath exists for
all @xmath and @xmath , and is continuous in @xmath . Moreover,
transforming to a parallel gauge cannot introduce any discontinuities,
because (fixing @xmath to be the matrix with entries @xmath ) the gauge
transformation @xmath will always be continuous, even if @xmath is
discontinuous. @xmath

We can provide some evidence to support Conjecture 1 . Recall the model
operator @xmath defined by @xmath . If Conjecture 1 does not hold for
@xmath (in some sense) then we cannot reasonably expect it to hold for
@xmath , so we should try to understand the behaviour of the solutions
to @xmath near the singularity @xmath . First consider the component
@xmath of @xmath defined by equation @xmath . Consider a separable
solution of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a solution if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . We therefore have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constants @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The values @xmath are fixed by the spectrum of the operator @xmath ,
which has a complete set of orthogonal eigenvectors. Given any non-zero
@xmath , equation @xmath can be solved explicitly using Maple: the
solutions are Whittaker functions with argument @xmath (see [ 1 ,
Section 13] for a description of Whittaker functions and their
asymptotic expansions). In the limit @xmath these have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and so are not normalizable. However, when @xmath the
equations decouple and normalizable solutions for @xmath exist—but these
are just the Nakajima solutions. By completeness of the eigenfunctions
in @xmath and @xmath we can assume that any solution to @xmath is a sum
of terms of the form @xmath , and by orthogonality @xmath must kill each
term in the sum. Thus we have shown that the only normalizable solutions
to @xmath on @xmath are the Nakajima solutions. This analysis can be
repeated for the other components @xmath ( @xmath ) of @xmath , and
shows that their solutions decay like @xmath as @xmath . These solutions
therefore form continuous families across @xmath which satisfy the
conditions of Conjecture 1 .

While this supports Conjecture 1 , it certainly does not prove it. Given
a family of solutions @xmath to @xmath that is continuous across @xmath
, one might hope to use @xmath as an approximate solution, as we did for
the terminating component, and show that @xmath is a continuous family
of solutions to @xmath . However, since @xmath decays like @xmath for
some @xmath the estimates @xmath do not hold, and we do not obtain
@xmath as @xmath . Nakajima’s analysis is therefore insufficient to
prove that the family @xmath is continuous across @xmath . In any case,
there may be the wrong number of solutions to @xmath to match the
expected rank of the continuing component.

An obvious approach to proving Conjecture 1 is to use weighted
operators, like those in Section 4.2.3 , using the weighting to kill off
the solutions corresponding to the terminating component. Consider the
operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined by @xmath . If we take @xmath to be some small
positive constant then, given the Nakajima solutions @xmath of @xmath ,
@xmath are solutions to @xmath but are not @xmath . In other words, by
weighting we have removed the Nakajima solutions from the @xmath
-kernel. If we could prove that @xmath was Fredholm with @xmath -index
@xmath for @xmath , then a trivialization @xmath of the @xmath kernel of
@xmath would give rise to a set of solutions to @xmath satisfying the
properties in Conjecture 1 . Unfortunately, a calculation of the
indicial family like that in Section 4.2.3 shows that @xmath is not
Fredholm when @xmath , and so the strategy fails to work.

Obtaining the continuing component at a zero jump presents further
difficulties, and we will not be so bold as to make a formal conjecture
as we did for @xmath . Given a zero jump @xmath , we would not expect to
find families @xmath defined on @xmath satisfying conditions @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath of the Conjecture, since the Nahm matrices would
then be continuous across the zero jump. One possibility is that there
are families @xmath defined on @xmath satisfying conditions @xmath and
@xmath but not @xmath . This would imply that the matrices @xmath do not
exist at @xmath (because @xmath might fail to be @xmath ), while the
limits as @xmath from either side could exist but be different. Beyond
this remark we will not consider zero jumps further.

The final step is to go from Conjecture 1 and Proposition 4.50 to the
full decomposition 4.59 . We make the following:

###### Conjecture 3.

Given that the data @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath satisfy Nahm’s
equation on the interior of each interval @xmath , we obtain the full
decomposition 4.59 from Conjecture 2 .

Conjecture 3 follows immediately from:

###### Conjecture 4.

Suppose we have a rank @xmath solution @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
to Nahm’s equation on a bundle over the interval @xmath , where @xmath .
In addition, suppose there is a parallel gauge in which the @xmath
decompose as

[]

where @xmath is some fixed skew-hermitian matrix and @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath . Here @xmath define an irreducible representation of @xmath
in the usual way. Under these assumptions it necessarily follows that

1.   the top left-hand block is analytic in @xmath , even for @xmath ,

2.   the off-diagonal blocks are of the form @xmath , and

3.  @xmath is meromorphic when @xmath but holomorphic when @xmath .

Conjecture 4 should be relatively easy to prove, and elements of a proof
already exist in the literature: [ 19 , Section 2] contains related
results. The main assertion contained in the Conjecture is that when
@xmath and @xmath , Nahm’s equation forces @xmath to have the form
@xmath . This is more straight-forward to prove when @xmath , according
to the following outline. Suppose that the matrices @xmath have rank
@xmath or @xmath , solve Nahm’s equation (with @xmath ) on @xmath , and
have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the two equations obtained from cyclic permutations of @xmath . In
the case @xmath we can express each @xmath as a sum @xmath and assume
@xmath for @xmath . Substituting this into @xmath and the other two
equations, it is easy to show that @xmath for all @xmath . A similar
proof using more sophisticated representation theory should work for the
case @xmath . However, when @xmath the off-diagonal blocks make the
Conjecture harder to prove.

To conclude this Section we return to calorons to give a precise
statement of our results concerning the transform from calorons to Nahm
data. Our aim was to prove that the Nahm transform is a well-defined map
from @xmath to @xmath . We have proved that the transform of an element
of @xmath consists of a well-defined connection and endomorphisms @xmath
on bundles @xmath for each @xmath ; that the data satisfy Nahm’s
equation; and that the data has the correct rank to be an element of
@xmath . To complete the proof we must also obtain the decomposition of
the Nahm data at each point @xmath and prove that the Nahm operator
constructed from the Nahm data is injective (since @xmath is by
definition the set of caloron Nahm data that determine injective Nahm
operators). We have not addressed the problem of injectivity, but made
some remarks about this in Section 1.4 . Although the Conjectures above
are stated for @xmath monopoles they also apply to calorons in an
obvious way, and assuming they hold, we have obtained the correct
decomposition of the caloron Nahm data at singularities with @xmath . We
refer the reader back to Section 1.4 for remarks about the invertibility
of the transform and problems that could be tackled with the Nahm
transform in place.

## Glossary of Notation

  -------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------
  @xmath   standard coordinates on @xmath                                                                 1.1.1
  @xmath   Hodge star operator                                                                            1.1.1
  @xmath   Hodge stars on @xmath and @xmath                                                               1.1.2
  @xmath   monopole configuration                                                                         1.1.2
  @xmath   spin bundles on @xmath , @xmath or @xmath -torus                                               1.1.4
  @xmath   spin matrices                                                                                  1.8
  @xmath   sections of a bundle @xmath                                                                    1.10
  @xmath   Dirac operators coupled to connection @xmath                                                   1.10
  @xmath   spin bundle on @xmath                                                                          1.1.4
  @xmath   the torus @xmath and its dual                                                                  1.1.5
  @xmath   spin bundles on the dual torus                                                                 1.1.5
  @xmath   coordinate on the dual torus                                                                   1.1.5
  WFF      without flat factors                                                                           1.18
  @xmath   Dirac operators coupled to the flat line bundle parameterized by @xmath                        1.18
  @xmath   orthogonal projection on @xmath                                                                1.1.5
  @xmath   Nahm transform of @xmath                                                                       1.21
  @xmath   Dirac operators coupled to the flat line bundle parameterized by @xmath                        1.22
  @xmath   inverse Nahm transform of @xmath                                                               1.1.5
  @xmath   the @xmath -dimensional torus @xmath                                                           1.1.6
  @xmath   vector bundle on which Nahm data is defined                                                    1.1.8 , 1.2.1 , 3.1.1
  @xmath   connection on @xmath                                                                           1.1.8 , 3.1.1
  @xmath   Nahm matrices on @xmath                                                                        1.1.8 , 3.1.1
  @xmath   the group of smooth loops in a group @xmath                                                    1.2.1
  @xmath   the Lie algebra of @xmath                                                                      1.2.1
  @xmath   semi-direct product of @xmath and @xmath                                                       1.2.1
  @xmath   @xmath is the period of the caloron                                                            1.2.1 , 2.1
  @xmath   @xmath                                                                                         1.2.1 , 2.1
  @xmath   a @xmath monopole                                                                              1.37
  @xmath   The interval @xmath                                                                            1.2.1
  @xmath   the closed @xmath -ball                                                                        1.3
  @xmath   obstruction to extending the framing @xmath to the interior of @xmath (the instanton charge)   1.3 , 2.9
  @xmath   @xmath                                                                                         2.1
  @xmath   interior of @xmath                                                                             2.1
  @xmath   boundary @xmath of @xmath                                                                      2.1
  @xmath   boundary of @xmath                                                                             2.1
  @xmath   projection @xmath for some manifold @xmath                                                     2.1
  -------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------

  -------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------
  @xmath   polar coordinates on @xmath                                                                               2.1
  @xmath   boundary defining function on @xmath , @xmath                                                             2.1
  @xmath   trivial @xmath bundle on @xmath                                                                           2.1.1
  @xmath   @xmath                                                                                                    2.1.1
  @xmath   connection and Higgs field on @xmath                                                                      2.1.1
  @xmath   eigenvalues of @xmath                                                                                     2.1.1
  @xmath   Chern classes of eigenbundles of @xmath (monopole charges)                                                2.1.1
  @xmath   monopole boundary data                                                                                    2.5
  @xmath   the interval @xmath                                                                                       2.1.2
  @xmath   unitary automorphisms of @xmath that are the identity at infinity                                         2.1.2
  @xmath   degree of a map @xmath                                                                                    2.1.2
  @xmath   trace-free elements of @xmath                                                                             2.1.2
  @xmath   the instanton charge @xmath                                                                               2.10
  @xmath   caloron boundary data                                                                                     2.13
  @xmath   rank of @xmath , @xmath for calorons                                                                      2.13
  @xmath   the projection @xmath                                                                                     2.1.4
  @xmath   the trivial bundle @xmath                                                                                 2.1.4
  @xmath   a quasi-periodic connection on @xmath , often the pull-back of @xmath                                     2.16
  @xmath   space of monopoles with boundary data @xmath                                                              2.1.5
  @xmath   space of loops of monopoles in @xmath with period @xmath and degree @xmath                                2.1.5
  @xmath   functions with @xmath derivatives in @xmath that are smooth up to the boundary                            2.21
  @xmath   space of @xmath -forms such that the @xmath component is @xmath , while the other components are @xmath   2.22
  @xmath   space of framed caloron configurations with boundary data @xmath                                          2.27
  @xmath   subspace of ASD calorons                                                                                  2.27
  @xmath   Chern character of the bundle and connection @xmath                                                       2.1.7
  @xmath   first Chern class of a bundle @xmath                                                                      2.30
  @xmath   the rotation map on sets of boundary data                                                                 2.2
  @xmath   the rotation map on caloron configurations                                                                2.2
  @xmath   residue in the terminating component of the Nahm data at @xmath                                           3.1.1
  @xmath   irreducible @xmath -dimensional representation of @xmath                                                  3.2
  @xmath   limits of the continuing component of the Nahm matrices either side of a singularity                      3.1.1
  @xmath   the set of monopole Nahm data with boundary data @xmath                                                   3.3
  @xmath   the Nahm operator                                                                                         3.1.2
  @xmath   the cokernel of @xmath regarded as a bundle over @xmath                                                   3.5
  @xmath   projection onto @xmath                                                                                    3.5
  @xmath   @xmath                                                                                                    3.1.2
  @xmath   Sobolev space of sections of @xmath with @xmath derivatives in @xmath                                     3.1.2
  @xmath   Sobolev space of functions on @xmath with @xmath derivatives in @xmath                                    3.1.2
  -------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------

  -------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------
  @xmath   space of restrictions to @xmath of distributions in @xmath                  3.5
  @xmath   space of distributions in @xmath supported on @xmath                        3.1.2
  @xmath   support of a function @xmath                                                3.1.2
  @xmath   elements of @xmath with vanishing terminating component                     3.1.2
  @xmath   the operator @xmath on @xmath                                               3.5
  @xmath   the sum @xmath                                                              3.1.2
  @xmath   subspace of @xmath corresponding to the zero jump at @xmath                 3.1.2
  @xmath   a vector in @xmath                                                          3.1.2
  @xmath   inner product of a vector @xmath with @xmath                                3.5
  @xmath   the set of zero jumps @xmath                                                3.1.2
  @xmath   the number of zero jumps, @xmath                                            3.1.2
  @xmath   monopole Nahm data not necessarily satisfying Nahm’s equation               3.12
  @xmath   space of caloron Nahm data with boundary data @xmath                        3.15
  @xmath   caloron Nahm data not necessarily satisfying Nahm’s equation                3.2.1
  @xmath   continuing component of a vector or vector space                            3.2.2
  @xmath   the sum @xmath                                                              3.2.2
  @xmath   space of solutions to @xmath                                                3.2.2
  @xmath   space of solutions to @xmath                                                3.2.2
  @xmath   the adjoint of @xmath                                                       3.2.3
  @xmath   the dual space of @xmath                                                    3.2.3
  @xmath   pairing of an element of @xmath and an element of @xmath                    3.2.3
  @xmath   action of translation @xmath on @xmath                                      3.2.5
  @xmath   translation by one period in the @xmath direction                           3.2.5
  @xmath   @xmath                                                                      3.2.5
  @xmath   rotation of Nahm data by @xmath                                             3.2.6
  @xmath   the model operator                                                          3.3.1
  @xmath   basis of sections of the instanton block                                    3.3.2
  @xmath   the resonating point @xmath                                                 3.3.2
  @xmath                                                                               3.40
  @xmath   deformation of the vector @xmath                                            3.3.2
  @xmath   inner product of @xmath with @xmath                                         3.3.2
  @xmath   @xmath -ball round resonating point @xmath                                  3.3.2
  @xmath   instanton and monopole blocks of @xmath                                     3.3.3
  @xmath   decomposition of @xmath into instanton and monopole blocks                  3.3.3
  @xmath   components of the model operator on the instanton and monopole blocks       3.1
  @xmath   the off-diagonal block of the model operator                                3.3.3
  @xmath   zero jumps in instanton and monopole blocks                                 3.3.4
  @xmath   singularities in the Nahm data that are not zero jumps                      3.3.4
  @xmath   @xmath and @xmath                                                           3.3.4
  @xmath   decomposition of the projection @xmath into instanton and monopole blocks   3.59
  @xmath   adjoint of the model operator                                               3.3.5
  @xmath   adjoints of @xmath                                                          3.3.5
  -------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------

  @xmath        the adjoint of @xmath                                                          3.3.5
  ------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------
  @xmath        approximate solutions to the model operator                                    3.4.1 – 3.4.2
  @xmath                                                                                       3.4.1
  @xmath        holonomy of @xmath                                                             3.75
  @xmath        exact solutions to @xmath corresponding to zero jumps in the instanton block   3.4.2
  @xmath        projection onto the cokernel of the model operator                             3.4.3
  @xmath        unitary approximation of @xmath                                                3.4.3
  @xmath        solutions to @xmath , @xmath                                                   3.4.3
  @xmath        local trivialization of @xmath                                                 3.4.4
  @xmath        instanton charge of @xmath                                                     3.5
  @xmath        caloron configuration with zero instanton charge, used to calculate @xmath     3.5
  @xmath        space of all (injective) Fredholm operators @xmath with index @xmath           3.6.1
  @xmath        unitary approximation to the projection @xmath                                 3.6.2
  @xmath        volume form                                                                    3.6.3
  @xmath        inner derivative of a vector field @xmath with a form @xmath                   3.6.3
  @xmath        @xmath                                                                         4.3
  @xmath        @xmath                                                                         4.1.1
  @xmath        the bundle with fibre @xmath over @xmath                                       4.1.1
  @xmath        Nahm data on @xmath                                                            4.1.1
  @xmath        the translation @xmath                                                         4.1.3
  @xmath        action of the translation @xmath as a bundle isomorphism on @xmath             4.1.3
  @xmath        @xmath                                                                         4.1.3
  @xmath DO’s   pseudo-differential operators                                                  4.11
  @xmath        the indicial family of a @xmath DO @xmath                                      4.14
  @xmath        ‘weighted’ Dirac operators                                                     4.20
  @xmath        Dirac operator coupled to a monopole                                           4.4.1
  @xmath        model operator approximating @xmath                                            4.4.1
  @xmath        spin bundles @xmath on @xmath                                                  4.4.1
  @xmath        hyperplane bundle on @xmath                                                    4.4.1
  @xmath        Dirac operators on @xmath coupled to @xmath                                    4.32
  @xmath        @xmath                                                                         4.4.1
  @xmath        projection @xmath                                                              4.4.1
  @xmath        Dirac operator on @xmath coupled to the pull-back of @xmath                    4.33
  @xmath        approximate solutions to @xmath that determine the terminating component       4.4.1