The superstring theory is now regarded as the most promising candidate
for the unification of the Standard Model and gravity, and this field
has been rigorously investigated. However, we have seen a setback of the
perturbative analysis of the superstring theory, because it has so many
vacua that we have no way to determine which are the true ones. In order
to remedy this problem and thus for the superstring theory to have a
power to predict our real four-dimensional world, we need the
nonperturbative formulation of the superstring theory.

In the late 1990â€™s, our understanding of the nonperturbative aspects of
the superstring theory have been greatly deepened. Especially, the
large- @xmath ( @xmath is the size of the matrices) reduced models have
been proposed as the nonperturbative formulation of the superstring
theory. One of the most promising candidates is the IIB matrix model,
which is defined by the dimensional reduction of the ten-dimensional
@xmath super-Yang-Mills theory to zero dimension. It has been
conjectured that this model resurrects the behavior of the string theory
at the large- @xmath limit. There have been a lot of interesting
discoveries of the IIB matrix model, such as the dynamical generation of
the four-dimensional spacetime and the interpretation of the
diffeomorphism invariance.

On the other hand, there are a lot of problems to surmount, if a large-
@xmath reduced model is to be an eligible framework to unify the
gravitational interaction. Firstly, it is still an enigma how we can
realize the local Lorentz invariant matrix model. In addition, we need
to understand how we can describe the curved spacetime more manifestly,
in terms of a large- @xmath reduced model.

This thesis discusses several attempts to address these issues
concerning the gravitational interaction. This thesis is based on the
following works [ 26 , 38 , 46 , 60 ] .

hep-th/0401120

Jan 2004

KUNS-1893

Matrix models and the gravitational interaction

Takehiro Azuma

Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan

         azuma@gauge.scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp        

A Dissertation in candidacy for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
