##### Acknowledgements. First I thank my advisor Vijay Balasubramanian.
He taught me many knowledge in physics and gave me many insights. He
also gave me numerous encouragement during the course of my graduate
study. He trained me with all kinds of other necessary skills. I am very
grateful to have such a great advisor. I should thank Asad Naqvi, who
was a postdoc here. He provided many specific guidance when my
understanding was still very naive. He seemed to be able to answer most
questions I had in a very broad regime of subjects. Also I have learned
tremendously from his expertise in field theory. Besides my advisor, he
has played important role in the formation of my intellectual
perspective. I thank other faculty members of the math and physics
department such as Mirjam Cvetic, Ron Donagi, Paul Langacker, Burt
Ovrut, Gino Segre and Matt Strassler to provide wonderful courses and
stimulating discussions. I also thank Jan de Boer, Bo Feng, Yang-Hui He,
Tommy Levi, Vishnu Jejjala for collaborations and discussions,
especially Bo Feng for his insights. I also thank other (ex)postdocs,
graduate students and visitors such as David Berenstein, Volker Braun,
Evgeny Buchbinder, Can Gurses, Junhai Kang, Klaus Larjo, Tianjun Li, Tao
Liu, Oleg Lunin, Makoto Natsuume, Brent Nelson, Rene Reinbacher, Gary
Shiu, Joan Simon for useful discussions. Finally I thank my family and
friends for moral support.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Our understanding of the physical laws of the nature has progressed
tremendously during the past century. The foundation of this progress
rests on two pillars: general relativity and quantum field theory.
General relativity is a classical theory of gravity. It explains the
macroscopic phenomena of our world, such as the motion of planets,
galaxies and the whole cosmos. On the other hand, the microscopic world
is well governed by quantum field theory. In particular, a paradigm
known as “standard model” has emerged and successfully incorporated all
three kind of interactions of elementary particles, namely, the
electro-magnetic, weak and strong interactions. These two theories have
been verified by experimental tests in a very broad regime that is
available to the probe of current experimental devices.

Yet, there are many problems with general relativity and the standard
model, and it is generally believed that these two theories can not be a
complete description of nature. Firstly, there are too many arbitrary
parameters in the standard model. Throught the study of a more
fundamental theory, one might hope to explain some of the patterns in
standard model or even make a quantitative derivation of some of these
parameters. Also some parameters in the standard model appear to have an
unnatural magnitude. One such example is the hierarchy problem. In
quantum field theory, the mass of a scalar particle is renormalized by
quantum effects and naturally has a mass scale comparable to the
fundamental cut-off scale of the theory. The Higgs is a scalar, so its
natural mass scale is the Planck scale, which is @xmath Gev. However,
the mass of the Higgs is constrained by experiment to be at about @xmath
Gev, and therefore appears to be very unnaturally small. Secondly, the
general relativity Lagrangian is non-renormalizable. This means that
general relativity is only an effective theory at low energy. The theory
must break down and needs to be modified above some high energy scale.
Thirdly, recent astronomical observations suggest our universe is
dominated by a kind of dark energy with negative pressure. A natural
explanation of the dark energy is the vacuum energy caused by a very
small positive cosmological constant. However, quantum field theory
predicts the vacuum energy to be roughly the cut-off scale of the
fundamental theory, which is on a order of @xmath larger than the
observational value of the cosmological constant. This cosmological
problem is generally regarded as a hint of new physics beyond classical
general relativity.

Supersymmetry provides a beautiful solution to the hierarchy problem. In
a supersymmetric theory bosons and fermions always appear in pairs. The
contributions of bosons and fermions to the quantum correction of the
mass of Higgs cancel, therefore the Higgs can have a naturally light
mass compared to Planck scale. There are also other arguments for
supersymmetry. For example, it improves the predictions of Grand Unified
Theory. Due to many of these arguments, it is generally believed that
@xmath supersymmetric gauge theory might be relevant to the description
of our world. In Chapter 2 we focus on low energy dynamics of
asymptotically free supersymmetric gauge theories. Asymptotically free
gauge theories are strongly coupled in low energy, therefore the usual
method of perturbation theory breaks down. It has been a long standing
and important problem to solve the low energy dynamics of
non-supersymmetric QCD, which is at present only accessible by large
computer simulation of QCD on lattice. Meanwhile, in the past years, it
has been shown the low energy dynamics of @xmath supersymmetric gauge
theories are solvable [ 1 , 2 ] . Recently, Dijkgraaf and Vafa proposed
the superpotentials of some @xmath supersymmetric gauge theories can be
computed from matrix models [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] . In Chapter 2 we review these
developments and present some results we obtained along these lines.

There are many reasons why these results are useful and interesting. We
have mentioned they may be useful to predict effective low energy
dynamics of baryons and mesons. Furthermore, these studies might be
relevant to understanding of phenomenology of supersymmetry in the next
generation of accelerator, namely the LHC (large hadron collider). It is
widely hoped that supersymmetry will be discovered in LHC. We know
supersymmetry, if exist, is broken in the scale we currently observe.
However, there are many mechanisms to break supersymmetry. To maintain a
small Higgs mass, supersymmetry must be “softly” broken. One such
appealing mechanism is that supersymmetry is broken by non-perturbative
effects, i.e. dynamically broken. Studies of non-perturbative
superpotentials in Chapter 2 might serve as a learning grounds for these
subjects.

String theory is a leading candidate of quantum theory of gravity that
requires supersymmetry. For a general textbook introduction, see [ 6 , 7
] . String theory was originally invented in 1960’s to account for some
empirical formulae in strong interaction experiments. Later it was
realized that string theory also contains gravity and does not suffer
the annoying divergence associated with the quantization of gravity. In
the First String Revolution in the mid 1980’s, it was realized that
string theory can cancel anomaly and obtain many appealing
phenomenological features of the standard model, such as chiral
fermions. There appeared to be five distinct perturbative formulations
of string theory. However, in the Second String Revolution in mid
1990’s, many evidences suggested that the five theories can be embedded
in a single theory known as “M-theory”, whose low energy dynamics is
described by an eleven dimensional supergravity. The existence of the
five perturbative string formulations strongly suggests that a
non-perturbative definition of the M-theory should exist. Finding this
conjectured non-perturbative definition is very desirable, since it will
enable us to find the true vacuum of the theory that may describe our
world.

Perhaps the most compelling reason for believing the conjectured
‘‘M-theory’’ is the correct description of nature is that the theory is
unique and has the richest structure of all known theories. There is no
dimensionless free parameter in the theory. The theory only contains a
dimensionful constant that determine the fundamental scale of the
theory. ¹ ¹ 1 However, M theory has a very large moduli space of vacua.
Other parameters such as string coupling constants are related to the
expectation value of dilaton, so correspond to different points of the
moduli space. Physics at different vacua are dramatically different. At
present we do not where we are in this space of vacua, so can not make
very precise phenomenological predictions. Furthermore, We have
mentioned supersymmetry solves many problems. It is also true that the
more supersymmetries a theory has, the richer the theory is. The maximal
amount of supersymmetry that a consistent quantum theory can have is 32
supersymmetries, i.e. the theory has 32 real supercharges. M-theory has
32 supersymmetries and has the highest spacetime dimension, namely 11
dimension, of theories with 32 supersymmetries. The other five
perturbative string theories can be obtained by compactifying M-theory
on some one-dimensional spaces and using various string dualities. One
may naively think a theory in higher spacetime dimension is richer than
a theory in lower spacetime dimension. Thus we claim M-theory is the
richest theory.

There are not many theories with 32 supersymmetries. It turns out many
of them are dual to each other. This is in some sense not surprising,
due to the scarcity or uniqueness of rich structure . A more radical
claim would be all theories with 32 supersymmetries are equivalent to
each other. However, the dimension of spacetime a theory lives in should
also be relevant. We have been a little too naive in saying a higher
dimensional theory is richer in structure than a lower dimensional
theory. Indeed, it has been long speculated that a quantum theory of
gravity is holographically dual to a quantum theory without gravity in
one lower dimension. This “holography principle” comes from the studies
of black hole information problem. The AdS/CFT correspondence is such an
example [ 8 , 9 , 10 ] . For a general review see [ 11 , 12 ] . The
AdS/CFT correspondence states that Type IIB string theory on the @xmath
background is equivalent to @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory in 4
dimension. ² ² 2 Both theories are maximally supersymmetric. In four
dimension @xmath supersymmetry has 16 supercharges. The conformal
symmetry of the theory will effectively double the amount of
supersymmetry. Besides being conceptually astonishing, the AdS/CFT
correspondence is also a powerful technical tool for obtaining new
results in both theories. Some very difficult problems in one theory
might turn out to be easy to solve in the other one. For example, it has
been shown that the very hard problem of doing calculation in the
strongly coupled gauge theory can be done easily using classical
supergravity in @xmath . In this thesis, among other things, we will
provide another such example. We use the free gauge theory to study type
IIB string theory in a highly curved plane wave background, where the
seemingly intractable problem of computing string interaction amplitudes
to all loops becomes easy and computable!

In Chapter 3 we first review the AdS/CFT conjecture and discuss the
tests of it in the regime where string theory can be approximated by
classical supergravtiy. Then we focus on the more recent development of
string theory on plane wave backgrounds [ 13 ] . The plane wave
background can be obtained as Penrose limit of @xmath [ 14 ] . The study
of AdS/CFT in this limit is very interesting, since the gauge theory is
weakly coupled and computable, and we can go beyond the classical
supergravity approximation. Finally we will go beyond the plane wave
limit, where the strings blow up into some higher dimensional objects
known as giant gravitons [ 15 ] .

Although there are some conceptual connections, Chapter 2 and Chapter 3
are roughly technically independent of each other. I have provided
self-contain introduction to each chapters. The readers can read
individual chapter according to their own interests and needs. We hope
this writing might be of some values to beginning students as well as
active researchers in the field. However, this thesis focus mostly on
the author’s own work, and is not a comprehensive review of various
subjects presented here. Therefore I apologize in advance for those
authors whose works are less emphasized here.

## Chapter 2 Topics in Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

### 2.1 Supersymmetric Lagrangian

We start in this section by introducing the notation of @xmath
supersymmetry in @xmath dimensions. Then we review the Seiberg-Witten
solution of @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory [ 1 , 2 ] , and how to
use the Seiberg-Witten curve to study @xmath supersymmetric gauge
theory. There are many excellent reviews on this subject. For a general
introduction to supersymmetry in 4 dimension see e.g. [ 16 , 17 ] . For
review of @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory see e.g. [ 18 , 19 ] .

There are two kinds of multiplets in @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory
in 4 dimensions, the chiral multiplet @xmath and the gauge or vector
multiplet @xmath . We will consider theory with @xmath or @xmath gauge
group. The vector multiplet @xmath is in the adjoint representation of
the gauge group, and the chiral multiplet can be in adjoint or
(anti)fundamental representations. The gauge field strength is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the glueball superfield is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the superspace covariant derivatives. We use
the notations of [ 16 ] . The gluino condensate @xmath is a commuting
field constructed out of a pair of fermionic operators @xmath . We can
write a general @xmath Lagrangian with a chiral and a vector multiplet
in the adjoint representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are known as Kahler potential and superpotential.
We have used superfield notation in writing the Lagrangian. After
integrating over @xmath , one can find the usual potential consisting of
“D-term” and “F-term” coming from integrating out the auxiliary fields
@xmath and @xmath .

The Lagrangian ( 2.3 ) is usually referred to as tree level or bare
Lagragian. In asymptotically free gauge theory, which will be our focus,
the theory becomes strongly coupled and non-perturbative below some
energy scale usually referred to as @xmath . The scale @xmath is
generated dynamically by dimensional transmutation. We refer to the
Lagrangian that describe the full quantum dynamics below scale @xmath as
effective or Wilsonian Lagrangian. The effective Lagrangian is
constrained by many properties such as holomorphy. In a confining gauge
theory, if we assume the glueball @xmath is a good variable to describe
low energy dynamics, then the effective superpotential is a function of
@xmath and @xmath known as the glueball superpotential @xmath . The
glueball has a mass scale comparable to @xmath . If we only consider IR
dynamics with energy scale much less than @xmath , then we can
“integrate out” the glueball in @xmath and find the low energy effective
superpotential @xmath . In this thesis we are primarily concerned with
the computations of glueball superpotentials in @xmath supersymmetric
gauge theory.

##### The Veneziano-Yankielowicz Superpotential

The glueball superpotential of a @xmath gauge theory consists of two
parts: the Veneziano-Yankielowicz superpotential and a perturbative
part.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Veneziano-Yankielowicz superpotential has been known for a long time
[ 20 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the coefficient of one-loop @xmath function of the gauge
theory. In @xmath gauge theory with an adjoint chiral multiplet, @xmath
; while in pure @xmath gauge theory @xmath . We can “integrate out” the
glueball in Veneziano-Yankielowicz superpotential ( 2.5 ) by solve the
equation of motion for glueball @xmath , and plug it back into equation
( 2.5 ). For example, for pure @xmath gauge theory the superpotential
only consists of the Veneziabo-Yankielowicz part, we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the known low energy superpotantial of pure guage theory without
the chiral superfield in ( 2.3 ). It is generated nonperturbatively by
instanton.

##### Seiberg-Witten curve

Now we consider @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory. There are two kinds
of @xmath multiplet usually referred to as @xmath vector multiplet and
@xmath hypermultiplet. A @xmath vector multiplet consists of a @xmath
vector multiplet and a @xmath chiral multiplet in the adjoint
representation; while a @xmath hypermultiplet consists of two @xmath
chiral multiplets. The Lagrangian @xmath theory is determined by only
one holomorphic function of the chiral superfield known as
“prepotential”. The pure @xmath super Yang-Mills has one @xmath vector
multiplet, and is a special case of the Lagrangian ( 2.3 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The modili space of vacua of the theory can be parameterized by the
expectation value of gauge invariant operators @xmath , @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1
Sometimes it is convenient to take the gauge group to be @xmath and keep
the parameter @xmath . The @xmath factor decouples in the inferred and
will not affect our discussion.

Seiberg and Witten gives a solution of low energy effective prepotential
of ( 2.7 ) [ 1 ] . Here we will not go into the details of the solution,
but instead directly use the Seiberg-Witten Curve. The Seiberg-Witten
curve of the pure @xmath super Yang-Mills is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is degree @xmath polynomial parameterized by @xmath , and
can be explicitly obtained by writing the determinant in terms of
traces.

We can break the @xmath supersymmetry by adding a degree @xmath tree
level superpotential to ( 2.7 ) with @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Classically, the vacuum structure is given by the F-term and D-term
equation. The D-term equation requires @xmath to be diagonal, and the
F-term equation requires @xmath . In the IR we have a pure Yang-Mills
with gauge group broken to @xmath . Quantum mechanically, the tree level
superpotential lift the points in the moduli space of vacua except those
points where at least @xmath mutually local monopoles becomes massless.
The presence of the superpotential then forces the monopoles to condense
and cause the confinement of @xmath electric charge. These points are
characterized by @xmath ( @xmath ) double roots in the Seiberg-Witten
curve.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The original Coulomb moduli space is a @xmath -dimensional space
parameterized by @xmath . The constrain to satisfy ( 2.10 ) restricts
the moduli space to a @xmath -dimensional sub-space. When @xmath , the
low energy degree of freedom has only a decoupled @xmath factor from the
original @xmath gauge group and the remaining @xmath confines. In this
@xmath vacuum, known as the confining vacuum, the one-parameter explicit
solution of @xmath is known to be given by the Chebyshev polynomials [
21 ] . The study of Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture is rather simple in the
confining vacuum. We will focus on the confining vacuum in this chapter,
until in the last section, where we explore interpolation between
various vacua.

To find the low energy effective superpotential, we minimize the tree
level superpotential ( 2.60 ) in the @xmath -dimensional sub-space of
vacua constrained by the factorization ( 2.10 ). The resulting low
energy effective @xmath does not include the glueball superfield @xmath
. We can reverse the “integrate out” procedure to “integrate in” the
glueball. To match the Veneziano-Yankielowicz superpotential, the
glueball superpotential must satisfy @xmath .

##### An example

The above discussion seems a little abstract. We now consider an
explicit example. In confining vacuum, the solution of Seiberg-Witten
factorization can be derived from the Chebyshev polynomials and is given
by [ 21 , 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and we use @xmath to parameterize the one-parameter space of
vacua. It will be integrated out shortly. We consider the following
superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 2.11 ) we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We minimize the tree level superpotential ( 2.12 ) over @xmath and find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the following procedure to “integrate in” the glueball. We set
@xmath , and impose the following equation in order to match the
Veneziano-Yankielowicz superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the effective glueball superpotential is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One can verify this procedure by integrate out @xmath and reproduce (
2.15 ). We can also eliminate the variable @xmath by solving @xmath in
terms of @xmath from ( 2.16 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plug this into ( 2.1 ) and expand in powers of the glueball @xmath we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The leading term is indeed the Veneziano-Yankielowicz superpotential.

### 2.2 Matrix Models and Dijkgraaf-Vafa Conjecture

#### 2.2.1 Matrix Models and saddle point method

In this subsection we review the solution of the matrix model by saddle
point approximation in planar limit. The saddle point method is a
standard technique of matrix model reviewed in e.g [ 23 ] . We consider
a simple example first studied in [ 24 ] . It is a Hermitian @xmath
matrix model with a potential similar to the tree level superpotential (
2.12 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In large @xmath limit only planar diagram survives. The free energy of
the matrix model can be computed by perturbative method by doing the
combinatorics of the planar Feymann diagram. However, the matrix model
can be solved by saddle point method [ 24 ] . The solution will
conveniently sum up all loop planar amplitude for us. The large @xmath
limit planar free energy @xmath of the matrix model is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath are the @xmath eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath is the free
energy, which can be evaluated by saddle point approximation at the
planar limit. The @xmath term comes from the standard Vandermonde
determinant [ 23 ] . This matrix model is Hermitian with rank @xmath .

For a one-cut solution, the density of eigenvalues

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

becomes continuous in an interval @xmath when @xmath goes to infinity in
the planar limit for some @xmath . Here the interval is symmetric around
zero since our model is an even function. The normalization condition
for eigenvalue density is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can rewrite ( 2.2.1 ) in terms of the eigenvalue density in the
continuum limit as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In large @xmath limit, the free energy is dominated by the saddle point
distribution of eigenvalues @xmath . The saddle point equation that
determines @xmath can be found by standard variation of the above
action. We find the saddle point equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means principal value integration.

The solution of @xmath to ( 2.25 ) can be obtained by standard matrix
model techniques by introducing a resolvent. The answer is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging the solution into ( 2.23 ) we obtain the equation that
determine the parameters @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting these expressions into ( 2.2.1 ) gives us the free energy
in the planar limit @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 2.29 ) together with ( 2.27 ) give the planar free energy. We
can also expand the free energy in powers of the couplings, by using (
2.27 ) to solve for @xmath perturbatively

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Plugging this back into ( 2.29 ) we find the free energy as a
perturbative series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result sums up all loop amplitude of the planar diagram
combinatorics as explicitly demonstrated in [ 24 ] .

#### 2.2.2 Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture and a diagrammatic derivation

Dijkgraaf and Vafa made a remarkable proposal that the glueball
superpotential and other holomorphic data of @xmath supersymmetric gauge
theories in four dimensions can be computed from an auxiliary matrix
model [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] . While the original proposal arose from
consideration of stringy dualities arising in context of geometrically
engineered field theories [ 25 , 26 ] , two subsequent papers have
suggested direct field theory proofs of the proposal [ 27 , 28 ] . These
works considered @xmath gauge theories with an adjoint chiral matter
multiplet @xmath and a tree-level superpotential @xmath . Using somewhat
different techniques ( [ 27 ] uses properties of superspace perturbation
theory, while [ 28 ] relies on factorization of chiral correlation
functions, symmetries, and the Konishi anomaly) these papers conclude
that:

1.  The computation of the effective superpotential as a function of the
    glueball superfield reduces to computing matrix integrals.

2.  Because of holomorphy and symmetries (or properties of superspace
    perturbation theory), only planar Feynman diagrams contribute.

3.  These diagrams can be summed up by the large- @xmath limit of an
    auxiliary Matrix model. The field theory effective superpotential is
    obtained as a derivative of the Matrix model free energy.

Various generalizations and extensions of these ideas ( e.g. , @xmath
theories [ 29 ] , fundamental matter [ 30 ] , non-supersymmetric cases [
31 ] , other gauge groups [ 32 ] , baryonic matter [ 33 ] ,
gravitational corrections [ 34 ] , Seiberg Duality [ 35 ] , some scaling
properties [ 36 ] , and using holomorphy to solve matrix model [ 37 ] )
have been considered in the literature. For a review see [ 38 ] . In
what follows we focus on the glueball superpotential in the confining
vacuum, although the Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture also concerns other
holomorphic data such as the low energy @xmath gauge coupling constant.

##### The statement of the conjecture and an explicit check

Condiser the following @xmath @xmath gauge theory

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a single-trace tree level superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the confining vacuum, the low energy degree of freedom consists a
decoupled @xmath and confining @xmath . The low energy dynamics of the
confining @xmath can be described by a glueball superfield @xmath . The
effective glueball superpotential is the Veneziano-Yankielowicz part
plus a perturbative part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dijkgraaf and Vafa considered the free energy of a corresponding matrix
model with the same potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We take a large @xmath limit with the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath fixed, so
only planar diagrams contribute to the free energy. The free energy of
matrix model can be expressed as a power series of the ’t Hooft coupling
constant @xmath . A planar diagram with @xmath index loops (i.e. “holes”
in the Feymann diagram) contributes @xmath to the free energy.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Dijkgraaf and Vafa identified the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath with the
glueball in the gauge theory and conjectured the perturbative part of
the superpotential is given by the derivative of the matrix model free
energy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Dijkgraaf and Vafa also pointed out the Veneziano-Yankielowicz term in
@xmath arises from the volume factor in the integration over matrices in
( 2.35 ), but here we will not explore this point. We should note the
rank the field theory gauge group @xmath is finite, but the matrix model
is a @xmath matrix with @xmath to select planar diagrams.

Now we can make a simple check of the Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture.
Consider the superpotential we studied in ( 2.12 ) ( 2.20 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

In subsection 2.2.1 we solve the matrix model free energy ( 2.31 ) in
planar limit. We have took the ’t Hooft coupling constant to be @xmath
in subsection 2.2.1 . It is not difficult to recover the ’t Hooft
coupling constant in the free energy expression ( 2.31 ), and we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture states that the effective glueball
superpotential is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is in agreement with the glueball superpotential ( 2.19 ) we
derived from Seiberg-Witten curve. Thus we provide a check of
Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture in this simple case. It is easy to show the
effective glueball superpotential agrees with matrix model computation
to all order in @xmath , by keeping the exact expression together with
the constraining equation. For general arbitrary polynomial single-trace
tree level superpotential, the Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture is checked in
confining vacuum in [ 49 ] . Some non-confining vacuum cases are studied
in [ 39 ] .

##### A diagrammatic derivation of Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture

In section 2.3 we will use the diagrammatic approach in [ 27 ] to derive
glueball superpotential of gauge theory with a double-trace tree level
superpotential. We give a schematic review here.

  1. The Power of Holomorphy:  

    We are interested in expressing the effective superpotential in
    terms of the chiral glueball superfield @xmath . Holomorphy tells us
    that it will be independent of the parameters of the
    anti-holomorphic part of the tree-level superpotential. Therefore,
    without loss of generality, we can choose a particularly simple form
    for @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Integrating out the anti-holomorphic fields and performing standard
    superspace manipulations as discussed in Sec. 2 of [ 27 ] , gives

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    as the part of the action that is relevant for computing the
    effective potential as a function of @xmath . Here, @xmath is the
    d’Alembertian, and @xmath is the tree-level superpotential, expanded
    as @xmath . (The reader may consult Sec. 2 of [ 27 ] for a
    discussion of various subtleties such as why the @xmath can be taken
    as the ordinary d’Alembertian as opposed to a gauge covariantized
    @xmath ).

  2. The Propagator:  

    After reduction into the form ( 2.42 ), the quadratic part gives the
    propagator. We write the covariant derivative in terms of Grassmann
    momentum variables

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.43)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and it has been shown in [ 27 ] that by rescaling the momenta we can
    put @xmath since all @xmath dependence cancels out. Then the
    momentum space representation of the propagator is simply

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.44)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the Schwinger time parameter of @xmath -th Feynman
    propagator. Here the precise form of the @xmath depends on the
    representation of the gauge group that is carried by the field
    propagating in the loop.

  3. Calculation of Feynman Diagrams:  

    The effective superpotential as a function of the glueball @xmath is
    a sum of vacuum Feynman diagrams computed in the background of a
    fixed constant @xmath leading to insertions of this field along
    propagators. In general there will be @xmath momentum loops, and the
    corresponding momenta must be integrated over yielding the
    contribution

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.45)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

    to the overall amplitude. We will show that th @xmath dependence in
    @xmath cancels later and thus explain the origin of the last line.
    Here @xmath labels momentum loops, while @xmath labels propagators.
    The momenta in the propagators are linear combinations of the loop
    momenta because of momentum conservation.

  4. Bosonic Momentum Integrations:  

    The bosonic contribution can be expressed as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.46)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where we have defined the momentum of the @xmath -th propagator in
    terms of the independent loop momenta @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    via the matrix elements @xmath and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.48)
      -- -------- -- --------

  5. Which Diagrams Contribute:  

    Since each momentum loop comes with two fermionic @xmath
    integrations ( 2.45 ), a non-zero amplitude will require the
    insertion of @xmath @xmath s. From ( 2.44 ) we see that that @xmath
    insertions arise from the power series expansion of the fermionic
    part of the propagator and that each @xmath is accompanied by a
    @xmath . So in total we expect an amplitude containing @xmath
    factors of @xmath . Furthermore, since we wish to compute the
    superpotential as a function of @xmath each index loop can only have
    zero or two @xmath insertions. These considerations together imply
    that if a diagram contributes to the effective superpotential as
    function of the @xmath , then number of index loops @xmath must be
    greater than or equal to the number of momentum loops @xmath , i.e.
    ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.49)
      -- -------- -- --------

  6. Planarity:  

    The above considerations are completely general. Now let us
    specialize to @xmath theories with single-trace operators. A diagram
    with @xmath momentum loops has

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.50)
      -- -------- -- --------

    index loops, where @xmath is the genus of the surface generated by
    ’t Hooft double line notation. Combining this with ( 2.49 ) tell us
    that @xmath , i.e. , only planar diagrams contribute.

  7. Doing The Fermionic Integrations:  

    First let us discuss the combinatorial factors that arise from the
    fermionic integrations. Since the number of momentum loops is one
    less than the number of index loops, we must choose which of the
    latter to leave free of @xmath insertions. This gives a
    combinatorial factor of @xmath , and the empty index loop gives a
    factor of @xmath from the sum over color. For each loop with two
    @xmath insertions we get a factor of @xmath . Since we are dealing
    with adjoint matter, the action of @xmath is through a commutator

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.51)
      -- -------- -- --------

    in the Schwinger term. As in the bosonic integrals above, it is
    convenient to express the fermionic propagator momenta as sums of
    the independent loop momenta:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.52)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where the @xmath are the same matrix elements as introduced above.
    The authors of [ 27 ] also find it convenient to introduce auxiliary
    fermionic variables via the equation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.53)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Here, the @xmath denotes the left- or right-action of the
    commutator. In terms of the @xmath , the fermionic contribution to
    the amplitude can be written as

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.54)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  8. Localization:  

    The Schwinger parameter dependence in the bosonic and fermionic
    momentum integrations cancel exactly

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.55)
      -- -------- -- --------

    implying that the computation of the effective superpotential as a
    function of the @xmath localizes to summing matrix integrals. All
    the four-dimensional spacetime dependence has washed out. The full
    effective superpotential @xmath is thus a sum over planar matrix
    graphs with the addition of the Veneziano-Yankielowicz term for the
    pure Yang-Mills theory [ 20 ] . The terms in the effective action
    proportional to @xmath arise exclusively from planar graphs with
    @xmath momentum loops giving a perturbative computation of the exact
    superpotential.

  9. The Matrix Model:  

    The localization of the field theory computation to a set of planar
    matrix diagrams suggests that the sum of diagrams can be computed
    exactly by the large- @xmath limit of a bosonic Matrix model. (We
    distinguish between @xmath , the rank of the matrices in the Matrix
    model and @xmath , the rank of the gauge group.) The prescription of
    Dijkgraaf and Vafa does exactly this for single-trace
    superpotentials. Since the number of momentum loops is one less than
    the number of index loops in a planar diagram, i.e. @xmath , the net
    result of the bosonic and fermionic integrations in ( 2.55 ) can be
    written as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.56)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Because of this, the perturbative part of the effective
    superpotential, namely the sum over planar diagrams in the field
    theory, can be written in terms of the genus zero free energy @xmath
    of the corresponding matrix model:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    Thus we completed the schematic review of the derivation of the
    Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture in [ 27 ] .

### 2.3 Multi-trace Superpotentials

A stringent and simple test of the Dijkgraaf-Vafa proposal and of the
proofs presented in [ 27 , 28 ] is to consider superpotentials
containing multi-trace terms such as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 40 ] we find that for such multi-trace theories:

1.  The computation of the effective superpotential as a function of the
    glueball superfield still reduces to computing matrix integrals.

2.  Holomorphy and symmetries do not forbid non-planar contributions;
    nevertheless only a certain subset of the planar diagrams
    contributes to the effective superpotential.

3.  This subclass of planar graphs can be summed up by the large- @xmath
    limit of an associated multi-trace Matrix model. However, because of
    differences in combinatorial factors, the field theory effective
    superpotential cannot be obtained simply as a derivative of the
    multi-trace Matrix model free energy as in [ 5 , 27 ] .

4.  Multi-trace theories can be linearized in traces by the addition of
    auxiliary singlet fields @xmath . The superpotentials for these
    theories as a function of both the @xmath and the glueball can be
    computed from an associated Matrix model. This shows that the basic
    subtlety involves the correct identification of the field theory
    glueball as a variable in a related Matrix model. This is similar in
    spirit to the UV ambiguity of @xmath gauge theory with antisymmetric
    matter discussed in [ 41 ]

It is worth mentioning several further reasons why multi-trace
superpotentials are interesting. First of all, the general deformation
of a pure @xmath field theory to an @xmath theory with adjoint matter
involves multi-trace superpotentials, and therefore these deformations
are important to understand. What is more, multi-trace superpotentials
cannot be geometrically engineered [ 42 ] in the usual manner for a
simple reason: in geometric engineering of gauge theories the tree-level
superpotential arises from a disc diagram for open strings on a D-brane
and these, having only one boundary, produce single-trace terms. In this
context, even if multi-trace terms could be produced by quantum
corrections, their coefficients would be determined by the tree-level
couplings and would not be freely tunable. Hence comparison of the
low-energy physics arising from multi-trace superpotentials with the
corresponding Matrix model calculations is a useful probe of the extent
to which the Dijkgraaf-Vafa proposal is tied to its geometric and
D-brane origins. In addition to these motivations, it is worth recalling
that the double scaling limit of the @xmath matrix model with a
double-trace potential is related to a theory of two-dimensional gravity
with a cosmological constant. This matrix model also displays phase
transitions between smooth, branched polymer and intermediate phases [
43 ] . It would be interesting to understand whether and how these
phenomena manifest themselves as effects in a four dimensional field
theory. Finally, multi-trace deformations of field theories have
recently made an appearance in the contexts of the @xmath /CFT
correspondence and a proposed definition of string theories with a
nonlocal worldsheet theory [ 44 ] .

Now we follow [ 40 ] to compute the multi-trace superpotential.

#### 2.3.1 A classification of multi-trace diagrams

We have reviewed in subsection 2.2.2 the field theory calculation of the
effective superpotential for a single-trace theory localizes to a matrix
model computation. In this subsection we show how the argument is
modified when the tree-level superpotential includes multi-trace terms.
We consider an @xmath theory with the tree-level superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

To set the stage for our perturbative computation of the effective
superpotential we begin by analyzing the structure of the new diagrams
introduced by the double-trace term. If @xmath , the connected diagrams
we get are the familiar single-trace ones; we will call these primitive
diagrams . When @xmath propagators in primitive diagrams can be spliced
together by new double-trace vertices. It is useful to do an explicit
example to see how this splicing occurs.

As an example, let us study the expectation value of the double-trace
operator: @xmath . To lowest order in couplings, the two ways to
contract @xmath s give rise to the two diagrams in Figure 2.1 . When we
draw these diagrams in double line notation, we find that Figure 2.1 a
corresponding to @xmath has four index loops, while Figure 2.1 b
corresponding to @xmath has only two index loops. Both these graphs have
two momentum loops. For our purposes both of these Feynman diagrams can
also be generated by a simple pictorial algorithm: we splice together
propagators of primitive diagrams using the vertex in Figure 2.1 c, as
displayed in Figure 2.2 a and b. All graphs of the double-trace theory
can be generated from primitive diagrams by this simple algorithm. Note
that the number of index loops never changes when primitive diagrams are
spliced by this pictorial algorithm.

If a splicing of diagrams does not create a new momentum loop we say
that the diagrams have been pasted together. This happens when the
diagrams being spliced are originally disconnected as, for example, in
Figure 2.2 a. In fact because of momentum conservation, no momentum at
all flows between pasted diagrams. If a new momentum loop is created we
say that that the diagrams have been pinched . This happens when two
propagators within an already connected diagram are spliced together as,
for example, in Figure 2.2 b. In this example one momentum loop becomes
two because momentum can flow through the double-trace vertex. Further
examples of pinched diagrams are given in Figure 2.3 where the new
momentum loop arises from momentum flowing between the primitive
diagrams via double-trace vertices.

To make the above statement more clear, let us provide some
calculations. First, according to our operation, the number of double
index loops never increases whether under pasting or pinching. Second,
we can calculate the total number of independent momentum loops @xmath
by @xmath where @xmath is the number of propagators and @xmath , the
number of vertices. If we connect two separate diagrams by pasting , we
will have @xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the total number of momentum loops is just the sum of
the individual ones. If we insert the double-trace vertex in a single
connected diagram by pinching , we will have @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

which indicates the creation of one new momentum loop.

Having understood the structure of double-trace diagrams in this way, we
can adapt the techniques of [ 27 ] to our case. The steps 1-4 as
described in Sec. 2.2.2 go through without modification since they are
independent of the details of the tree-level superpotential. However the
steps 5-9 are modified in various ways. First of all naive counting of
powers of fermionic momenta as in step 5 leads to the selection rule

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total number of index loops and @xmath is the total
number of momentum loops. (The holomorphy and symmetry based arguments
of [ 28 ] would lead to the same conclusion.) Since no momentum flows
between pasted primitive diagrams it is clear that this selection rule
would permit some of the primitive components to be non-planar.
Likewise, both planar and some non-planar pinching diagrams are
admitted. An example of a planar pinching diagram that can contribute
according to this rule is Figure 2.2 b. However, we will show in the
next subsection that more careful consideration of the structure of
perturbative diagrams shows that only diagrams built by pasting planar
primitive graphs give non-zero contributions to the effective
superpotential.

#### 2.3.2 Which diagrams contribute: selection rules

In order to explain which diagrams give non-zero contributions to the
multi-trace superpotential it is useful to first give another
perspective on the fermionic momentum integrations described in steps
5-7 in Sec. 2.2.2 . A key step in the argument of [ 27 ] was to split
the glueball insertions up in terms of auxiliary fermionic variables
associated with each of the momentum loops as in ( 2.53 ). We will take
a somewhat different approach. In the end we want to attach zero or two
fields @xmath to each index loop, where @xmath labels the index loop,
and the total number of such fields must bring down enough fermionic
momenta to soak up the corresponding integrations. On each oriented
propagator, with momentum @xmath , we have a left index line which we
label @xmath and a right index line which we label @xmath . Because of
the commutator in ( 2.51 ), the contribution of this propagator will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that we are omitting @xmath indices, which are simply replaced by
the different index loop labels. In a standard planar diagram for a
single-trace theory, we have one more index loop than momentum loop. So
even in this case the choice of auxiliary variables in ( 2.64 ) is not
quite the same as in ( 2.53 ), since the number of @xmath s is twice the
number of index loops in ( 2.64 ) while the number of auxiliary
variables is twice the number of momentum loops in ( 2.53 ).

Now in order to soak up the fermionic @xmath integrations in ( 2.45 ),
we must expand ( 2.64 ) in powers and extract terms of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of momentum loops and all the @xmath are
distinct. The range of @xmath ’s are over @xmath , with @xmath the
number of index loops. In the integral over the anticommuting momenta,
we have all @xmath @xmath appearing. However, one linear combination,
which is the ‘center of mass’ of the @xmath , does not appear. This can
be seen from ( 2.64 ): if we add a constant to all @xmath
simultaneously, the propagators do not change. Thus, without loss of
generality, one can set the @xmath corresponding to the outer loop in a
planar diagram equal to zero. Let us assume this variable is @xmath and
later reinstate it. All @xmath corresponding to inner index loops
remain, leaving as many of these as there are momentum loops in a planar
diagram. It is then straightforward to demonstrate that the @xmath
appearing in ( 2.53 ) in linear combinations reproduce the relations
between propagator momenta and loop momenta. In other words, in this
“gauge” where the @xmath corresponding to the outer loop is zero, we
recover the decomposition of @xmath in terms of auxiliary fermions
associated to momentum loops that was used in [ 27 ] and reviewed in (
2.53 ) above.

We can now reproduce the overall factors arising from the fermionic
integrations in the planar diagrams contributing to ( 2.54 ). The result
from the @xmath integrations is some constant times

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Reinstating @xmath by undoing the gauge choice, namely by shifting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , ( 2.66 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The terms on which each index loop there has either zero or two @xmath
insertions are easily extracted:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this final result we should replace each of the @xmath by @xmath ,
and therefore the final result is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

as derived in [ 27 ] and reproduced in ( 2.54 ).

Having reproduced the result for single-trace theories we can easily
show that all non-planar and pinched contributions to the multi-trace
effective superpotential vanish. Consider any diagram with @xmath
momentum loops and @xmath index loops. By the same arguments as above,
we attach some @xmath to each index loop, and again, the ‘center of
mass’ decouples due to the commutator nature of the propagator.
Therefore, in the momentum integrals, only @xmath inequivalent @xmath
appear. By doing @xmath momentum integrals, we generate a polynomial of
order @xmath in the @xmath inequivalent @xmath . Each index loop can
have zero or two @xmath ’s. Therefore, we reach the important conclusion
that the total number of index loops must be larger than the number of
momentum loops

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the naive selection rule ( 2.63 ) says that it could be larger or
equal.

Consider pasting and pinching @xmath primitive diagrams together, each
with @xmath index loops and @xmath momentum loops. According to the
rules set out in the previous subsection, the total number of index
loops and the total number of momentum loops are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

with equality only when all the primitive diagrams are pasted together
without additional momentum loops. Now the total number of independent
@xmath s that appear in full diagram is @xmath since in each primitive
diagram the “center of mass” @xmath will not appear. So the full diagram
is non-vanishing only when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

This inequality is already saturated by the momenta appearing in the
primitive diagrams if they are planar. So we can conclude two things.
First, only planar primitive diagrams appear in the full diagram.
Second, only pasted diagrams are non-vanishing, since pinching
introduces additional momentum loops which would violate this
inequality.

###### Summary:

The only diagrams that contribute to the effective multi-trace
superpotential are pastings of planar primitive diagrams. These are
tree-like diagrams which string together double-trace vertices with
“propagators” and “external legs” which are themselves primitive
diagrams of the single-trace theory. Below we will explicitly evaluate
such diagrams and raise the question of whether there is a generating
functional for them.

#### 2.3.3 Summing pasted diagrams

In the previous subsection we generalized steps 5 and 6 of the the
single trace case in Sec. 2.2.2 to the double-trace theory, and found
that the surviving diagrams consist of planar connected primitive vacuum
graphs pasted together with double-trace vertices. Because of momentum
conservation, no momentum can flow through the double-trace vertices in
such graphs. Consequently the fermionic integrations and the proof of
localization can be carried out separately for each primitive graph, and
the entire diagram evaluates to a product of the primitive components
times a suitable power of @xmath , the double-trace coupling.

Let @xmath , @xmath be the planar primitive graphs that have been pasted
together, each with @xmath index loops and @xmath momentum loops to make
a double-trace diagram @xmath . Then, using the result ( 2.55 ) for the
single-trace case, the Schwinger parameters in the bosonic and fermionic
momentum integrations cancel giving a factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last factor arises from the number of ways in which the
glueballs @xmath can be inserted into the propagators of each primitive
diagram. Defining @xmath as the glueball symmetry factor, @xmath as the
number of primitive components, @xmath as the total number of index
loops and @xmath as the total number of momentum loops, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can assemble this with the Veneziano-Yankielowicz contribution
contribution for pure gauge theory [ 20 ] to write the complete glueball
effective action as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the combinatorial factor for generating the graph @xmath
from the Feynman diagrams of the double-trace theory. We can define a
free energy related to above diagrams as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a generating function for the diagrams that contribute to the
effective superpotential, but does not include the combinatorial factors
arising from the glueball insertions. In the single-trace case that
combinatorial factor was simply @xmath and so we could write @xmath .
Here @xmath is a product rather than a sum @xmath , and so the effective
superpotential cannot be written as a derivative of the free energy.

Notice that if we rescale @xmath to @xmath , there will be a @xmath
factor from @xmath insertions of the double-trace vertex. This factor
will change the @xmath dependence in ( 2.76 ) to just @xmath for every
diagram. This implies that the matrix diagrams contributing to the
superpotential are exactly those that survive the large @xmath limit of
a bosonic @xmath Matrix model with a potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.4 Perturbative calculations

Thus equipped, let us begin our explicit perturbation calculations. We
shall tabulate all combinatoric data of the pasting diagrams up to third
order. Here @xmath and @xmath is obtained by counting the contractions
of @xmath s. For pure single-trace diagrams the values of @xmath have
been computed in Table 1 in [ 24 ] , so we can utilize their results.

##### First Order

To first order in coupling constants, all primitive (diagram (b)) and
pasting diagrams (diagram (a)) are presented in Figure 2.4 . Let us
illustrate by showing the computations for (a). There is a total of four
index loops and hence @xmath for this diagram. Moreover, since it is
composed of the pasting of two primitive diagrams each of which has
@xmath ; thus, we have @xmath . Finally, @xmath because there is only
one contraction possible, viz , @xmath .

In summary we have:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.79)
  -- -- -- --------

##### Second Order

To second order in the coupling all primitive ((c) and (d)) and pasting
diagrams ((a) and (b)) are drawn in Figure 2.5 and the combinatorics are
summarized in table ( 2.80 ). Again, let us do an illustrative example.
Take diagram (b), there are five index loops, so @xmath ; more precisely
it is composed of pasting a left primitive diagram with @xmath and a
right primitive with @xmath , so @xmath . Now for @xmath , we need
contractions of the form @xmath ; there are @xmath ways of doing so.
Furthermore, for this even overall power in the coupling, we have a
minus sign when expanding out the exponent. Therefore @xmath for this
diagram.

In summary, we have:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.80)
  -- -- -- --------

##### Third Order

Finally, the third order diagrams are drawn in Figure 2.6 . The
combinatorics are tabulated in ( 2.81 ).

Here the demonstrative example is diagram (b), which is composed of
pasting four diagrams, each with @xmath , thus @xmath and @xmath . For
@xmath , first we have a factor @xmath from the exponential. Next we
have contractions of the form @xmath ; there are @xmath ways of doing
this. Thus altogether we have @xmath for this diagram.

In summary:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.81)
  -- -- -- --------

##### Obtaining the Effective Action

Now to the highlight of our calculation. From tables ( 2.79 ), ( 2.80 ),
and ( 2.81 ) we can readily compute the effective glueball
superpotential and free energy. We do so by summing the factors, with
the appropriate powers for @xmath , in accordance with ( 2.76 , 2.77 ).

We obtain, up to four-loop order,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.82)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and subsequently,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.83)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In [ 40 ] we check the free energy ( 2.82 ) are reproduced by the large
@xmath limit of the double trace matrix model ( 2.78 ). The double trace
matrix model can be solved by a mean field saddle point method [ 43 ] ,
and sum up exactly the same “planar pasted diagrams” that we described
above and give the free energy defined by ( 2.82 ). Furthermore, we show
that the glueball superpotential ( 2.83 ) is reproduced by the analysis
based on the Seiberg-Witten curve as in the single trace case. However,
unlike the single-trace case, the Matrix model will not reproduce the
combinatorial factors @xmath appearing in ( 2.76 ). This subtlety can be
thought of as arising from the question of how to correctly identify the
glueball in the matrix model, and can be seen more clearly when one
linearize the double trace by an auxialiary singlet field. Here we will
not explore these points further. Interested readers can consult [ 40 ]
for more details.

### 2.4 Phases of @xmath supersymmetric gauge theories

Traditionally, there are two senses in which two quantum field theories
can be “dual” to each other. On the one hand, two theories can be
equivalent to each other in the sense that all the correlation functions
of one can be computed from the other (and vice versa) by a suitable
identification of dual variables. Examples include the electric-magnetic
duality of the @xmath super Yang-Mills theory, or the AdS/CFT
correspondence. Another kind of duality, described by Seiberg for @xmath
supersymmetric field theories occurs when two different microscropic
theories have identical macroscopic (or infra-red) dynamics [ 45 ] . For
example, an @xmath supersymmetric @xmath gauge theory with @xmath
fundamental flavours has the same long distance physics as an @xmath
gauge theory with @xmath flavours. Motivated by the development of
Dijkgraaf-Vafa conjecture , Cachazo, Seiberg and Witten have proposed
another notion of duality in certain @xmath supersymmetric gauge
theories [ 46 ] . It is found in [ 46 ] that various vacua can be
smoothly connected in the phase diagrams. This is similar to the famous
M-theory phase diagrams, and one may hope to get more understanding of
the M-theory picture by studying these models. In this Section we first
review the case of pure gauge theory in [ 46 ] , then we consider the
case of theory with matter in the (anti)fundamental representation [ 47
, 48 ] . We will follow the approach in [ 48 ] . For related
observations and further generalization other gauge groups see [ 49 , 50
] .

#### 2.4.1 Phases of pure gauge theories

We consider our familiar example, the pure @xmath @xmath gauge theory
with one @xmath vector multiplet, and break the @xmath supersymmetry to
@xmath by a tree level superpotential of the adjoint chiral superfield
@xmath . For simplicity we consider a cubic tree level superpotential.
Classically, the gauge group is broken to @xmath . The question
addressed by Cachazo et al [ 46 ] , is whether two different classical
limits @xmath and @xmath can be smoothly connected in the strongly
coupled quantum mechanical regime. It is found that such an
interpolation is indeed possible. Let us briefly review the results in [
46 ] .

Quantum mechanically, once we turn on a cubic tree level cubic
superpotential, the points in the Coulomb moduli space that are not
lifted by the tree level superpotential are those points where at least
@xmath magnetic monopoles become massless and condense. This is
characterized by at least @xmath double roots in the Seiberg-Witten
curve. ² ² 2 The general solution to the factorization problem of @xmath
gauge group is not known except at the confining vacuum where @xmath
monopoles condense (See [ 51 ] for results on some other cases.) . In [
46 ] some specific cases, namely from @xmath to @xmath gauge group, are
studied since the factorization can be solved explicitly. Thus the
quantum moduli space is a two-dimensional sub-space of the original
Coulomb moduli space. Minimizing the tree level superpotential on this
sub-space we can find the discrete vacua of the theory. We can also
reverse the problem by fixing a point in the sub-space and solve for the
cubic tree level superpotential that produces vacuum at this given
point. When the classical limit @xmath is taken, we can see how the
gauge group is broken. It was found in [ 46 ] that the same branch of
solutions to the Seiberg-Witten curve factorization can have different
classical limits by taking different limits of the cubic tree level
superpotential.

In low energy there are two @xmath ’s. The @xmath and @xmath confine,
and give @xmath and @xmath discrete vacua according to Witten index. So
there are a total of @xmath discrete vacua in low energy. How can we
predict which vacua are in the same branch of the Seiberg-Witten curve
factorization? In [ 46 ] an order parameter, the confinement index , is
found. Vacua that have different confinement index can not be in the
same branch, while vacua that have the same confinement index may or may
not be in the same branch.

Let us discuss briefly the confinement index. Suppose @xmath is a Wilson
loop in the fundamental representation of the gauge group @xmath . To
see whether a theory confines, we put in @xmath -tensor product of the
Wilson loop @xmath , and see whether it has an area law. If the
representation of the Wilson loop contains gauge singlet, then it has no
area law and is unconfined ; otherwise it will have an area law and is
said to be confined. It is obvious that if two Wilson loops @xmath and
@xmath are unconfined, then the tensor product @xmath is also
unconfined. The confinement index is defined as the smallest positive
integer @xmath that the Wilson loop @xmath that is unconfined. According
to this definition, if @xmath , we say the vacuum is unconfined; if
@xmath , we say the vacuum is confined. In pure gauge theory, the Wilson
loop can be combined with the center of the gauge group that represents
the gluons to make electric screening and ’t Hooft loop to make magnetic
screening. For cubic tree level superpotentail, the gauge group is
broken to @xmath . There are @xmath discrete vacua that can be
parameterized by a pair of integers @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath .
The electric screening makes @xmath and @xmath unconfined, while the
magnetic screening makes @xmath unconfined. Taking into electric and
magnetic screening it is found in [ 46 ] that the confinement index
should be the greatest common divisor (GCD) of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
.

#### 2.4.2 Phases of gauge theories with flavors

It is interesting to understand how these above ideas extend to the case
where fundamental matter is included. In particular, how does Seiberg
duality of @xmath theories fit into the story of [ 46 ] ? Accordingly,
in [ 48 ] we study @xmath @xmath theory with an adjoint chiral multiplet
@xmath , and @xmath fundamental and anti-fundamental chiral multiplets
@xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ). We also add a superpotential @xmath . This
model is an @xmath @xmath gauge theory with @xmath fundamental
hypermultiplets which is deformed to @xmath by addition of the tree
level superpotential @xmath . ³ ³ 3 The coupling @xmath is required by
@xmath supersymmetry, and the mass terms @xmath is allowed for @xmath
supersymmetry.

First we can consider confinement in this case. A Wilson loop @xmath in
any representation can always combine with fundamental matter to make
gauge singlet, thus there is no area law. This is known as “maximal
screening” or “perfect screening”. It means there is no true confinement
once we have light fundamental matter. For example, in QCD if we try to
pull out of a single light quark by high energy electrons, the quark
will produce a cloud of gluons with energy density of the @xmath . This
cloud then pair produces quarks and antiquarks. Thus if quarks have a
mass much less than @xmath , it will be screened maximally and we will
not see single isolated quarks. The usual referring of “quark
confinement” in QCD really means maximal screening, and should not be
confused with the true color confinement we discuss here.

Since there is no confinement once we have (anti)fundamental matter, the
order parameter of confinement index used in pure gauge theory to
distinguish various phases is not immediately applicable here. In [ 47 ]
, a general tree level superpotential for the chiral superfield and mass
matrix for the quarks are considered. In this case the quarks can be
thought of as massive in classical limit @xmath and can be integrated
out. In low energy we are left with a few @xmath factors. It is found
that vacua with the same number of @xmath factors can be smoothly
connected to each other by changing the superpotential and mass matrix.

In the following we summarize the results in [ 48 ] where another
situation is considered. The interested readers can consult [ 48 ] for
more details. We consider the case that the quarks have the same mass
@xmath , and the cubic tree level always has a minimal point at @xmath .
In this case there will be massless quarks in low energy even in
classical limit @xmath . Thus the moduli space of vacua can have
different branches with the same number of @xmath ’s in low energy.

Classically, the D-term equation requires adjoint scalar to be diagonal.
Suppose the two roots of the @xmath is @xmath and @xmath , then diagonal
elements of @xmath have to be either @xmath or @xmath . So classically
the gauge group is broken to two pieces @xmath , with @xmath as @xmath
diagonal elements and @xmath as @xmath diagonal elements. The @xmath
fundamental flavors are massless in @xmath piece, but become massive in
the @xmath piece and can be integrated out in low energy . So
classically we have two decoupled pieces in low energy: @xmath with
@xmath massless flavors and pure @xmath theory. We denote such a
classical vacua as @xmath . We study whether we can go from the same
branch of strongly coupled regime to different classical limits by
taking different classical limits of the cubic tree level suprpotential.

The classical picture is modified significantly in the quantum theory.
We can analyze the @xmath quantum theory in two ways by strong coupling
analysis and weak coupling analysis. The strong coupling analysis is to
consider this theory as a small perturbation of a strongly coupled
@xmath gauge theory with tree level superpotential @xmath . The moduli
space of @xmath SQCD is analyzed in details in [ 52 ] . The
Seiberg-Witten curve encodes the low energy quantum dynamics of the
@xmath theory on the Coulomb branch. Turning on a tree-level
superpotential lifts almost all points on the Coulomb branch, except
points in the Higgs branch roots where a certain number of mutually
local monopoles and become massless. Furthermore, on this sub-manifold
of the Coulomb branch, the tree-level superpotential has to be minimized
to find the @xmath vacua. By varying the parameters of the
superpotential, these @xmath vacua can be moved around on the Coulomb
branch of @xmath moduli space. In particular, special corners in the
parameter space will place these vacua in regions where the @xmath gauge
symmetry breaking scale is much greater than @xmath , the @xmath
dynamical scale. Thus the gauge group is higgsed. These regions can then
be analyzed by weak coupling analysis.

In weak coupling analysis the description in terms of non-interacting
product gauge group factors is valid. More concretely, we can integrate
out (in each gauge group factor) the massive adjoint chiral field,
@xmath , which has a mass well above @xmath . The corresponding @xmath
theory thus obtained, valid below scales of order @xmath can be analyzed
in various group factors separately. In each factor, it will become
strongly coupled in the infra-red and will have vacua, details of which
will depend on the number of flavors charged under the group factor. We
can interpolate smoothly between vacua in the weak and strong coupling
regions by holomorphic variation of the parameters in the superpotential
@xmath because the theory has @xmath supersymemtry. What is perhaps most
interesting is the fact that different weak coupling regions with
different microscopic physics can be reached smoothly from the same
strongly coupled point.

##### An example

The above discussion seems a little abstract. Let us discuss an explicit
example with a rather rich phase structure. We will discuss the case of
a cubic tree level superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath . In this case the gauge group will break into two
factors in the semiclassical limit @xmath . Suppose the Seiberg-Witten
curve is @xmath . Then there are various @xmath ’th branches in which
the SW curve factorizes as @xmath . In the @xmath branches we have
massless flavors quantumly.

We consider the case of @xmath gauge theory with @xmath flavors in
@xmath non-baryonic branch. We have 2 double roots in the Seiberg-Witten
curve. Suppose the Seiberg-Witten curve factorize as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 2 double roots can have various distributions in the Seiberg-Witten
curve. We discuss these various branches and extrapolate to weak
coupling regimes.

###### Non-baryonic @xmath branch in @xmath distributions:

On this branch with the @xmath and @xmath distribution of roots, we have
@xmath , ( @xmath ), then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.86)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We can find the tree level superpotential that gives rise to the vacuum
by using a theorem in [ 26 ] and generalized to the case with flavors in
[ 48 ] . ⁴ ⁴ 4 There is a subtle of of additional contributions from the
flavor when @xmath . See [ 48 ] . Here we will not need to worry about
this for @xmath . It is found there the tree level superpotential is
determined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

So here we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.88)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

There are two solutions for @xmath : @xmath . In semiclassical limit,
each solution leads to the breaking pattern @xmath .

To count vacua, we fix @xmath and solve @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath are symmetric, we have only one solution for
each @xmath .

###### Non-baryonic @xmath branch in the @xmath distribution:

By shifting @xmath by a constant, we can arrange the two double roots to
be at @xmath and @xmath . The general case can be recovered by shifting
by a constant @xmath : @xmath , @xmath . The factorization we need is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.90)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

So @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath has to satisfy the following equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

This has three solutions which we denote by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Notice that ( 2.92 ) has the symmetry @xmath and @xmath . We now
consider the different semiclassical limits.

1.  @xmath and @xmath fixed and finite. Then from ( 2.92 ), find two
    solutions @xmath or @xmath when the second and fourth term in ( 2.92
    ) dominates, and the third solution @xmath blows up in the @xmath
    limit . We will ignore this solution. For @xmath and @xmath we
    obtain @xmath which implies that the breaking pattern is @xmath .

2.  @xmath , and @xmath with @xmath . The asymptotic behavior of @xmath
    can be read off from ( 2.92 ). We find the solutions @xmath when
    second and fourth term in ( 2.92 ) dominate and @xmath when the
    first and second terms dominate. Thus for @xmath we obtain @xmath ,
    which yields a singular limit since there is only one gauge group
    factor. For @xmath if @xmath the solution blows up and should be
    discarded. If @xmath we obtain @xmath , which is a singular limit.
    For @xmath we obtain a smooth semiclassical limit. In this case
    @xmath , and we obtain @xmath . Hence the breaking pattern is @xmath
    .

3.  @xmath , and @xmath with @xmath . The asymptotic behavior of @xmath
    can be again read off from ( 2.92 ). We find @xmath and @xmath For
    @xmath we get @xmath , which is a singular limit unless @xmath , in
    which case the gauge group breaks into @xmath . For @xmath we have
    @xmath , which is a singular limit unless @xmath , in which case the
    gauge group breaks into @xmath .

Something interesting has happened here. To determine classical limits,
we take a point on the factorization locus (parameterized by @xmath and
@xmath ) and then determine the superpotential which would yield that
point as its minimum. That leads to the consistency condition ( 2.92 ),
which has three solutions @xmath and @xmath . The three solutions lead
to different branches and different interpolation patterns: @xmath
smoothly interpolate between @xmath and @xmath . @xmath smoothly
interpolates between @xmath and @xmath . We do not encounter this
phenomenon in our other examples. For example, in the @xmath theory with
two flavors, the three classical limits smoothly inteplate between each
other with the same choice of @xmath . Notice that for the @xmath theory
with four flavors, the limit @xmath is not smoothly connected with
@xmath .

To count the number of vacua, we need to first fix @xmath and @xmath and
find the number of solutions for @xmath and the shifted constant @xmath
. From ( 2.91 ) we obtain the equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eliminating @xmath , we obtain the following equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus @xmath has eight solution. We keep @xmath and @xmath fixed and find
the asymptotic behavior of the eight roots when @xmath . First by
setting @xmath in ( 2.94 ) we find two roots at @xmath and six others
@xmath . The two non-zero solutions (which correspond to @xmath in case
1 above) lead to a semiclassical limit @xmath . We now analyze the six
solutions for @xmath which vanish in the @xmath limit. Assume @xmath .
Then from ( 2.94 ) we find that @xmath or @xmath . For @xmath the
dominant terms in ( 2.94 ) give @xmath and we find three roots with
@xmath . These solutions (which correspond to @xmath in case (2) above)
lead to the semiclassical limit @xmath . For @xmath the dominant terms (
2.94 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that @xmath . We obtain one solution (corresponding to
@xmath in case 3 above) with @xmath and two solutions (corresponding to
@xmath in case 3) with @xmath . These three solutions lead to the
semiclassical limit @xmath .

We can match the number of these strong coupling vacua with the number
obtained in the weak coupling region. In @xmath branch, @xmath has four
vacua where two from confining @xmath factor and two from the @xmath
factor with four flavors. Two of these four vacua are in @xmath
distribution and two, @xmath distribution. @xmath has three vacua in the
@xmath distribution while @xmath has three vacua in @xmath distribution.

##### What are the order parameters?

On a given branch, the vacua are all in the same phase. What order
parameters (or indices) distinguish between vacua on different branches?
An obvious characterization of a branch is the global symmetry group
(which in this case will be a flavor symmetry). One such index is @xmath
, which characterizes the meson VEV in various vacua in the weak
coupling region, and labels the root of the @xmath -th Higgs branch in
the strong coupling region. The global symmetry group must be the same
on each branch. On the @xmath -th branch, the global flavor symmetry is
broken as @xmath . Another fact which distinguishes the different
branches is if they are ‘baryonic’ or ‘non-baryonic’. These two types of
branches differ from each other in the number of condensed monopoles,
and hence have different number of @xmath s at low energies.
Furthermore, a finer distinction is possible on the non-baryonic @xmath
-th branches which arise when @xmath and @xmath . In these cases, there
are two types of non-baryonic branch. In the strong coupling region one
arises from a generic non-baryonic root, while the other is special case
arising when the non-baryonic root lies inside the baryonic root. These
two kinds of strong coupling vacua match up with two types weak coupling
vacua in which the meson matrix is degenerate and non-degenerate.
However, the various indices that are available to us are not refined
enough to provide sufficient conditions which determine the phase
structure completely. It would be interesting to find more order
parameters that can determine the phase structure.

## Chapter 3 Topics in the AdS/CFT Correspondence

### 3.1 Introduction: Classical Supergravity on @xmath and @xmath Super
Yang-Mills

It has been speculated long time ago by ’t Hooft [ 53 ] that when the
rank of the gauge group @xmath becomes large, the gauge dynamics can be
described by classical string theory. The original motivation is to
study strongly coupled gauge theory. When @xmath is large, Feymann
diagrams can be organized in the @xmath expansion by the topology of the
diagrams. Since string theory is also well known to have perturbative
expansion in topology of the Riemann surface that represents string
worldsheet, it was speculated by t’ Hooft the two descriptions are
equivalent. In particular, when @xmath is large only planar diagrams
contribute, the gauge theory is described by genus zero string theory,
i.e. free string theory.

Maldacena made a remarkable conjecture relate type IIB string theory on
@xmath to @xmath @xmath Super Yang-Mills theory [ 8 ] . The conjecture
is non-trivial since it relate theories with gravity, such as string
theory, to a field theory with no gravity at all. Some problems that are
very hard to solve on one side of the duality may be easy on the other
side. For example, we can extract many information in strongly coupled
@xmath Yang-Mills theory using classical supergravity on @xmath . In
this duality the @xmath super Yang-Mills lives on a 4-dimensional
space-time at the boundary of @xmath . This is an example that realize
the “holography principle” that comes from the study of black hole
information paradox.

The motivation of the conjecture comes from the study of near horizon
geometry of extremal black branes. Here we will not go into the detail
of the origins of the conjecture, but instead directly states the
conjecture and explains various regime that it can be tested. The @xmath
is a maximally supersymmetric background that preserves all 32
supercharges of the type IIB superstring theory. It is the near horizon
geometry of D3-brane. The metric in Poincare coordinate is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the radius of the @xmath and @xmath . The solution also
have Ramond-Ramond five form flux on the @xmath . The flux number @xmath
is quantized

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The radius is related to the string scale by the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath super Yang-Mills theory in four dimensions contains one
@xmath gauge multiplet and three @xmath adjoint chiral multiplets @xmath
, with a tree level superpotential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This tree level superpotential is required to preserve @xmath
supersymmetry. The @xmath super Yang-Mills theory is known to have
vanishing beta function and is a conformally invariant theory (CFT). The
R-symmetry of theory is @xmath . Guage invariant operators can be
organized in representations of the @xmath R-symmetry and is said to
carry various R-charges.

The AdS/CFT correspondence states that Type IIB string theory on @xmath
background is equivalent to @xmath @xmath supersymmetric Yang-Mills
theory in @xmath dimension. The flux number in ( 3.2 ) is identified
with the rank @xmath in the @xmath gauge group. The Yang-Mills coupling
constant is related to the string coupling by the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is expectation value of the Ramond-Ramond scalar.

In the strongest form, the conjecture would hold for all finite @xmath
and @xmath . Thus the @xmath Yang-Mills provided a non-perturbative
definition of type IIB string theory on @xmath since the string coupling
constant could be any values. However, at finite @xmath and @xmath this
is not a duality per say, since we do not have any other
non-perturbative definition of type IIB string theory on @xmath . On the
other hand, if we take @xmath to be large, then something very fantastic
happens. A miraculous but not quite well understood “duality transition”
occur at large @xmath , and we could have a dual description of string
theory such as classical supergravity. This transition is in some sense
like a geometric transition [ 25 ] .

Let us discuss in what regime the string theory can be approximated by
classical supergravity. Firstly, if we take @xmath to be large, then
only planar diagrams contribute. We have argued planar diagrams are
genus zero diagrams. So in this case the gauge theory corresponds to
free string theory, with no string loop effect. ¹ ¹ 1 From next section
we will consider a sub-sector, known as BMN sector, of the gauge theory
with very large R-charge, then non-planar diagrams can contribute
although @xmath is large. Secondly, we consider @xmath correction. The
mass scale of stringy excitation is of @xmath , where @xmath is the
string length scale. On the other hand, the typical energy scale we
encounter in the @xmath background is @xmath . So when @xmath is much
large @xmath , we will only see zero modes of the full string theory,
and the string theory on @xmath can be truncated to its supergravity
zero modes. Thus the condition that the string theory can be
approximated by classical supergravity is the following

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , we see that @xmath is same as @xmath . The constant
@xmath is known as the ’t Hooft coupling constant. In large @xmath
limit, the effective gauge coupling constant is the ’t Hooft coupling
constant @xmath instead of @xmath . Thus we have a strongly coupled
gauge theory corresponding to the classical supergarvity on @xmath .

In [ 9 , 10 ] a holographic map is proposed that relates physical
observable on both sides of the duality. It is proposed that gauge
invariant operators in @xmath Yang-Mills theory are in one to one
correspondence to fields in the string theory side. Suppose an operator
@xmath of the CFT corresponds to a field @xmath in classical
supergravity on @xmath . Here @xmath is a four vector represent
space-time at the boundary, and @xmath is the radius direction of the
@xmath . In Poincare coordinate the boundary is at @xmath . It is
proposed that the partition function of string theory with a fixed
boundary field is the same as the generating function of the CFT with
the corresponding operator coupled to the boundary field as source,
namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can then vary the generating function with respect to the source
@xmath to computed correlation functions of corresponding operators.
According to ( 3.7 ), the correlation function can also be computed from
the string theory side by varying the supergravity action with respect
to boundary fields.

The AdS/CFT correspondence is a strong-weak duality. In the regime that
classical supergravity is valid, the gauge theory is strongly coupled
and the corresponding physical quantities can not be computed by gauge
pertuabation theory. How can we test the duality? First, we can match
the global symmetry of the two theories, which does not change with the
coupling. Both theories are known to have a global symmetry group of
@xmath whose bosonic subgroup is @xmath . Also both theories are
believed to have a S-duality group symmetry @xmath acting on their
coupling constant @xmath .

Gauge invariant operators of the CFT fit in the representation the
global symmetry group @xmath . There are operators that lie in some
short representations of the @xmath . Operators in short representations
are annihilated by some combination supercharges, so have less
multiplicity of primary operators than those of long representation.
These operators are known as BPS or chiral operaors. Their conformal
dimension does not change with gauge coupling constant, due to
non-renormalization theorem in supersymmetric gauge theory. Many
correlation functions of BPS operators has also been computed and shown
to be not dependent on the gauge coupling. We can compare these
quantities to the computation from classical supergravity side. Many
successful tests have been done in these cases. For review see [ 11 , 12
] .

### 3.2 Plane Waves and BMN Operators

Until recently, most tests of the AdS/CFT correspondence have been
restricted to the classical supergravity regime. Can we go beyond
classical supergravity to study stringy modes of theory, or even
interacting string theory? The difficulty is that we need @xmath large
to have a duality transition. However, when @xmath is large the
anomalous dimension of non-BPS operators grow like @xmath , so is not
subjected to perturbation theory study when the classical supergravity
is valid. Recently, it is realized that a sub-sector of the @xmath can
be non-BPS yet have small anomalous dimension, due to the large R-charge
of these operators. In the string theory side, The @xmath geometry goes
to a Penrose limit and becomes a background known as pp-wave, or plane
wave. There are many excellent reviews on this subject, see e.g. [ 54 ]
.

#### 3.2.1 The plane wave background

First we explain the plane wave geometry. Long time ago, Penrose pointed
out that if we zoom in a null geodesics of any metric, we can take a
limit, known as Penrose limit, then we will obtain a metric that has the
form of a “pp-wave” [ 55 ] . Let us follow the approach in [ 13 , 14 ]
and see how this works for @xmath background. It is convenient to write
@xmath in global coordinate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is a null geodesics parameterized by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
This trajectory satisfy @xmath so it is a null geodesics. We can take
the Penrose limit by zooming in this trajectory. We introduce the
coordinate @xmath and a parameter @xmath , and perform the scaling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

In this limit we see the @xmath becomes the following metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

here the @xmath and @xmath parameterize points in @xmath from @xmath and
@xmath . And the five form Ramond-Ramond flux become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metric ( 3.10 ) is a plane wave metric. This limit of @xmath is
known as pp-wave (plane wave) limit, or BMN limit. While string spectrum
on @xmath has not been solved. It turns out the free string spectrum in
plane wave ( 3.10 ) is solvable. The solvability is largely due to the
light cone gauge in the metric. Since the plane wave is a Ramond-Ramond
background, we have to use Green-Schwarz formalism instead of NS-R
formalism. Th free string spectrum is obtained in [ 56 ] . The light
cone Hamiltonian spectrum is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the Fourier string mode. We use the notation of [ 13 ]
where @xmath label left movers and @xmath label right movers. @xmath
denote the total occupation number of that bosonic and fermionic mode
with Fourier number @xmath . The light cone momenta is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

We now consider how we can compare the string spectrum to dual @xmath
gauge theory. The energy in global coordinate @xmath is given by @xmath
and the angular momentum in @xmath direction is given by @xmath . In the
dual gauge theory the energy will correspond to conformal dimension of
an operator. We denote the conformal dimension as @xmath . The angular
momentum in @xmath direction correspond to the R-charge of the @xmath
factor in the @xmath R-symmetry group that corresponds to the @xmath
direction. Use the coordinate transformation ( 3.9 ) we can write the
light cone momenta ( 3.13 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We should keep the light cone momenta @xmath finite while scale @xmath .
Thus we must scale the energy and angular momentum as @xmath while keep
@xmath finite. The second equation in ( 3.2.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 3.12 ) ( 3.2.1 ) ( 3.15 ), and using the relation @xmath we find
that the contribution to @xmath for an oscillator mode @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is very important and will be compared to perturbative gauge
theory calculations. We see when @xmath , the string modes are very
light and almost degenerate. This corresponds to strings in a very
curved RR background. On the other hand, the opposite limit @xmath
corresponds to strings in nearly flat background. The comparison to dual
@xmath gauge theory will be made in the highly curved limit. The
essential point is that the large R-charge in ( 3.16 ) keep the
anomalous dimension from growing in large @xmath . These stringy modes
are near-BPS modes that can be studied in gauge perturbation theory.

#### 3.2.2 The BMN operators

Berenstein, Maldacena and Nastase proposed some operators that
correspond to string states in the plane waves background [ 13 ] . These
operators are known as BMN operators. We should now review the
construction of BMN operators.

The string states in the plane waves consist of a vacuum state and
string excitation modes. The vacuum state is denoted as @xmath . It has
R-charge @xmath in one of the direction in @xmath , and zero light cone
Hamiltonian @xmath . The six real scalars in @xmath super Yang-Mills are
usually written in 3 complex scalars

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Suppose the @xmath direction that strings move on correspond to the
R-charge of complex scalar @xmath . There is an operator with the
correct R-charge and dimension corresponding to the vacuum state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have not fixed the normalization of the operator.

The string excited states are created by acting creation operators on
the vaccum state. There are eight bosonic modes and eight fermionic
modes corresponding to the eight transverse directions to the light
cone. The bosonic and fermionic creation operators are denoted as @xmath
, and @xmath . Here @xmath is the string Fourier and @xmath denote left
movers and @xmath denote right movers. These operators and their complex
conjugates are the same as creation and annihilation operators in usual
harmonic oscillators, with the frequency given by ( 3.16 ). Since we are
considering close string states, we need to impose the usual level
matching condition to cancel the world sheet momentum for left movers
and right movers

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The level matching condition impose constrains on string states. For
example, if we have only one string mode acting on the vacuum, the level
matching condition ( 3.19 ) implies that this string mode must be zero
mode. Thus for one string mode we can only have states @xmath and @xmath
, with @xmath . These are BPS states corresponding to supergravity
modes. On the other hand, string states with two string modes can have
opposite non-zero modes, such as @xmath . There are truly non-BPS
stringy modes.

The operators corresponding to strings with one supergravity mode have
@xmath . We should consider insert some operators in the “strings of Z”
in the vacuum operator ( 3.18 ) that satisfies this condition. For
bosonic modes, there are eight such operators. We can insert the other
four scalars @xmath and the covariant derivative @xmath . There
operators have dimension one and no R-charge in the “Z” direction. For
fermionic operators, there are 16 gaugino components that have dimension
@xmath . Eight of the components @xmath have R-charge @xmath and the
other eight components @xmath have R-charge @xmath . These eight
components @xmath , should be identified as the correct operators with
@xmath to be inserted in the vacuum operator. It is argued in [ 13 ]
that other operators such as @xmath , @xmath have @xmath and their
anomalous dimensions will grow in the BMN limit, so we will not consider
these operators further. In summary, it is argued in [ 13 ] that the
operators corresponding to string states with one supergravity mode are
the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the above discussion we consider only one supergarvity mode, so it
does not matter where we insert the operators in “string of Z’s” due to
the cyclicity of the trace. However we should really think of the
inserted operator as summing over all positions in the “string of Z’s”.
This is required when we have more that one string excitation modes. For
supergravity modes, this symmetrization will produce BPS operators. For
string modes with Fourier mode @xmath , BMN [ 13 ] proposed to use a
phase factor @xmath when we insert an operator, say @xmath , in position
@xmath of “string of Z’s”, @xmath . For @xmath this will be a non-BPS
operator. Let us see how the level matching condition can be obtained by
this proposal. For string state with one string mode, the operator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the cyclicity of the trace and the identity @xmath ), we immediately
see this operator vanishes unless @xmath . ² ² 2 In some cases, such as
the case if we take @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , the sum does not
exactly vanish but is small compared to @xmath in large @xmath . These
operators can also be neglected in BMN limit. See [ 57 ] for more
discussion. This is expected from the level matching condition ( 3.19 )
that string states with one string mode must be zero mode. In general it
is straightforward to show the level matching condition is reproduced
for arbitrary number of string modes. The first non-BPS BMN operators we
can construct consist of two string modes, @xmath . Suppose @xmath ,
then the corresponding operator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to use the cyclicity to move @xmath to the first position of
the trace and eliminate one of the sum, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , this operator is referred to as “singleton”. We will focus
on the case of scalar modes @xmath in our discussion.

##### Computation of the planar anomalous dimension

Now we compute the anomalous dimension of BMN operators and see how the
spectrum ( 3.16 ) can be reproduced from gauge theory. In conformal
field theory the conformal dimension of an operator @xmath can be found
by computing the following two point function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is a constant that is not dependent on @xmath . We then read
off the conformal dimension from the two point function. To compute the
two point function we need the free field propogator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the @xmath action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where the D-term potential and the F-term potential are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two point function in an interacting gauge theory can be computed by
putting in the action @xmath and doing perturbation with free field
contractions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We consider the BMN operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we consider only planar diagrams. The calculation of anomalous
dimension was originally done for real scalar insertions in [ 13 ] .
Here we have used complex scalars @xmath and @xmath insertions because
the calculation is simplified due to an argument in Appendix B in [ 57 ]
, where it was shown for a holomorphic operator consisting of @xmath ,
the D-term and gluon exchange cancel at one loop order (this is based on
techniques in previous papers [ 58 , 59 ] ), so we only need to consider
the contributions from F-term. We need to compute the free part and
one-loop part in ( 3.29 ). Using the propagator ( 3.25 ) it is easy to
find the free part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The one-loop part is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will need to the log divergence formulae

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath and @xmath give the same contributions to the one-loop two
point function, so we only need to consider one of them. The four terms
in @xmath contribute as follows

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.34)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Adding up all contributions and keep leading terms in large @xmath limit
we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The contribution of @xmath and @xmath insertion in the “string of Z’s”
are the same. It can be read off from the above equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the one-loop calculation reproduced the first order expansion in
the square root in ( 3.16 ).

It has also been shown in [ 60 ] the higher loop calculations also
reproduce higher order terms of the square root expansion in ( 3.16 ).
One can also study the sub-leading order in “ @xmath ” correction to the
spectrum, see e.g. [ 61 ] . This is known as the “near plane wave”,
which corresponds to small deformation the plane wave toward the AdS
geometry. Some connections to integrable structure have also been
studied, see e.g. [ 62 ] . One can also study operators corresponding
rotating strings, for a review see e.g. [ 63 ] . Here we will not
explore these very important issues further.

### 3.3 String Interactions in Plane Wave Backgrounds

We have seen the BMN limit is to scale the R-charge @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath fixed. There is another dimensionless parameter @xmath in
the theory, so we have a total of two dimensionless parameters. ³ ³ 3
The string scale @xmath is a dimensionful parameter, so it can be set at
any value, (or just to “1”) and it will not affect our discussion. These
two dimensionless parameters that determine the theory are
conventionally denoted as @xmath and @xmath in the literature, and are
parameterized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is usually referred to as the effective ’t Hooft coupling
constant. In previous section we have considered planar diagrams of
gauge perturbation theory. This is an expansion in @xmath while keeping
@xmath . In this case the free string spectrum are reproduced by gauge
interactions. To study string interaction, we must consider non-planar
diagrams and do “ @xmath ” expansion. This means we will do expansion in
the parameter @xmath .

One might then try to study the string spectrum involving non-planar
diagrams. However, the BMN operators appear to have some kind of
dangerous mixings and no long have well defined anomalous conformal
dimensions [ 57 , 64 , 65 ] . Further studies in this direction can be
found in e.g. [ 66 , 67 , 68 ] . One can also propose some Hamiltonians,
such as a string bit model, that could reproduce the spectrum [ 69 ] .

In the following we will not explore these important directions further.
Instead, we consider the situation where we set @xmath and do expansion
solely in the parameter @xmath . In this case the Yang-Mills theory is
free, so the correlation functions of the BMN operators have the usual
nice form of spacetime dependence. We note this nice form of spacetime
dependence is present when one of the parameters @xmath or @xmath is
zero, but is ruined when both parameters are finite. By setting @xmath ,
we can focus on the coefficients of the correlation functions and not
worry about the not quite well understood spacetime dependence part. We
also see from the spectrum formula ( 3.16 ) that the string spectra are
degenerate in this highly curved background. However, the interactions
of strings does not vanish. The physical string amplitudes are
represented in dual free gauge theory by correlation functions of BMN
operators.

Suppose a Feymann diagram has genus @xmath , number of holes (index
loops) @xmath , propagators (edges) @xmath and vertices @xmath , then it
is easy to see @xmath . This diagram will has a contribution
proportional to @xmath . Since we are considering free field theory, for
a given correlation functions we can not add interaction vertices. The
number of edges and vertices @xmath and @xmath are fixed and determined
by the given correlation functions we want to compute. Thus we find the
implementation of the original t’Hooft idea of “summing over all holes
for a given genus” is pretty simple in the case of free field theory!
For a given genus we only need to sum over a finite number of diagrams
with the same number of holes @xmath , and they are all proportional
@xmath . Furthermore, in large R-charge limit the diagram will be also
proportional to @xmath due to many ways of doing free field
contractions. Thus we see the diagram is proportional to @xmath . In
string perturbation theory we know that string loop expansion is
organized in the genus expansion of the Riemann surface of the string
worldsheet. Thus it is natural in this case to identify the parameter
@xmath as the effective string coupling constant.

As opposed to previous section, where the free string spectrum is
reproduced by gauge interaction, here we have a situation that string
interactions are described by free gauge theory. In this section we will
compare the planar three point function to light cone string field
theory vertex [ 70 ] , and make a proposal on string loop diagrams that
corresponds to non-planar correlation functions [ 71 ] .

#### 3.3.1 Planar three point functions

The definition of the vacuum operators and BMN operators with one and
two excitation modes are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath represent excitations in two of the four scalar
transverse directions. The normalization is fixed by choosing planar two
point functions to be orthonormal.

The computation of free planar three point function are straightforward,
see e.g. [ 57 ] . Some results are the followings (Assuming @xmath and
@xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Note the spacetime dependences of two point
and three point functions in this case of free field theory is quite
simple. Here and elsewhere in this section we have omitted the factors
of spacetime dependence in the correlators.

Here we note that a three point function can be thought of as a two
point function of a single trace operator and a double trace operator.
In order to have non-vanishing correlation functions we must have equal
number of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s. Since in BMN limit an operator always
has a large number of @xmath ’s but no @xmath ’s, a non-vanishing
correlation function can always be thought of as a two point function of
multi-trace operators. In AdS/CFT a multi-trace operator represents
multi-particle states, so here we will still conventionally call these
correlators “three point functions”. We also caution the readers
although these planar three point function can be drawn on a plane, they
really increase the number of traces and thus have power of @xmath
compared to the planar diagrams we considered in previous section.

##### How to compare three point function to string theory vertex

In [ 57 ] it is proposed that the matrix element for a single string
@xmath to split into a two-string state @xmath in the string field
theory light cone Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where @xmath ’s are the properly normalized corresponding operators in
CFT and @xmath ’s are their conformal dimensions. In light cone string
field theory the matrix element is calculated by applying the three
string states to a prefactor @xmath and the cubic interaction vertex
state @xmath in the three-string Hilbert space @xmath . The @xmath and
@xmath are calculated in details in [ 72 , 73 ] . It is conjectured in [
57 ] that at large @xmath limit the dressing factor @xmath in equation (
3.45 ) comes from the prefactor @xmath and assuming discretization of
the string world sheet at large @xmath , a heuristic proof is given
there that the delta functional overlap agrees exactly with the planar
3-point function in field theory, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will explicitly check this proposal [ 70 ] . Here we will not
calculate the overall normalization of the matrix element. To make an
explicit check of the PP-wave/Yang-Mills duality, we will calculate the
ratio with vacuum amplitude on both sides. We should verify

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , and @xmath is the corresponding operator of the vacuum
state.

From ( 3.3.1 ) we can read off the ratios

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will calculate the ratios of the three point correlators ( 3.48 ) (
3.49 ) ( 3.50 ) from light cone string field theory in pp-wave. We will
find exact agreements with equation ( 3.47 ).

Some notation is the following. Following the notation of [ 72 , 70 ] we
denote @xmath . The strings are labeled by @xmath and in light-cone
gauge their widths are @xmath , with @xmath . We will take @xmath and
@xmath positive for purposes of calculation. Also note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Computation of the bosonic Neumann matrices in large @xmath limit

Light cone string field theory is an old subject dating back to the 80’s
(see e.g. [ 74 , 75 ] ). Recently the results have been extend to plane
wave backgrounds, see e.g. [ 76 , 77 , 78 ] . For our purpose we will
need to use the cubic interaction vertex @xmath , which can be written
as an element in the 3-string Hilbert space. Roughly speaking, the
interaction amplitude of three strings is the inner product of the three
string state with the cubic interaction vertex.

The string modes interaction vertex is @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
are bosonic and fermionic operators that are calculated in details in [
72 , 73 ] . Here will not consider the fermionic sector. Up to a overall
factor, the bosonic operator @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the eight transverse directions, and @xmath are the
Neumann matrices.

Here we only need to consider the limit of large @xmath . we will show
that the infinite dimensional Neumann matrices turn out to simplify in
large @xmath limit. The Neumann matrices @xmath ( @xmath ) is calculated
in [ 72 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definition of @xmath is the following. Consider for @xmath the
matrices of [ 74 , 72 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define @xmath , while for @xmath we can express the matrices @xmath
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the limit of large @xmath , @xmath . Using equation ( 3.54 ), we find
that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and @xmath . All other components such as @xmath are zero.

Using the summation formulae in the appendix D of [ 74 ] we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

So the Neumann matrices in large @xmath limit is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note @xmath .

In [ 72 ] the cubic coupling matrix of supergravity modes is derived. It
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

One would be tempted to identify @xmath as the zero-zero component of
the Neumann matrices ( 3.63 ). But this is incorrect. Actually one can
check @xmath is true when @xmath , but at large @xmath limit @xmath is
true only when @xmath or @xmath . But since we will only use these
components, it will be same whether we use @xmath or @xmath .

##### Interaction of supergravity modes

We consider the interaction of three supergravity modes @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath are two different transverse
directions. We want to compute the object

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will need the zero components of the Neumann matrices. From equation
( 3.63 ) we find @xmath , @xmath . (Actually this is true without taking
the large @xmath limit.)

From the bosonic operator ( 3.52 ) and the Baker-Hausdorff formula ⁴ ⁴ 4
The Baker-Hausdorff formula is @xmath . we know

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

So

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the field theory side, the three modes @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
correspond to chiral operators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (Suppose
@xmath and @xmath correspond to scalar instead of the @xmath insertions
in the string of @xmath ’s) . Thus we have found equation ( 3.68 ) is in
agreement with equation ( 3.48 ).

##### Interaction of string theory modes

Example 1

We consider the interaction of three states @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
which correspond to operators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We caution
the reader here the @xmath notation we use is not the familiar string
theory basis of BMN [ 13 ] , but is the same as in [ 72 ] . These two
basis are related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sign of @xmath (For @xmath , @xmath ). Notice that
the @xmath mode contribution vanish since the corresponding Neumann
matrices elements are zero. The calculation here follows similarly as in
the case of supergravity modes, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.70)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Using equation ( 3.63 ) we find @xmath , in agreement with equation (
3.49 ).

Example 2

In this example we consider the interaction of three states @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , which correspond to operators @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Notice the Neumann matrix elements @xmath and @xmath vanish, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.71)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Again it agrees with equation ( 3.50 ).

#### 3.3.2 Non-planar correlation functions

We consider free torus two point function of BMN operators. The
calculation involves a gauge theory diagram as shown in Fig 3.1 . The
calculation is to divide the string of Z’s into 4 segments. The scalar
insertions can then be summed over all positions with phases. The
calculation was first done in [ 57 , 64 ] . Here we simply quote the
result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

We should note that unlike planar two point functions, torus two point
functions do not vanish between different BMN operators. We can not
absorb the torus two point function by proper normalization of the BMN
operators. Therefore the torus two point functions represent physical
string propagation amplitudes. One should try to reproduce them from a
string theory calculation. We will follow [ 71 ] and make a proposal as
to what the string theory calculation is.

##### A proposal on string theory loop diagrams

We consider a single string propagating in the pp-wave background. We
expect the one loop correction to the string propagation to be the torus
contribution to the two point function of corresponding BMN operators.
On the other hand, the one loop amplitude can be calculated by summing
over the amplitudes of the string splitting into two strings and then
joining back into a single string. The cubic vertices of string
splitting and joining can be represented by free planar three point
functions. There are two diagrams associated with this process as shown
in figure 3.2 . The BMN string @xmath can split into two strings @xmath
, @xmath or @xmath , @xmath and joining back into another string @xmath
. We denote the contributions from these two processes by @xmath and
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The string theory diagrams are computed by multiplying all vertices and
summing over all possible intermediate operators. Here we do not use
propagators in calculating the diagrams. In large @xmath limit we can
approximate the sum in @xmath by a integral @xmath . It is
straightforward to put equations in ( 3.3.1 ) into equations ( 3.3.2 ) (
3.3.2 ) and explicitly compute the sum and integral. We find an
agreement with equation ( 3.72 ) in all 5 cases

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the @xmath can be thought of as the symmetry factor of the string
theory diagrams. The symmetry factor can be understood from the example
of free torus two point function of chiral operators, which is computed
in the field theory side as shown in figure 3.1 [ 57 , 64 ] . The
twistings in the large @xmath gauge index contractions can be thought of
intuitively as string splitting and rejoining. Below we will give an
argument why we have overcounted by a factor of @xmath when we do string
theory diagrams. In more general cases of one loop cubic interaction and
two loop propagation diagrams the symmetry factors will be determined by
more complicated combinatorics and will generally differ from the
symmetry factors in usual Feymann diagrams in quantum field theory.

One can also easily calculate the one loop string propagation diagram
for chiral operators @xmath and @xmath . In both cases there is only one
diagram. The results are again agree with the field theory calculations
by the symmetry factor of @xmath .

##### Derivation of symmetry factors

We propose a practical prescription for deriving symmetry factors of
string theory diagrams we computed. We denote a close string with n
segments by @xmath , where the strings are regarded as the same by
cyclic rotation. For example, @xmath and @xmath are the same string. We
denote the processes of string splitting and joining by @xmath and
@xmath . Now imagine figure 3.1 as a string of 4 segments goes from
@xmath to @xmath . How many ways can we do this with our rules? A little
counting reveals that at one loop level there are only two processes as
the following

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here since @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and (43) are the same, we can join
@xmath in to @xmath . These two processes are one loop string
propagation diagrams. Thus we conclude we have overcounted by a factor
of @xmath when we do string theory diagram calculations. This explain
the symmetry factor of @xmath in equation ( 3.75 ).

##### Further generalizations

In flat space it is very hard to do string perturbation theory, due to
the difficulty in doing integration of the moduli space of the string
worldsheet. Most string calculations in flat space have been restricted
to less than two loops. On the contrary, here we have found that the
highly curved Ramond-Ramond plane wave background with @xmath is an
ideal background for doing string perturbation theory. We proposed the
string loop amplitudes can be computed by a cubic string field theory,
whose diagrams are constructed by naively multiplying the vertices. It
would be interesting to directly derive this cubic field theory from
integration of the moduli of string worldsheet. In this case it is the
agreements with BMN correlation functions in dual (free) Yang-Mill
theory that give us confidences that these are indeed the correct string
amplitudes. In [ 71 ] the comparison with Yang-Mills theory was further
checked for free torus three point functions and perfect agreements were
found. We expect to this to work to all genera. A general derivation or
proof of this conjecture would increase our understanding of string
perturbation theory as well as give general lessons of large @xmath
duality.

In some cases of two-dimensional string theory or topological string
theory, the string amplitudes can also be computed to all loops. In
those cases the theory have much less degrees of freedom than that of
critical superstrings considered here, so the amplitudes is usually
solvable and can be summed up to all loops by some kind of integrable
structures. In our case, for the vacuum operator, the free field
correlation functions can be summed up to all genera by a Gaussian
matrix model [ 57 , 64 ] . However, for general non-BPS BMN operators,
we do not know whether it is possible to find a formula to sum up all
genus (free field) correlation functions, although it is straightforward
to compute the correlation functions at any given genus. If such a
formula does exist, it would likely to be provided by some matrix models
or integrable structures.

### 3.4 Giant Gravitons and Open Strings

Historically, it was first pointed out in [ 79 ] that trace operators
with large R-charge will mix with each other and no longer form a good
orthogonal basis. This is telling us the strings are strongly coupled
and perturbation theory has broken down. In strongly coupled regime we
expect to encounter non-perturbative objects such as D-branes. Indeed,
it was shown in [ 15 ] that the size of a probe D-brane in @xmath expand
if its angular momentum (R-charge of corresponding operators ) becomes
bigger. This is similar to Myers effect [ 80 ] where lower dimensional
objects can blow up into higher dimensional objects.

In large N limit, R-charge of operators in dual Yang-Mills theory is
closely related to string coupling. The string theory is free when
R-charge @xmath is less than @xmath . In the BMN limit @xmath , in
previous Section we claimed we can compute string perturbation theory to
all loops in a highly curved plane wave background [ 71 ] . If the
R-charge is larger, non-planar diagrams dominate over planar diagrams,
string perturbation theory breaks down. Strings blow up into
non-perturbative objects known as giant gravitons. Giant gravitons are
D3-branes that can have open string excitations [ 81 ] . Studies of
these objects are likely to provide insights on non-perturbative
completions of string theory.

We have mentioned that when we stuck many D-branes together, a
mysterious “duality transition” will sometimes happen. Applying this
philosophy we can put a large number coincident giant gravitons
together. Then there is a new gauge symmetry emerging on the giant
gravitons. This gauge symmetry is different from the original @xmath
gauge symmetry we have, and is somehow encoded in the open strings
attached to the giant gravitons. There might be a new duality transition
in some decoupling limit analogous to AdS/CFT correspondence. If this is
true, we will have a very interesting duality between two gauge theories
with different gauge groups. Some motivations and evidences of this
conjecture comes from the study of AdS black hole which is a condensate
of giant gravitons [ 82 ] .

Giant graviton states of spacetime are created in Yang-Mills theory by
determinant and sub-determniant operators as proposed in [ 79 ] and
confirmed in [ 83 ] . In this Section we mainly follow the discussion in
[ 81 ] . Other aspects of giant gravitons have been studied in [ 84 ] .
⁵ ⁵ 5 In [ 85 , 86 ] it was showed how open strings emerge from gauge
theories dual to string theories that have open strings in the
perturbative spectrum. In these cases, the dual field theory has quarks
marking the endpoints of open string worldsheets. Here we are interested
in situations in which open strings emerge in pure supersymmetric
Yang-Mills theory as fluctuations around states dual to D-branes in
spacetime. D-branes in pp-wave backgrounds and open strings propagating
on them have been studied in e.g. [ 87 , 88 ] . In Sec. 3.4.1 we show
how Yang-Mills theory reproduces the spectrum of small fluctuations of
giant gravitons. We discuss the emergence of the @xmath degrees of
freedom expected when @xmath giants nearly coincide. In Sec. 3.4.2 we
display a Penrose limit in which the open strings propagating on giants
can be quantized simply. Taking the corresponding large charge limit in
Yang-Mills theory, we reconstruct the open string worldsheets from field
theory degrees of freedom, and show that the one-loop field theory
calculation reproduces string spectra. The relevant operators are
generically not BPS, but nevertheless their dimensions do not grow in
the @xmath limit.

Since we have a complete second-quantized formulation of @xmath
Yang-Mills, this theory is supposed to give us a non-perturbative
description of strings. If this is really so, various subsectors of the
theory should contain the holographic duals to all possible string
backgrounds. This is indeed the case. A classical geometry @xmath is
seen as by small R-charge BPS operators. As we go to BMN limit @xmath ,
we encounter the geometry of plane wave and flat space. These are all
known maximally supersymmetric backgrounds of type IIB string theory. We
speculate the geometry seen by giant gravitons will be very fuzzy and
foamy. Further studies of this question would shed light on the
difficult problem of achieving a background independence formulation of
M-theory, see e.g. [ 89 ] .

#### 3.4.1 Spherical D3-branes and their fluctuations

###### Scalar fluctuations:

The best semiclassical description of a graviton with angular momentum
of order @xmath on the @xmath of @xmath is in terms of a large D3-brane
wrapping a 3-sphere and moving with some velocity [ 15 , 90 ] . This is
the giant graviton. In @xmath , the radius of the spherical D3-brane is
@xmath , where @xmath is the angular momentum on the @xmath of the
state, @xmath is the radius of the sphere, and @xmath the total 5-form
flux through the 5-sphere. Since the radius of the D3 brane giant
graviton is bounded by the radius @xmath of the @xmath , there is an
upper bound on the angular momentum @xmath .

The spectrum of small fluctuations of the giant graviton was calculated
in [ 91 ] . When the giant graviton expands into an @xmath on the @xmath
, it has six transverse scalar fluctuations, of which four correspond to
fluctuations into @xmath and two are fluctuations within @xmath . These
vibration modes can be written as a superposition of scalar spherical
harmonics @xmath on the unit @xmath . In [ 91 ] it was found that the
frequencies of the four modes corresponding to fluctuations in @xmath
with wave-functions @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, the two vibration mode frequencies corresponding to
fluctuations in @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Giants and their scalar fluctuations from CFT:

In [ 79 ] , it was shown that giant gravitons are dual to states created
by a family of subdeterminants:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

(So @xmath is the same as the determinant of @xmath .) Here, @xmath is a
complex combination of two of the six adjoint scalars in the @xmath
theory. ⁶ ⁶ 6 The @xmath in the bulk can be described by @xmath . The
operator @xmath in ( 3.78 ) corresponds to a giant graviton moving in
the @xmath plane. The trajectory of such a giant will trace out a circle
of radius @xmath in this plane. Notice that the maximal giant with
@xmath is not really moving on the @xmath . Its angular momentum arises
from the Chern-Simons interaction on its worldvolume and the background
flux. These subdeterminants have a bounded R-charge, with the full
determinant saturating the bound. The bound on the R-charge is the field
theory explanation of the angular momentum bound for giants. A giant
graviton is a 1/2 BPS state of the CFT and breaks the SO(6) R-symmetry
of the @xmath theory down to U(1) @xmath SO(4). The U(1) corresponds to
the plane of motion of the giant gravitons while the SO(4) corresponds
to the rotation group of the @xmath worldvolume of the giants. Under the
U(1) @xmath and @xmath have charges @xmath while the other scalars
@xmath ( @xmath ) of the Yang-Mills theory are neutral. The giant
gravitons in ( 3.78 ) therefore carry a @xmath charge @xmath and, being
protected operators, their conformal dimensions are @xmath . Under the
SO(4), Z is neutral, but the @xmath transform as a 4 .

To map the fluctuations of a giant graviton to the CFT, we can replace
@xmath in ( 3.78 ) by other operators, along lines similar to [ 92 ] for
the dibaryon in the theory of D3-branes at a conifold singularity. The
resulting operator should carry the same U(1) charge @xmath as the
giant. Therefore, their conformal dimension in the free field limit
should take the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is appropriate fluctuation frequency in ( 3.76 ) or ( 3.77
). ⁷ ⁷ 7 Recall that giant gravitons in global AdS map onto states of
Yang-Mills theory on @xmath and that energy in spacetime maps to energy
@xmath in the field theory. Using the state-operator correspondence, the
energy of states on @xmath maps to the dimension @xmath of operators on
@xmath , which we will typically discuss. Finally, since the scalar
vibrations of giants are in the @xmath scalar spherical harmonics of
@xmath , i.e. the symmetric traceless representation of @xmath , it is
natural to use operators formed by the symmetric traceless products of
the four scalars @xmath , ( @xmath ).

Suppose @xmath is the @xmath th symmetric traceless product of @xmath .
Consider the operators:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath are operators with U(1) charge @xmath , in the @xmath th
symmetric traceless representation of SO(4), and have dimension @xmath .
The index @xmath refers to the four Cartesian directions of @xmath in
radial quantization of @xmath . Clearly, @xmath has the quantum numbers
to match the AdS polarized fluctuations with spectrum ( 3.76 ). (Note
that unlike ( 3.78 ) we have not normalized these operators to have unit
two-point functions.)

Now consider

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These operators have U(1) charge @xmath , are in @xmath th symmetric
traceless representation of SO(4), and have conformal dimensions @xmath
and @xmath . Clearly we have found operators with quantum numbers
matching the @xmath polarized fluctuations whose spectrum is ( 3.77 ).
(Again, we have not chosen to normalize these operators to have unit
two-point functions.) Note that the operators ( 3.81 , 3.82 ) cannot be
constructed for the maximal giant graviton, i.e., when @xmath . The
corresponding analysis of fluctuations in [ 91 ] leads to a similar
conclusion since the relevant equations are ill-defined for the maximal
giant.

In general, most fluctuations of giant gravitons are not BPS [ 91 ] and
so we expect anomalous dimensions to develop quantum mechanically. From
the spacetime point of view these would be studied by finding solutions
to the open-string loop corrected equations of motion of a D-brane. (The
DBI action used in [ 91 ] included all @xmath corrections at disk order
but not string loop corrections.) Since these corrections are hard to
compute in spacetime it is interesting to examine them in the field
theory. In [ 81 ] we show that the interactions of @xmath Yang-Mills do
produce anomalous dimensions for ( 3.80 , 3.81 , 3.82 ), but,
surprisingly, these corrections do not grow with @xmath . Here we will
not explore the details, but give the result that the anomalous
dimension is @xmath . At weak coupling and large @xmath , therefore,
these are non-BPS operators whose dimensions are protected from large
corrections.

###### Multiple giants from Yang-Mills:

Consider a CFT states made by the product of @xmath identical giant
graviton operators. This should represent @xmath giants of the same size
moving in concert on the @xmath . Such a group of giants should have
@xmath strings stretching between them. At low energies these string
should give rise to a @xmath gauge theory living on the worldvolume of
the spherical D3-branes. The spectra that we described above we derived
from fluctuations of a single giant, and therefore apply to the @xmath
part of this low-energy gauge theory. Below we will display candidate
operators dual to the expected @xmath scalar fluctuations of the branes.
In the quadratic limit relevant to small fluctuations all of these will
have the same spectrum as we see below. (Again, there are small quantum
corrections to the spectrum that are negligible in the large N limit.)

For simplicity consider two maximal giant gravitons, corresponding to
the product of two determinants in the CFT @xmath . Here we have
introduced labels analogous to Chan-Paton indices for each of the
determinants representing a giant graviton. Taking @xmath and @xmath to
be coordinates on the @xmath on which the Yang-Mills theory is defined,
we could define the operator @xmath so that it makes sense to treat them
as distinguishable in this way. After constructing the operators of
interest to us as described in the text we later let @xmath . For each
of the operators @xmath describing scalar fluctuations on a single giant
we might expect four operators here. Two of these would correspond to
separate vibrations of each of the two giants and should be given by
@xmath and @xmath where @xmath is a fluctuation on giant @xmath as
described above. Two of the fluctuations would arise from off-diagonal
components of the U(2) matrices, which in turn arise from strings going
between the two branes. It is natural that these vibrations should arise
from operators that intertwine the gauge indices in the two
determinants:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the @xmath are the symmetric traceless products of scalars
mentioned earlier. The other operators @xmath are written similarly. The
indices that we introduced on the two determinants have played the role
of Chan-Paton factors of open strings stretched between two giants. It
appears that the four operators we find have a natural interpretation as
the expected operators from the adjoint representation of @xmath group.
However, there is a subtlety. When @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by an
exchange of dummy indices. What is more, it can be shown that in this
limit the operators @xmath also. This is surprising at first because
@xmath intertwines indices between two determinants, but this fact can
be shown as follows. First, observe that ( 3.83 ) is zero when @xmath .
In this case there exists an @xmath where @xmath , and so the sum overs
the permutations of @xmath gives zero. We are left with @xmath in which
case the operator is unchanged by switching these two indices. Thus
@xmath is proportional to @xmath . The proportionality factor between
these operators is @xmath because the former has @xmath choices of
@xmath , while requiring @xmath leaves @xmath choices.

In fact this is exactly what we should expect since coincident D-branes
are identical and there is no difference between the strings running
between different pairs of branes; the change of dummy variables
relating ( 3.83 ) and ( 3.84 ) when @xmath is an example of this. To
display the four strings running between two branes we have to separate
the branes from each each other. The generalization of this discussion
to @xmath giants and the associateed @xmath degrees of freedom from the
adjoint of @xmath is obvious.

There is some issue as to whether multiple less-than-maximal giant
gravitons are described by a product of subdeterminant operators or by a
sudeterminant of products (see [ 79 , 83 , 92 ] ). Above we restricted
ourself to the largest giants for which this issue does not arise since
the determinant of products is the product of determinants. It would be
interesting to test our proposal that fluctuations of strings between
branes are described by intertwined operators, by taking one of them to
be a maximal giant and another to be a smaller one. Strings running
between such branes are stretched and should have a corresponding gap in
their spectra. It would be interesting to test this by trying to match
the vibrational energies of strings stretched between the maximal and
next-to-maximal sized giants.

#### 3.4.2 Open strings in plane wave limit

##### Penrose limits for open strings

We will see that for open strings moving with a large angular momentum
on the giant graviton D3 brane, we can construct the open string world
sheet in the @xmath @xmath Yang-Mills theory. To that end, we start by
looking at the geometry seen by such an open string. The @xmath metric
is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the AdS scale. Consider the near maximal giant graviton
at @xmath which is moving in the @xmath direction. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Strictly
speaking, the maximal giant is at rest and all its angular momentum
comes from the five-form flux. The world volume of the giant spans
@xmath and the giant graviton is at @xmath and @xmath . We want to find
the geometry seen by an open string ending on the giant graviton, moving
rapidly in the @xmath direction at the equator of @xmath given by @xmath
. We define light cone coordinates @xmath , a new coordinate @xmath ,
and focus on the region near @xmath by rescaling:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this limit, the metric becomes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath parameterize points on two @xmath s and @xmath
parameterizes points on @xmath . The 5-form flux that supports the
@xmath background becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

in this limit, thereby breaking the @xmath isometry of the metric ( 3.86
) to SO(4) @xmath SO(4). We find that the open string sees the standard
pp wave geometry. The light cone action becomes [ 56 ] ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.88)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a Majorana spinor on the worldsheet and a
positive chirality spinor @xmath under SO(8) which is the group of
rotations in the eight transverse directions. The @xmath tranform as
@xmath under this group. The fermionic term in the action breaks the
SO(8) symmetry that is otherwise present to SO(4) @xmath SO(4). The open
strings we are interested in have Neumann boundary conditions in the
light cone directions @xmath and @xmath and Dirichlet boundary
conditions in the six transverse directions parameterized by @xmath and
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The coordinates used in ( 3.86 ), @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Such open strings were quantized by Dabholkar and Parvizi in [
87 ] . Here, we quote their results. The spectrum of the light cone
Hamiltonian ( @xmath ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the bosonic and fermionic creation and
annihilation operators @xmath and @xmath as in [ 87 ] . Here @xmath is
the zero point energy for the D3 brane and

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.91)
  -- -- -- --------

There are only two bosonic zero modes coming from two directions in
light cone gauge which have Neumann boundary conditions (these would
have been momentum modes but in the pp wave background, the zero mode is
also a harmonic oscillator). The fermionic zero mode is @xmath which
transforms in @xmath of SO(8).

The D3 brane occupies @xmath and has six transverse coordinates @xmath .
In the light cone, only an SO(2) @xmath subgroup of the SO(1,3) symmetry
of the D3 brane world volume is visible. In addition, the SO(6) group
transverse to the D3-brane is broken down to SO(2) @xmath SO(4) by the
5-form background flux. Hence we have the embedding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spinor @xmath decomposes as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscripts denote SO(2) @xmath SO(2) @xmath , and we have
written SO(4) representations as representations of SU(2) @xmath SU(2).
The fermionic zero modes @xmath can be arranged into fermionic creation
and annihilation operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The commutation relations are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energy contribution from the zero mode oscillators is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.96)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as in [ 87 ] . We choose @xmath and @xmath as creation operators. ⁹ ⁹ 9
This convention differs from [ 87 ] but is convenient for us. The vacuum
state is invariant under SO(4) @xmath SO(2) @xmath and carries charge
@xmath under SO(2) @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Other modes with zero worldsheet momentum ( @xmath ) are contructed by
acting with creation operators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The vacuum
state @xmath has @xmath and carries @xmath units of angular momentum in
the @xmath direction. Since the maximal giant graviton that we are
considering carries angular momentum @xmath in this direction, we see
that @xmath is the total angular momentum of the giant and the ground
state of its open strings in our Penrose limit. Likewise the fermionic
contribution to the energy ground state lowers it to @xmath from the
value @xmath for the maximal giant. Below we will present the complete
perturbative spectrum of the string quantized in this way and map all
the states to operators of @xmath Yang-Mills theory.

##### Open string world sheet in SYM

String theory in global @xmath is dual to @xmath Yang-Mills theory on
@xmath . States in spacetime map to states of the field theory, and by
the state-operator correspondence for conformal theories, are related to
operators on @xmath . The global symmetry of the theory is SO(4) @xmath
SO(6) where SO(4) is the rotation group of @xmath corresponding to the
SO(4) appearing in ( 3.92 ). SO(6) is the R-symmetry group,
corresponding to the rotation group of @xmath in the bulk spacetime. The
Yang-Mills theory has six adjoint scalar fields @xmath which transform
as the fundamental of SO(6). The complex combinations @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are charged under three different SO(2) subgroups of SO(6), SO(2)
@xmath , which correspond to rotations in three independent planes of
the bulk @xmath . We will denote charges under these SO(2) groups as
@xmath . As we have discussed, giant gravitons carry a charge of order
@xmath under SO(2) @xmath , and are created by subdeterminant operators.
The Penrose limit of open strings on giants corresponds to strings
moving in the spacetime direction corresponding to @xmath . We will
propose a field theory description of the worldsheets of open strings on
the maximal giant graviton.

We will denote the conformal dimenion of the operators dual to such
strings by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the additive @xmath arises because the background giant has this
dimension. Mapping the data of the Penrose limit to the field theory we
find that the conformal dimension @xmath of the excitation above the
giant and @xmath charges of these states are related to the lightcone
Hamiltonian ( 3.90 ) of strings as [ 13 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We are going to consider states of fixed @xmath so that @xmath .
Likewise the other lightcone momentum maps as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the AdS scale. Note that to have a fixed non-zero value
of @xmath , @xmath must be of order @xmath . The contribution to
Hamiltonian from higher oscillator modes of the lightcone string ( 3.91
) then translates into ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We have set @xmath to make the
comparison with field theory.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the Yang-Mills theory up to small corrections that vanish at large
@xmath .

###### The ground state:

From the previous section, the ground state of strings on maximal giants
carries SO(2) @xmath charge @xmath and lightcone energy @xmath . So the
overall state including the giant carries an SO(2) @xmath charge @xmath
and @xmath . Furthermore, we achieve the Penrose limit by considering
states with SO(2) @xmath charge @xmath of order @xmath . To describe the
ground state of the string we therefore seek an operator that is a
modification of the @xmath creating the maximal giant which has the
charges just listed. A suitable candidate is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have inserted a product of @xmath Ys in place of one Z. (We
have chosen not to normalize this operator to have a unit two-point
function.) The notation @xmath indicates a single maximal giant graviton
with an open string in its ground state as defined in ( 3.98 ). The Zs
create the D3 brane giant graviton and, as we show below, the string of
Ys explicitly reconstructs the worldsheet of open string propagating on
a giant in a Penrose limit.The absence of a trace on the indices of the
product of Ys will be responsible for making this an open string
worldsheet, and in the presence of multiple giants, Chan-Paton factors
will emerge from the ability to intertwine these indices between
different giant operators.

The operator ( 3.103 ), just like the small fluctuations ( 3.80 , 3.81 ,
3.82 ), is not BPS and therefore receives quantum corrections to its
dimension. Surprisingly, as shown in [ 81 ] , these corrections do not
grow with @xmath and lead to an anomalous dimension of @xmath . This
extra piece is very small compared to the BMN anomalous dimension @xmath
if we take @xmath small to suppress the non-planar contributions
anomalous dimensions . This shift, being of @xmath order, suggests a
loop open-string effect.

###### Rest of the zero modes:

The remainder of the zero modes on the string worldsheet arose from the
ground state ( 3.98 ) by the action of the creation operators @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . In Yang-Mills theory we can construct operators
corresponding to these states by inserting into the string of the Ys the
two scalars @xmath and four of the 16 gaugino components of @xmath
Yang-Mills which have SO(2) @xmath charge @xmath and SO @xmath charge
@xmath . These gaugino components in which we are interested transform
as @xmath and @xmath under the SO(4) = SU(2) @xmath SU(2) rotation group
of four dimensional Yang-Mills and so we will collect into two spinors
@xmath and @xmath . This matches the charges carried by the four
creation operators @xmath and @xmath identified on the lightcone string
worldsheet in ( 3.94 ). So we identify the string worldsheet zero mode
creation operators with operator insertions into ( 3.103 ) as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For example,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Each action of a zero mode operator on the lightcone string vacuum adds
a similar sum to the dual field theory operator. It is interesting to
see a detailed match between field theory operators and the quantum
numbers for states created by acting by worldsheet fermionic zero modes.
Each of these operators takes the form @xmath with @xmath given as
below:

  State    Rep.     @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   0        @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

The superscripts denote charges under SO(2) @xmath SO(2) @xmath and we
have indicated the energy of fluctuations above the giant graviton which
itself has energy @xmath .

###### Higher oscillators and string spectrum from @xmath theory:

To construct the higher oscillator states of open strings in analogy
with [ 13 ] we can insert operators representing string fluctuations
into the worldsheet represented by the string of Ys in ( 3.103 ). (Again
we choose not to normalize these operators here to have a unit two point
function.) A phase depending on the position of insertion into the
string of Ys represents the oscillator level. In effect, the phases
reconstruct the Fourier representation of a momentum state on the string
worldsheet in position space along the string. The operators we can
insert include those in ( 3.104 ) corresponding to the directions in
which the open string has Neumann boundary conditions. For example:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.106)
  -- -- -- ---------

In addition, although there are no zero modes in directions with
Dirichlet boundary conditions for the open string, there are higher
oscillator excitations. These will correspond to insertions of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with a position dependent phase @xmath :

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.108)
  -- -- -- ---------

The higher fermionic oscillators correspond to similar insertions of
@xmath and @xmath with similar phases. Note that the phase @xmath is
half of the phase appearing in the closed string construction of [ 13 ]
. This is necessary to correctly reproduce the open string spectrum from
field theory.

All operators constructed as in ( 3.106 , 3.108 ) carry charge @xmath
under SO(2) @xmath and so to compare the string spectrum ( 3.102 ) to
the field theory we need only compute the conformal dimension of the
operator.

Although the interactions between Zs and the operators within the string
of Ys continue to be suppressed as for the zero modes, the presence of
phases in ( 3.106 , 3.108 ) leads to anomalous dimensions that we must
compute in order to match the spectrum ( 3.102 ) [ 13 ] . Below we will
work with the example ( 3.106 ) but an identical story applies to all
the other operators. (We leave out most of the details of the
calculation since it is exactly parallel to the work in [ 13 ] .)

To start it is useful to expand the energies ( 3.102 ) in a power series
in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The classical dimension of ( 3.106 ) is @xmath . In the interacting
theory anomalous dimensions will develop. To study this we have to
compute correlation functions of ( 3.106 ). Even in the free limit,
there are many non-planar diagrams in these correlators which are not
suppressed even at large @xmath because the operator itself has
dimension comparable to @xmath [ 79 ] . However, within any diagram the
interactions between the Ys and themselves is dominated by planar
sub-diagrams because @xmath and because when @xmath is large
nonplanarity only becomes important when more that @xmath fields are
involved [ 79 ] . The free contractions between Zs and themselves and
the Ys and themselves give rise to the classical dimension of the
operators.

If we introduce an additional operator @xmath within the string of Ys as
in ( 3.106 ). There are interactions between @xmath and Z, which lead to
small corrections that are suppressed in the large @xmath limit. There
will be further interactions between @xmath and Y which we will discuss
here. The diagrams connecting @xmath and @xmath arise because of the 4
point vertex in the @xmath theory. Summing all such diagrams is a
computation almost identical to what we did for BMN operators as in Sec.
3.2 . The only difference arises from the different position dependent
phase in relating the higher oscillators to operators as in ( 3.106 ).
The result is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This correctly reproduces the first order correction to the energy in (
3.109 ).

In Sec. 3.4.1 we discussed how the @xmath low energy fluctuations of
@xmath coinciding giants can arise from states with mutiple determinants
with intertwined indices (see the discussion around ( 3.83 ) and ( 3.84
)). A similar construction in the Penrose limit of G coinciding
D3-branes yields strings stretched between each pair of branes. The
spectra of each of these strings is identical and is reproduced as
above. The presence of a Chan-Paton factor labelling the string
endpoints is confirmed by point-splitting the location of the
determinant operators in Yang-Mills theory. At low energies these
strings must give rise to a new @xmath gauge theory. Note, however, that
only gauge-invariant operators built from this theory will be visible
unless the @xmath is broken by separating the branes. This is related to
the observation in Sec. 3.4.1 that when the branes coincide, all the
@xmath operators describing fluctuations of the multiple giants become
identical.