Higher-order representations of objects such as programs, proofs,
formulas and types have become important to many symbolic computation
tasks. Systems that support such representations usually depend on the
implementation of an intensional view of the terms of some variant of
the typed @xmath -calculus. Various notations have been proposed for
@xmath -terms to explicitly treat substitutions as basis for realizing
such implementations. There are, however, several choices in the actual
reduction strategies. The most common strategy utilizes such notations
only implicitly via an incremental use of environments. This approach
does not allow the smaller substitution steps to be intermingled with
other operations of interest on @xmath -terms. However, a naive strategy
explicitly using such notations can also be costly: each use of the
substitution propagation rules causes the creation of a new structure on
the heap that is often discarded in the immediately following step.
There is thus a tradeoff between these two approaches. This thesis
describes the actual realization of the two approaches, discusses their
tradeoffs based on this and, finally, offers an amalgamated approach
that utilizes recursion in rewrite rule application but also suspends
substitution operations where necessary.

\acknowledgments

I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to my advisor Dr.
Gopalan Nadathur for his guidance, support, and valuable instruction
throughout this entire project. I am grateful to Dr. Chuck C. Liang for
his help and interest in this project. Thanks are also due to Dr. Eric
Van Wyk and Dr. William Messing for their interest in this project.

I would also like to thank Natalie Linnell, Lijesh Krishnan, and Jimin
Gao for their comments on drafts and this thesis.

Work on this thesis has been partially supported by NSF Grant
CCR-0096322, a Grant-in-Aid of Research from the University of Minnesota
and by funds provided by the Institute of Technology and the Department
of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of Minnesota.
