Instantons constitute an important part of QCD as they provide a way to
reach behind the perturbative region. In the introductory chapters we
present, in the framework of a simple standard integral, the ideas that
constitute the backbone of instanton computation. We explain why
instantons are crucial for capturing non-perturbative aspects of any
theory and get a feel for zero mode difficulties and moduli space.
Within the same setting we explore the configuration space further by
showing how constrained instantons and instanton valleys come into play.

We then turn our attention to QCD instantons and briefly show the steps
to compute the effective lagrangian. We also show how single instanton
approximation arises and how one can use it to evaluate correlation
functions. By this we set the stage for the main parts of the thesis:
computation of @xmath decay and evaluation of nucleon vector and axial
vector couplings.

Having understood the effective lagrangian we use it as a main tool for
studying instanton contributions to hadronic decays of the scalar
glueball, the pseudoscalar charmonium state @xmath , and the scalar
charmonium state @xmath . Hadronic decays of the @xmath are of
particular interest. The three main decay channels are @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , each with an unusually large branching ratio @xmath . On
the quark level, all three decays correspond to an instanton type vertex
@xmath . We show that the total decay rate into three pseudoscalar
mesons can be reproduced using an instanton size distribution consistent
with phenomenology and lattice results. Instantons correctly reproduce
the ratio @xmath but over-predict the ratio @xmath . We consider the
role of scalar resonances and suggest that the decay mechanism can be
studied by measuring the angular distribution of decay products.

In the next part, motivated by measurements of the flavor singlet axial
coupling constant of the nucleon in polarized deep inelastic scattering
we study the contribution of instantons to OZI violation in the
axial-vector channel. We consider, in particular, the @xmath meson
splitting, the flavor singlet and triplet axial coupling of a
constituent quark, and the axial coupling constant of the nucleon. We
show that instantons provide a short distance contribution to OZI
violating correlation functions which is repulsive in the @xmath meson
channel and adds to the flavor singlet three-point function of a
constituent quark. We also show that the sign of this contribution is
determined by general arguments similar to the Weingarten inequalities.
We compute long distance contributions using numerical simulations of
the instanton liquid. We find that the iso-vector axial coupling
constant of a constituent quark is @xmath and that of a nucleon is
@xmath , in good agreement with experiment. The flavor singlet coupling
of quark is close to one, while that of a nucleon is suppressed @xmath .
This number is still significantly larger than the experimental value
@xmath .

Throughout the instanton computation in QCD one employs integration over
the @xmath group as the @xmath parameters are part of the moduli space.
The techniques of group integration are especially useful for computing
the effective lagrangian. We therefore present an algorithm for
computation of integrals over compact groups that is both simple and
easy to implement. The main idea was mentioned before by Michael Creutz
but, to our knowledge, never carried out completely. We exemplify it on
integrals over @xmath of type @xmath , with @xmath as well as integrals
of adjoint representation matrices @xmath , @xmath .

May 2004
\director Thomas SchaeferAssociate Professor, Nuclear physics theory ,
SBU \chairman Edward ShuryakProfessor, Nuclear physics theory, SBU
\fstmember Konstantin LikharevDistinguished Professor, Department of
Physics, SBU \outmember Raju VenugopalanPhysicist, Department of
Physics, Brookhaven National Laboratory

\makeapproval
