###### Contents

-    \thechapter The dark side of the Universe
    -    1 A historical introduction
    -    2 Standard cosmology
    -    3 Observational evidence
        -    3.1 CMB anisotropies
        -    3.2 Clustering of matter
        -    3.3 Age of the Universe
        -    3.4 Supernovae Ia and luminosity distance measurements
    -    4 Cosmic complementarity
-    \thechapter An explanation for the dark energy?
    -    5 Vacuum energy
    -    6 Anthropic solutions
    -    7 Quintessence
        -    7.1 Scalar field dynamics
        -    7.2 Quintessential problems
    -    8 Supergravity inspired models
        -    8.1 Exponential Times Inverse Power Law potential
        -    8.2 Two Exponential potential
-    \thechapter Quintessence field fluctuations
    -    9 Quintessence perturbations in Newtonian gauge
    -    10 Evolution of perturbations
        -    10.1 Analytical solution in the tracker regime
        -    10.2 Numerical analysis
-    \thechapter Constraining the quintessence potential
    -    11 Upper bounds on the cosmic equation of state
    -    12 Parameterized quintessence potential
    -    13 CMB peaks
    -    14 Likelihood analysis and results
        -    14.1 Constraints from supernovae
        -    14.2 Constraints from Doppler peaks and Sn Ia
    -    15 Discussion
-    \thechapter A model independent approach to the dark energy
    equation of state
    -    16 The effective equation of state
    -    17 Cosmological distance fitting functions
    -    18 Statefinder method
    -    19 Low redshift parameterization
    -    20 An exact parameterization for the dark energy equation of
        state
-    \thechapter Dark energy effects in the Cosmic Microwave Background
    Radiation
    -    21 A beginner’s guide to CMB physics
        -    21.1 Basic equations
        -    21.2 CMB anisotropies
    -    22 Dark energy and the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect
    -    23 Differentiating dark energy models with CMB measurements
    -    24 Testing dark energy with ideal CMB experiments
-    \thechapter Alternative cosmological test with higher order
    statistics
    -    25 Higher order statistics
    -    26 Frequentist approach and estimation of higher moments
    -    27 Modelling localized non-Gaussian anisotropies
    -    28 Discussion

\starttext

## Introduction

The set of astrophysical observations collected in the past decades and
the theoretical and experimental developments in high energy physics
have provided the natural framework that defines Cosmology as a
scientific discipline. The identification of the ‘Hot Big-Bang’ scenario
as a paradigm has been of crucial importance for the beginning of
Cosmology as a modern science. In fact it has allowed us to address a
number of questions about the nature and the evolution of the Universe
that otherwise would have been the subject of investigation of
philosophers and theologians. Since this paradigm has been accepted by
the majority of the scientific community, more specific and detailed
studies have been undertaken in order to extend the validity of the
paradigm to a wider class of phenomena such as the formation of the
structures we observe in the Universe. As result of this intense
activity, that the philosopher of science T.S. Kuhn would define as
normal science investigation [ 1 ] , the initial paradigm of Cosmology
has been extended in order to include the inflationary mechanism and
dark matter, two necessary ingredients to explain a number of issues
that arise within the ‘Hot Big-Bang’ scenario. This extended paradigm is
extremely successful and recent measurements in observational cosmology
have widely confirmed its prediction. It is very remarkable that long
before the recent developments of the cosmological science, T.S. Kuhn
identified the basic steps that a scientific discipline follows in its
evolution, steps that applies to modern Cosmology too. In particular he
has pointed out that there are phenomena which evading an explanation of
the paradigm are the subject of ‘extraordinary’ investigations, in
opposition to the ‘ordinary’ normal science activity. Most of the time
these studies lead to a crisis of the underlying paradigm and trigger
what he has called a ‘scientific revolution’. In this light the
discovery that the Universe is dominated by a dark energy component that
accounts for @xmath of the total matter budget belongs to this class of
phenomena. This is the subject of this thesis. In Chapter \thechapter we
will describe the observational evidence of dark energy and in Chapter
\thechapter we will review some of proposed explanations. From Kuhn’s
point of view these explanations would represent the attempt to force
Nature to fit within the ‘Hot Big-Bang’ paradigm. In fact these models
fail to succeed since they manifest inconsistencies with the
expectations of particle physics theories that are included in the
standard cosmological paradigm. The solution to this difficulty most
probably will need a new paradigm. This necessity will be more urgent if
the observational data will indicate a time dependence of the dark
energy properties. In this perspective the aim of this thesis is to
investigate some of the phenomenological aspects of minimally coupled
quintessence scalar field scenarios. In Chapter \thechapter we describe
the evolution of fluctuations in the quintessence field. In Chapter
\thechapter we discuss the constraints on a general class of
quintessence potentials obtained from the analysis of the position of
the acoustic peaks in the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) anisotropy
power spectrum and the Sn Ia data. In Chapter \thechapter we describe
some of the methods used to constrain the dark energy. We then introduce
a model independent approach that allows us to study the full impact a
general dark energy fluid has had in Cosmology. In fact this fluid
description, based on a very general parameterization of the dark energy
equation of state, allows us to infer the dark energy properties from
cosmological observations, instead of constraining specific classes of
dark energy models. In Chapter \thechapter we study the effects dark
energy produces in the CMB anisotropy power spectrum and show that
clustering of dark energy leaves a distinguishable signature only for a
specific class of models. In Chapter \thechapter we present the results
of preliminary work that aims to develop alternative cosmological tests
using the non-gaussianity produced by localized sources of CMB
anisotropies. We hope that the work reviewed in this thesis will provide
the basis for those ‘extraordinary’ investigations that will help us in
developing the new paradigm that modern Cosmology needs.

## Chapter \thechapter The dark side of the Universe

The recent results obtained in different areas of observational
cosmology provide an astonishing picture about the present matter
content of the Universe. The accurate measurements of the Cosmic
Microwave Background radiation (CMB) give strong evidence that the
curvature of the space-time is nearly flat. On the other hand the
analysis of large scale structure surveys shows that the amount of
clustered matter in baryonic and non-baryonic form can account only for
thirty per cent of the critical energy density of the Universe. In order
to be consistent these two independent analyses require the existence of
an exotic form of matter, that we call dark energy . More direct
evidence is provided by the Hubble diagram of type Ia supernova (Sn Ia)
at high redshifts. It suggests that the Universe is undergoing an
accelerated expansion sourced by this dark energy component that is
characterized by a negative value of its equation of state. A lot of
criticism has been levelled to these measurements. In fact the physics
of Sn Ia is still a matter of debate and consequently their use as
standard candles has not yet convinced the whole astronomical community.
In spite of such an important issue it is worth underlining that the
combination of CMB and supernova data constrains the amount of clustered
matter in the Universe to a value that is consistent with the large
scale structure observations. As we shall review in this chapter,
indirect evidence for a dominant dark energy contribution comes mainly
from the combination of CMB results and the constraints on the density
of baryons and cold dark matter. The simplest explanation for the dark
energy would be the presence for all time of a cosmological constant
term @xmath in Einstein’s equations of General Relativity. However
evidence for a non vanishing value of @xmath raises a fundamental
problem for theoretical physics, (for a review of the subject [ 2 , 3 ,
4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] ). In fact, as we shall see later, it is rather
difficult to explain the small observed value of @xmath from the
particle physics point of view. In this chapter we will briefly review
some historical developments of the dark energy problem. We will
introduce the standard cosmological model and the equations describing
the expansion of the Universe. Then we will discuss the build up of
observational evidence for dark energy.

### 1 A historical introduction

The cosmological constant was initially introduced by Einstein in the
equations of General Relativity (GR) as a term that could provide static
cosmological solutions [ 8 ] . Motivated by the observed low velocities
of the stars, he assumed that the large scale structure of the Universe
is static. We should remind ourselves that the notion of the existence
of other galaxies had been established only a few years later. Besides,
Einstein believed that the GR equations had to be compatible with the
Mach’s principle, which in a few words states that the metric of the
space-time is uniquely fixed by the energy momentum tensor describing
the matter in the Universe. For this reason he thought the Universe had
to be closed. These two assumptions were, however, not compatible with
the original form of the GR equations. In fact a matter dominated closed
Universe is not static, therefore he needed to introduce a term leading
to a repulsive force that could counterbalance the gravity. In such a
case he found a static and closed solution that preserved Mach’s
principle. But in the same year, 1917, de Sitter discovered an apparent
static solution that incorporated the cosmological constant but
contained no matter [ 9 ] . As pointed out by Weyl, it was an
anti-Machian model with an interesting feature: test bodies are not at
rest and an emitting source would manifest a linear redshift distance
relation. Such an argument was used by Eddington to interpret Slipher’s
observations of the redshift of spiral nebula (galaxies). Subsequently
expanding matter dominated cosmological solutions without a cosmological
constant were found by Friedman [ 10 , 11 ] and Hubble’s discovery of
the linear redshift distance relation [ 12 ] made these models the
standard cosmological framework. The cosmological constant was then
abandoned. For some time a non vanishing @xmath was proposed to solve an
‘ age problem ’. Eddington pointed out the Hubble time scale obtained by
using the measured Hubble constant was only 2 billion years in contrast
with the estimated age of the Earth, stars and stellar systems. In the
1950s the revised values of the Hubble parameter and the improved
constraints on the age of stellar objects resolved the controversy and
the cosmological constant became unnecessary. However in 1967 it was
again invoked to explain a peak in the number count of quasars at
redshift @xmath . It was argued that the quasars were born during a
hesitation era , at the transition between the matter and the @xmath
dominated era. More observational data confirmed the existence of this
peak and allowed for a correct interpretation as simply an evolutionary
effect of active galactic nuclei, with no necessity for @xmath . We
shall discuss the theoretical implications of the cosmological constant
in Chapter 2, here we would like to stress that in the past few decades
the @xmath term has played the role of a fitting parameter necessary to
reconcile theory and observations which has been discarded every time
systematic effects were considered. It is therefore natural to ask the
question if today we are facing a similar situation. In what follows we
will try to show that this turns not to be the case and the dark energy
is indeed most likely to be present in our Universe.

### 2 Standard cosmology

The Einstein field equations are:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the Ricci tensor, @xmath is the Ricci scalar, @xmath is
the cosmological constant term and @xmath is the matter energy momentum
tensor which determines the dynamics of the Universe. When different non
interacting sources are present the energy momentum tensor is the sum of
the energy momentum tensor of each of the sources. Assuming an isotropic
and homogeneous space-time the large scale geometry can be described by
the Friedman-Robertoson-Walker metric:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is a function of time (called the scale factor ) and @xmath
sets a flat, open (-1) or close (+1) geometry. Spatial homogeneity and
isotropy implies that the energy momentum tensor of each component is
diagonal:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the energy density and @xmath is the pressure of the i
-th matter component (radiation, baryons, cold dark matter, etc..). In
the FRW metric the Einstein equations ( 1 ) with a mixture of different
matter components are the Friedman equations:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

We define the density parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath where @xmath
is the critical energy density. Then the Friedman equation Eq. ( 4 ) can
be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

showing that the spatial curvature is fixed by the total matter content.
Since the different components do not interact with each other, their
energy momentum tensor must satisfy the energy conservation equation
@xmath . Hence in addition to the Friedman equations the evolution of
the energy density of each matter component is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

It is worth remarking that, as has been stressed by T. Padmanabhan [ 16
] , ‘absolutely no progress in cosmology can be made until a
relationship between @xmath and @xmath is provided in the form of the
functions @xmath ’ . In fact once these relations are known, we can
solve the dynamical equations and make predictions about the evolution
of the Universe, that can be tested by cosmological observations. If the
matter components consist of normal laboratory matter, then the
knowledge of how the matter equation of state @xmath evolves at
different energy scales is provided by particle physics. At present the
behaviour of matter has been tested up to about @xmath GeV, in this
domain the relation between energy density and pressure can be taken to
be that of an ideal fluid, @xmath , with @xmath for non relativistic
matter and @xmath for relativistic matter and radiation. However if a
cosmological model based on conventional matter components fails to
account for cosmological observations, we could interpret this fact as a
failure of the cosmological model or as a signal for the existence of a
source not seen in laboratories. For instance the cosmological constant
term behaves as a perfect fluid with negative pressure. This can be seen
rewriting the @xmath term in Eq. ( 4 ) and Eq. ( 5 ) as an energy
density and a pressure term. Then one finds @xmath . The effect of such
a component on the expansion of the Universe can be seen from Eq. ( 5 ),
and the value of deceleration parameter today is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

and we have neglected the radiation. For @xmath the expansion of the
Universe is accelerated since @xmath . Hence in a Universe dominated by
the cosmological constant the expansion is eternally accelerating. In
summary the dynamics of our Universe is observationally determined by
two geometrical quantities, the Hubble parameter @xmath , which provides
us with a measure of the observable size of the Universe and its age,
and the deceleration parameter @xmath which probes the equation of state
of matter and the cosmological density parameter.

### 3 Observational evidence

Different cosmological tests can be used to constrain the geometry and
the matter content of the Universe. We shall briefly review the latest
limits on @xmath and @xmath obtained by recent experiments in cosmology.

#### 3.1 CMB anisotropies

During the last few years an avalanche of balloon and ground
experiments, together with the most recent WMAP satellite observatory
have measured the small angular temperature fluctuations of the Cosmic
Microwave Background Radiation. Such measurements have detected a series
of acoustic peaks in the anisotropy power spectrum and confirmed early
predictions about the evolution of pressure waves in the primordial
photon-baryon plasma [ 17 , 18 ] . The specific features of such peaks
are sensitive to the value of the cosmological parameters, in particular
to @xmath , @xmath and the scalar spectral index @xmath . The
sensitivity to the curvature of the Universe however does not allow us
to constrain independently @xmath and @xmath , that are consequently
degenerates. The earlier analysis of the Boomerang experiment [ 19 , 20
, 21 ] found @xmath and the latest data released constrain the total
energy density to be @xmath [ 22 ] . Such a result is consistent with
the ones found by other CMB experiments. For instance, the data from
MAXIMA-1, another balloon experiment, when combined with the COBE-DMR
data suggest @xmath [ 23 ] . Similarly the two ground experiments, DASI
and CBI provide @xmath [ 24 ] and @xmath [ 25 ] respectively. Recently
three more groups, ARCHEOPS [ 26 ] , VSA [ 27 ] and ACBAR [ 28 ] have
released their data finding similar results. The constraints on the
baryon density are in good agreement with the prediction of the Big-Bang
Nucleosynthesis (BBN) and the scalar spectral index is found to be of
order unity, as predicted by generic inflationary paradigms. However CMB
alone poorly determines @xmath and a vanishing cosmological constant
cannot be excluded at @xmath . Nonetheless due to the strong constraint
on the curvature of the Universe, it is reasonable to restrict the data
analysis to the flat cosmological models ( @xmath ). In this case,
assuming the so called ‘HST prior’ on the value of the Hubble constant,
@xmath [ 29 ] , then all the CMB data constrain the cosmological
constant density parameter to be @xmath [ 25 ] . The WMAP satellite
provided CMB data with such an high level of accuracy that is worth
mentioning a part. The experiment has measured CMB anisotropies in
different frequency bands, allowing for an efficient removal of the
foreground emissions. The measurements mapped the full sky in the
unpolarized and polarized components providing an accurate determination
of the temperature power spectrum (TT) and the temperature-polarization
cross-correlation spectrum (TE) [ 30 ] . The position of the first peak
in the TT spectrum constrain the curvature to be @xmath [ 31 ] . The
combination of WMAP data with ACBAR and CBI, 2dF measurements and Lyman
@xmath forest data find the best fit cosmological parameters: @xmath ,
the baryon density @xmath , the dark matter density @xmath , the optical
depth @xmath , the scalar spectral index @xmath and the amplitude of the
fluctuations @xmath [ 32 ] . The value of @xmath comes from an excess of
power on the large angular scales of the TE spectrum [ 33 ] . This
signal cannot be explained by systematic effects or foreground emissions
and has a natural interpretation as the signature of early reionization,
most probably occurred at redshift @xmath . This conflicts with the
measurements of the Gunn-Peterson absorption trough in spectra, which
indicate the presence of neutral hydrogen at redshift @xmath [ 34 ] .
Therefore we have evidence for a complex ionization history of the
Universe, which most probably underwent two reionization phases, an
early and a late one. Of particular interest is the running of the
scalar spectral index that provides a better fit to the data when WMAP
is combined with small angular scale measurements such as ACBAR, CBI,
2dF galaxy survey and Lyman @xmath . Another interesting finding of the
WMAP TT spectrum is the lack of power at low multipole. In particular
the quadrupole and the octupole are suppressed compared to the
expectation of the best fit @xmath CDM model. It has been claimed that
such suppression could be the signature of new physics [ 35 , 36 ] .

#### 3.2 Clustering of matter

The cosmological structures we observe today have been formed by the
gravitational amplification of small density perturbations. The amount
of such inhomogeneities at different cosmological scales is measured by
the matter power spectrum. This is estimated from the statistical
analysis of a large sample of galaxies and provides a measurement of the
amount of clustered matter in the Universe. Recently two large galaxy
surveys, the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey [ 37 ] and the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey [ 38 ] , have probed intermediate scales ( @xmath Mpc). The fit
to the power spectrum data of the 2dF yields @xmath and the baryon
fraction @xmath [ 37 ] . Such a low value of @xmath gives indirect
evidence for a large non vanishing cosmological constant contribution
when this LSS data is combined with the CMB. A joint analysis of the CMB
and 2dF data indicates @xmath at @xmath [ 39 ] . An independent estimate
of @xmath is provided by the peculiar velocities of galaxies. In fact
mass density fluctuations cause galaxy motion with respect to the Hubble
flow. Such a motion reflect the matter distribution and therefore is
sensitive to @xmath . The analysis of the Mark III and SFI catalogs
constrain @xmath [ 40 ] . Low values of @xmath are also indicated by the
studies of cluster of galaxies, where it is assumed the amount of matter
in rich clusters provides a fair sample of the matter content of the
Universe. Recent surveys have precisely determined the local X-ray
luminosity function. Using the observed mass-luminosity relation, the
cluster mass function has been compared with the prediction from
numerical simulations. This analysis constrains @xmath at @xmath [ 41 ]
(see also [ 42 ] ). This result is in agreement with the limits found by
an alternative study from which, @xmath at @xmath [ 43 ] . Another way
of estimating the amount of dark matter is to measure the baryon
fraction @xmath from X-ray cluster observations. In fact the ratio of
the baryonic to total mass in cluster should closely match the ratio
@xmath . Therefore a measurement of @xmath combined with accurate
determination of @xmath from BBN calculation can be used to determine
@xmath . Using such a method it was found @xmath for @xmath [ 44 ] .
This is in agreement also with the value obtained by a study of the
redshift dependence of the baryon fraction, that indicates @xmath [ 45 ]
. Similarly a different analysis based on gravitational lens statistics
provides @xmath [ 46 ] .

#### 3.3 Age of the Universe

The Friedman equation Eq. ( 4 ) can be integrated to obtain the age of a
given cosmological model:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

The numerical solutions are shown in figure 1 . The solid lines
correspond to increasing value of @xmath in the @xmath plane. It is easy
to see that for fixed values of @xmath the age of the Universe increases
for larger values of @xmath . Since matter dominated cosmological models
are younger than globular clusters, in the past few decades the
possibility of an ‘age problem’ has been a matter of debate. The
presence of a cosmological constant can alleviate such a problem.
However a key role is played by the Hubble parameter, in fact low values
of @xmath increase @xmath . The age of globular clusters is estimated to
be about @xmath Gyr [ 47 ] , therefore a purely matter dominated
Universe ( @xmath and @xmath ) cannot be excluded if @xmath . However
such a low value of @xmath seems to be inconsistent with the accepted
value of @xmath [ 29 ] . It is worth mentioning that the determination
of the age of high redshift objects can be used to constrain @xmath by
studying the redshift evolution of the age of the Universe [ 48 ] .

#### 3.4 Supernovae Ia and luminosity distance measurements

Supernovae type Ia are violent stellar explosions, their luminosity at
the peak becomes comparable with the luminosity of the whole hosting
galaxy. For such a reason they are visible to cosmic distances. These
supernovae appear to be standard candles and therefore are used to
measure cosmological distances by means of the magnitude-redshift
relation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the apparent magnitude, @xmath is absolute magnitude and
@xmath is the luminosity distance which depends upon the geometry of the
space and its matter content. In the standard scenario a white dwarf
accretes mass from a companion star. Once the Chandrasekhar mass limit
is reached, the burning of carbon is ignited in the interior of the
white dwarf. This process propagates to the exterior layers leading to a
complete destruction of the star. The physics of these objects is not
completely understood yet. It requires the use of numerical simulations
from which it appears that the thermonuclear combustion is highly
turbulent. Such theoretical uncertainties prevent us from having
reliable predictions of possible evolutionary effects. It is also matter
of debate as to whether the history of the supernova progenitors can
have important effects in the final explosion (see [ 49 ] for a general
review). For these reasons it is a rather unreliable assumption that
supernova Ia are perfect standard candles. However the observations show
the existence of an empirical relation between the absolute peak
luminosity and the light curve shapes. There are also correlations with
the spectral properties. Using such relations it is possible to reduce
the dispersion on magnitude of each supernova to within @xmath
magnitudes allowing them to be used for cosmological distance
measurements (see [ 50 ] and references therein). The Supernova
Cosmology Project [ 51 ] and the High-Z Supernova Research Team [ 52 ]
have observed and calibrated a large sample of supernovae at low and
high redshifts. The result of their analysis [ 53 , 52 ] shows that
distant supernovae are on the average about 0.20 magnitudes fainter than
would be expected in a Milne universe (empty). The likelihood analysis,
due to the degeneracy of the luminosity distance with the values of
@xmath and @xmath , constrains these parameters in a region approximated
by @xmath . The data give evidence for a non vanishing cosmological
constant. Including the farthest supernova Sn 1997f with @xmath [ 54 ] ,
the data analysis shows that at redshift @xmath the Universe was in a
decelerating phase. However the presence of possible systematic
uncertainties has attracted some criticism. In particular there could be
a dimming of the light coming from the supernovae due to intergalactic
dust. Moreover the Sn Ia might have an evolution over the cosmic time,
due to changes in characteristics of the progenitors so as to make their
use as standard candles unreliable. The argument against the extinction
is that high-redshift supernovae suffer little reddening. While the fact
that their spectra appear similar to those at low-redshift seems to
exclude the possibility of evolutionary effects in the data. For
instance in [ 55 ] , the Hubble diagram of distant type Ia supernovae
segregated according to the type of host galaxy has been analysed. The
results shows that host galaxy extinction is unlikely to systematically
affect the luminosity of Sn Ia in a manner that would produce a spurious
cosmological constant. In reality only a theoretical prediction, not
available at the present time, would convince the entire community.
Nevertheless none of these systematic errors can reconcile the data with
a vanishing @xmath .

### 4 Cosmic complementarity

Figure 2 shows the region of the @xmath constrained by different
cosmological observations.

It appears evident that the joint analysis of the recent CMB, large
scale structure and Sn Ia observations, previously reviewed, indicate a
region of the parameter space where they are consistent [ 56 , 57 , 58 ]
. In particular the likelihood contours of Sn Ia and CMB are orthogonal
and therefore their combination breaks the geometric degeneracy between
@xmath and @xmath . Such consistency tells us that the Universe is
nearly flat, the structures we observe today are the result of the
growth of initial density fluctuations characterized by a nearly scale
invariant spectrum as predicted by inflationary scenarios. The matter
content of the Universe consist of baryons ( @xmath ), while most of the
clustered matter consists of cold dark particles that account for only
@xmath of the total energy density. About @xmath of the matter is in a
‘dark energy’ form and is responsible for the present accelerated
expansion. In spite of any astronomical uncertainties, the limits on
@xmath impose that @xmath GeV @xmath . Understanding the origin and the
smallness of this term is the challenge of modern theoretical physics.
In principle nothing prevents the existence of a @xmath -term in the
Einstein equations. However if @xmath appears on the left hand side, the
gravitational part of the Einstein-Hilbert action will depend on two
fundamental constants, @xmath and @xmath , which differ widely in scale.
For instance the dimensionless combination of fundamental constants
@xmath . On the other hand we know that several independent phenomena
can contribute as an effective @xmath term on the right hand side of the
Einstein equations [ 2 ] . However, as we shall see in the next chapter,
in order to reproduce the small observed value, these terms have to be
fine tuned with bizarre accuracy. Therefore the solution to such an
enigma may well lead us to the discovery of new physics.

## Chapter \thechapter An explanation for the dark energy?

The cosmological constant can be naturally interpreted as the energy
contribution of the vacuum. However its measured value turns out to be
extremely small compared to the particle physics expectations. Therefore
alternative candidates for the dark energy component have been
considered. In particular a light scalar field rolling down its
self-interacting potential can provide the missing energy in the
Universe and drive a late time phase of accelerated expansion. A lot of
effort has gone into justifying the existence of this field, called
quintessence , within the context of particle theories beyond the
Standard Model. Different versions of this original idea have been
developed in the literature. In this Chapter we will review the vacuum
energy problem. Then we will discuss the application of the anthropic
principle to the solution of the ’coincidence problem’. We will describe
the main characteristic of a minimally coupled quintessence scenario. At
the end we will analyse the dynamics of two specific scalar field
models.

### 5 Vacuum energy

It was initially pointed out by Y.B. Zeldovich [ 59 ] that in Minkowski
space-time, Lorentz invariance constrains the energy momentum tensor of
zero point vacuum fluctuations to be proportional to the Minkowski
metric, i.e. @xmath . This relation can be generalized to the case of a
curved space-time with metric @xmath . The principle of general
covariance requires that @xmath , which has the form of a cosmological
constant. This implies that in General Relativity, since the
gravitational field couples through the Einstein equations with all
kinds of energy, the vacuum energy contributes to the total curvature of
space-time. The vacuum state of a collection of quantum fields, that
describes the known forces and particles, is defined to be the lowest
energy density state. If we think of the fields as a set of harmonic
oscillators the total zero point energy is given by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

that diverges as @xmath (ultraviolet divergence). However any quantum
field theory is valid up to a limiting cut-off scale, beyond which it is
necessary to formulate a more fundamental description. Consequently the
integral Eq. ( 11 ) can be regularized imposing a cut-off @xmath , and
we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we set the cut-off @xmath at the Planck scale, the energy density of
the vacuum is @xmath GeV @xmath which is about @xmath orders of
magnitude larger than the observed value of @xmath . Fixing the cut-off
scale at the QCD phase transition, @xmath , we find @xmath GeV @xmath
which is still 44 orders of magnitude above the expected one. On the
other hand if Supersymmetry is realized in nature, the cosmological
constant vanishes because the vacuum energy contribution of the bosonic
degree of freedom exactly cancels that of the fermionic ones. However,
because we do not observe super-particles, Supersymmetry must be broken
at low energy. This implies that the cosmological constant vanishes in
the early Universe and reappears later after SUSY breaking. Assuming
that Supersymmetry is broken at @xmath the resulting @xmath is about 60
orders of magnitude larger then the observational upper bounds. Hence
any cancellation mechanism will require a bizarre fine tuning in order
to explain the huge discrepancy between @xmath and @xmath . By the
present time we do not have any theoretical explanation for this
cosmological constant problem. Moreover such a tiny value presents an
other intriguing aspect. In fact we could ask why @xmath has been fixed
at very early time with such an extraordinary accuracy that today it
becomes the dominant component of the Universe. In other words we should
explain why the time when @xmath starts dominating nearly coincides with
the epoch of galaxy formation. This is the so called coincidence or ’why
now’ problem. The solution to the cosmological constant problem will
provide an explanation also for this cosmic coincidence. On the other
hand it could be easier to justify a vanishing cosmological constant
assuming the existence of some unknown symmetry coming from quantum
gravity or string theory [ 60 ] . As we shall see in the following
sections, alternative scenarios of dark energy formulate the initial
condition problem and the coincidence problem in a different way.

### 6 Anthropic solutions

The use of anthropic arguments in cosmology has been often seen as an
anti-scientific approach. However a different use of the ‘Anthropic
Principle’ has been recently proposed in the literature and for a review
of the subject we refer to [ 61 ] . We should always have in mind that
at the speculative level our Universe can be one particular realization
of possible universes. Therefore the fact that we live in this Universe
makes us privileged observers, since under other circumstances we would
not be here. For instance several authors pointed out that not all
values of @xmath are consistent with the existence of conscious
observers [ 62 , 63 , 64 ] . The reason is that in a flat space-time the
gravitational collapse of structure stops at the time @xmath , as
consequence universes with large values of @xmath will not have galaxies
formed at all. This argument can be used to put an anthropic bound on
@xmath by requiring that it does not dominate before the redshift @xmath
when the earliest galaxy formed. In [ 64 ] assuming @xmath it was found
@xmath . However it was suggested in [ 65 , 66 ] that observers are in
galaxies and therefore there is a conditional probability to observe a
given value of @xmath . In particular this value will be the one that
maximizes the number of galaxies. In such a case the probability
distribution can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the a priori probability density distribution and @xmath
is the average number of galaxies that form per unit volume with a given
value of @xmath . The calculation of @xmath can be done using the
Press-Schechter formalism. Assuming a flat a priori probability density
distribution the authors of [ 67 ] found that the peak of @xmath is
close to the observed value of @xmath . This anthropic solution to the
cosmological constant problem would be incomplete without an underlying
theory that allows @xmath to take different values and predicts a flat
@xmath . The recent developments in string/M theory seems to provide a
natural framework where such issues can be addressed (see [ 68 ] ).

### 7 Quintessence

A non-anthropic solution to the cosmic coincidence problem would be an
exotic form of matter playing the role of dark energy. The existence of
such a component should be the prediction of some fundamental theory of
particle physics. For instance it was initially suggested that a network
of topological defects could provide such a form of energy [ 69 , 70 ,
71 ] . In fact topological defects are characterized by a negative value
of the equation of state @xmath and lead to an accelerated expansion if
they dominate the energy budget of the Universe. However these models
are ruled out by current cosmological observations. On the other hand,
long before the time of Sn Ia measurements, it was considered that an
evolving scalar field, called quintessence, could take into account for
the missing energy of the Universe [ 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 , 77 , 78 ]
. In this scenario the cosmic coincidence problem is formulated in a
different way. In fact the evolution of the quintessence is determined
by the initial conditions and by the scalar field potential.
Consequently there would be no coincidence problem only if the
quintessence becomes the dominant component today independently of the
initial conditions, that have been set at very early time. It was
pointed out by Zlatev, Wang and Steinhardt [ 79 , 80 ] that viable
quintessence potentials are those manifesting ‘tracking’ properties. In
these cases, for a wide range of initial conditions, the scalar field
evolves towards an attractor solution such that at late time it
dominates over the other matter components. However such a time will
depend on the energy scale of the potential and is fixed in way such
that @xmath reproduces the observed amount of dark energy. In other
words the tracker quintessence solves the initial conditions problem,
but the ‘why now’ problem is related to the energy scale of the model.
If such a scale is consistent with the high energy physics scales there
is no fine tunning and the fact that the acceleration starts only by the
present time does not have any particular meaning. On the contrary the
coincidence problem would result if such a scale is much smaller than
any particle physics scale, because this will require a fine tuning
similar to the cosmological constant case. As we shall see consistent
quintessence model building is a difficult challenge [ 81 ] . Cosmic
coincidence is absent in quintessence models where the scalar field is
non-minimally coupled to the cold dark matter [ 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 ] .
Coupling with baryons is strongly constrained by tests of the
equivalence principle, however a coupling with cold dark matter cannot
be excluded. In this case the coupling will naturally produce the
gravitational collapsing time scale of the order of the time when the
@xmath field starts dominating, @xmath . Moreover in these models
structure formation can occur even during the accelerated phase of
expansion and consequently no coincidence have to be explained [ 86 ] .
It may be argued that for this class of models to fully succeed what has
to be explained is the strength of the couplings. However the non
universality of the couplings may arise in the context of brane models,
where dark energy and dark matter belong to an hidden sector.

#### 7.1 Scalar field dynamics

A multiple fluid system consisting of a scalar field, pressureless
matter and radiation interacting through the gravitational field is
described by the action:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar and @xmath Lagrangian density of the
matter and radiation and @xmath is the Lagrangian density of the
quintessence field which is given by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

The scalar field energy-momentum tensor then reads as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

In a FRW flat Universe for a nearly homogeneous scalar field, the
quintessence pressure and energy density are @xmath and @xmath . The
quintessence behaves as perfect fluid with a time dependent equation of
state which is given by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

The scalar field evolution is described by the Klein-Gordon equation,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the matter and radiation energy densities
and evolve according to the energy conservation equation Eq. ( 7 ). As
an example we analyse the dynamics of this system in the case of an
Inverse Power Law potential [ 73 , 79 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and we set @xmath such that @xmath . We solve numerically
the equations of motion. In figure 3 we show the evolution with redshift
of the energy density of radiation (blue dash line), matter (green dot
line) and quintessence (red solid line). Different red lines correspond
to different initial conditions, we may distinguish two distinct
behaviours. For initial values of the quintessence energy density larger
than matter energy density, @xmath , @xmath rapidly decreases. This
regime is called kination . In fact, as we can see in figure 4 a, the
kinetic energy rapidly falls off while the potential energy remains
nearly constant. The overshooting is then followed by the frozen field
phase, where the energy density is dominated by the potential. During
this period @xmath remains constant until the kinetic energy becomes
comparable with the potential one and the field reaches the tracker
regime . In the tracker solution the kinetic and potential energies
scale with a constant ratio, therefore the equation of state is constant
or slowly varying. For a given potential the existence of a period of
tracking is guaranteed by the condition @xmath [ 80 ] . Moreover during
this phase the value of the quintessence equation of state mimics the
value @xmath of the background component according to the relation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

For inverse power law potentials @xmath . At late time the field leaves
the tracker solution, the potential energy starts dominating over the
kinetic one (figure 4 b) and the equation of state tends to negative
values. During this final phase the field becomes the dominant component
of the Universe and drives the accelerated expansion. The same arguments
hold for initial conditions corresponding to @xmath . In such a case the
quintessence starts its evolution in the frozen regime. Such a behavior
occurs over a range of initial conditions that covers more then 100
orders of magnitude, consequently the quintessence dominated period is
obtained with no need of fine tunning of the initial conditions.

For tracker models the final value of the equation of state depends on
the parameter @xmath or equivalently on @xmath and on the slope of the
potential. In general for large values of @xmath or flat potential
@xmath , in the case of the Inverse Power Law potential small values of
@xmath corresponds to large negative value of @xmath (figure 5 ).

#### 7.2 Quintessential problems

The existence of the tracker phase cancels any knowledge of the initial
condition of the scalar field providing an elegant way of solving the
coincidence problem. Nevertheless it is a rather difficult task to build
consistent particle physics models of quintessence. One of the reasons
it that for a given tracker potential, @xmath , the cosmic coincidence
is fully solved only if the scale @xmath is consistent with the energy
scale of the underlying particle physics theory that predicts the shape
@xmath of the quintessence potential. For example let us consider the
Inverse Power Law model. It was shown in [ 87 , 88 ] that it can be
derived from a Supersymmetric extension of QCD. By the present time the
condition @xmath has to hold in order to guarantee the Universe is
accelerating, this implies that today the scalar field @xmath . Since
the observations suggest @xmath , for values of the slope @xmath we find
that @xmath GeV, a very reasonable scale from the particle theory point
of view. On the other hand for tracker models the slope of the potential
is constrained by measurements of the present value of the quintessence
equation of state @xmath that indicate a low value of @xmath . But, as
we can see in figure 6 for values of @xmath the energy scale is much
smaller than any known particle physics scale. Therefore the Inverse
Power Law seems not to be a viable quintessence model.

Alternative models have been proposed in the literature, they can be
distinguished into two categories, dilatonic and supersymmetric
quintessence. The former class of models assume that the quintessence
field is the dilaton, this possibility has been studied in [ 89 , 90 ] .
The dilaton is predicted by all string theory models and it couples to
all the fields including gravity [ 91 ] . Therefore it could be a good
candidate for dark energy. However it predicts a running of the
different coupling constants, that are strongly constrained by present
observations and the violation of the equivalence principle.
Nevertheless these models deserve more investigation and some of these
issues have been recently addressed in [ 92 , 93 ] . It is worth
mentioning that the non-minimally coupled scalar field models which
solve the coincidence problem belong to this category [ 82 , 83 , 84 ,
85 , 94 , 95 ] . In the second class of models the quintessence is one
of the scalar fields predicted by Supersymmetric extensions of the
Standard Model of particle physics. In particular a lot of effort has
been recently devoted to the formulation of viable quintessence models
in the context of Supergravity theory. In fact it was noticed that
Inverse Power Law potentials generated by Supersymmetric gauge theories
are stable against quantum and curvature corrections, but not against K
@xmath hlerian corrections [ 96 , 97 , 98 ] . Since @xmath ,
Supergravity (SUGRA) corrections cannot be neglected and therefore any
realistic model of quintessence must be based on SUGRA. It is argued
that also this class of models lead to violation of the equivalence
principle, the quintessence field can in fact mediate a long range fifth
force that we do not observe. However we want to stress that in the
context of Supersymmetric theories this is not the main problem. The
reason is that the quintessence can belong to a hidden sector of the
theory that couples only gravitationally to the visible sector. It was
pointed out in [ 81 ] that any supersymmetric inspired model has to
address two specific issues. The first one concerns the case of
Supersymmetry breaking quintessence, if the quintessence field belongs
to a sector of the theory that breaks Supersymmetry, because of the
shape of the potential it turns out it cannot be the main source of
breaking. In such a case SUSY can be broken by the presence of an F-term
that leads to an intolerably large vacuum energy contribution that
completely spoils the nice properties of the quintessence potential. The
other difficulty arises from the coupling of quintessence to the field
responsible for the supersymmetry breaking. Such a coupling leads to
corrections of the scalar field potential such that the quintessence
acquires a large mass. Some alternatives have been recently
investigated, for instance a way of avoiding such problems has been
considered in [ 99 ] , where a Goldstone-type quintessence model in
heterotic M-theory has been proposed.

### 8 Supergravity inspired models

We now review some of the properties of two models proposed in the
context of Supergravity theories: the Exponential Times Inverse Power
Law potential and the Two Exponential potential.

#### 8.1 Exponential Times Inverse Power Law potential

The authors of [ 96 ] have shown that taking into account Supergravity
corrections to the Inverse Power Law potential, the quintessence
potential takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . This potential is an improvement the Inverse Power Law.
In fact the dynamic remains unchanged during the radiation and the
matter dominated era, while the presence of the exponential term flatten
the shape of the potential in the region corresponding to the late time
evolution of the scalar field. This allows for more negative values of
the equation of state today independently of the slope of the inverse
power law. Consequently we can have a reasonable particle physics energy
scale even for large values of @xmath . For instance for @xmath and
@xmath we have @xmath GeV and the present value of the equation of state
is @xmath , in better agreement with observational constraints.

#### 8.2 Two Exponential potential

The dynamics of cosmologically relevant scalar fields with a single
exponential potential has been largely studied in the literature and
within a variety of contexts (see for instance [ 77 ] ). The existence
of scalar field dominated attractor solutions is well known, however for
this class of models an accelerated phase of expansion can be obtained
with an extreme fine tunning of the initial conditions [ 102 ] . It has
been shown in [ 100 , 101 ] that quintessence Supergravity inspired
models predict the scalar field potential to be of the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a free parameter, while @xmath has to be fixed such that
@xmath . This potential has a number of interesting features. As it has
been pointed out by the authors of [ 100 ] in the form given by the
Eq. ( 23 ) all the parameters are of the order of the Planck scale. Only
@xmath has to be adjusted so that @xmath , it turns out to be @xmath .
For a large range of initial conditions the quintessence field reaches
the tracker regime during which it exactly mimics the evolution of the
barotropic fluid and at some recent epoch it evolves into a quintessence
dominated regime. It is useful to rewrite the two exponential potential
as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the usual energy scale parameter. For a given value of
@xmath the slopes @xmath fix the final value of the equation of state.
The sign of the slopes distinguish this class of potentials into two
categories: @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . For both the cases the Q-field
initially assumes negative values and rolls down the region of the
potential dominated by the exponential of @xmath . When it reaches the
tracker regime its equation of state exactly reproduces the value of the
background dominant component, @xmath and the energy density is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

The late time evolution is determined by the value of @xmath that fixes
the present value of the equation of state. In the case of slopes with
the same sign @xmath for small value of @xmath , while for @xmath and
@xmath with opposite sign the scalar field reaches by the present time
the minimum of potential at @xmath . Consequently @xmath after a series
of small damped oscillations. This can be seen in figure 7 where we plot
the evolution of the quintessence energy density parameter @xmath and
the equation of state @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .
In the latter model the equation of rapidly drops to @xmath after few
damped oscillations, while the former shows a more smooth behaviour. It
is worth remarking that for the two exponential potential with same sign
of the slopes the accelerated phase can be a transient regime. This can
occurs for large value of @xmath , in such a case after a short period
dominated by the potential energy the scalar field acquires kinetic
energy so that the equation of state can be @xmath . As we may note in
figure 7 , because Eq. ( 25 ) holds during the tracker regime, for small
values of @xmath the quintessence energy density assumes non-negligible
values at early times. Such an early contribution during the radiation
dominated era is constrained by nucleosynthesis bound to be @xmath MeV
@xmath . This implies that @xmath . Such a limit has pushed toward
larger value by a new analysis of the Big-Bang nucleosynthesis [ 103 ]
that constrains @xmath MeV @xmath at 2 @xmath .

In principle this bound can be avoided if the tracker regime starts
after Big-Bang nucleosynthesis. However this can be obtained only by
tuning the scalar field initial conditions in a restricted range of
values. Moreover a recent analysis of the large scale structure data and
CMB measurements strongly constrain the value of @xmath during the
matter dominated era [ 104 ] .

## Chapter \thechapter Quintessence field fluctuations

The cosmological constant is a smooth component and therefore does not
play any active role during the period of structure formation. On the
contrary a peculiar feature of the quintessence field is that it is
spatially inhomogeneous just as any other scalar field. Therefore it is
possible that the clustering properties of the dark energy can play a
determinant role in revealing the nature of this exotic fluid. In this
Chapter we introduce the scalar field fluctuation equations in the
Newtonian gauge. We derive an analytical solution of the quintessence
perturbation in the tracking regime and describe the behaviour during
different cosmological epochs. We then present the numerical analysis of
the perturbations in a multiple fluids system in the particular cases of
an Inverse Power law potential and the two exponential potential.

### 9 Quintessence perturbations in Newtonian gauge

The evolution of minimally coupled scalar field perturbations has been
studied in a number of papers. For instance in [ 73 , 77 , 105 , 106 ]
the analysis has been done in the synchronous gauge, while in [ 107 ,
108 , 109 ] the authors have used the Newtonian gauge. In what follows
we use the Newtonian gauge. When compared to the synchronous one it has
a number of advantages. In fact since the gauge freedom is fully fixed
there are no gauge modes that can lead to misleading conclusions about
the evolution of superhorizon modes. Besides, the metric perturbations
play the role of the gravitational potential in the Newtonian limit. The
equations we need to linearize are the Einstein’s equations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

the Klein-Gordon equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the conservation equation of the stress energy tensor of the
different matter components

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the Newtonian gauge the line element in a spatially flat FRW
background reads as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the metric perturbation and @xmath is the real time. We
consider a multiple fluid system composed of a scalar field, cold dark
matter and radiation. Expanding the fluid variables at first order
around the homogeneous value we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the density perturbation of the @xmath -th component,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the scalar field fluctuation and @xmath is the
homogenous part of the quintessence field. The linearized Eq. ( 26 ),
Eq. ( 27 ) and Eq. ( 28 ) provide a set of differential equations for
the metric, scalar field, radiation and cold dark matter perturbations.
In Fourier space the equations are:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the density perturbations of cold dark
matter and radiation, while @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding
velocity perturbations. The perturbed quintessence energy density and
pressure are,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

### 10 Evolution of perturbations

#### 10.1 Analytical solution in the tracker regime

From Eq. ( 33 ) we note that the perturbations of the other fluids feed
back onto the scalar field perturbations through the gravitational
potential @xmath . Deep during the radiation and the matter dominated
eras the gravitational potential is constant and therefore the first
term on the right-hand-side can be neglected. As a first approximation
we ignore the second term as well, hence Eq. ( 33 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can find an analytical solution during the tracker regime when

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath a constant that depends on the specifics of the potential
and on the equation of state of the background dominant component. This
can be obtained as follows. Consider the adiabatic definition of the
sound speed associated with the quintessence field:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

During the tracker regime the quintessence equation of state is nearly
constant implying that @xmath . Hence by differentiating Eq. ( 42 ) with
respect to time and dividing by @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

From Eq. ( 43 ) using the second of the Hubble equations @xmath , with
@xmath being the equation of state of the background dominant fluid, we
finally obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is useful to rewrite Eq. ( 40 ) in conformal time, which is defined
as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

where a prime denotes the derivative with respect to @xmath . In the
radiation dominated era the scale factor evolves as @xmath , while the
Hubble rate is given by @xmath , hence Eq. ( 45 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath being the value of @xmath in radiation dominated era. During
the tracker regime @xmath and @xmath . In such a case the characteristic
roots of Eq. ( 46 ) are complex and the solutions are of the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are integration constants and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

Eq. ( 47 ) is a damped oscillatory solution with frequency @xmath , On
large scales ( @xmath Mpc @xmath ) the frequency of these oscillations
is scale independent and is set by the tracker properties ( @xmath ). On
the other hand if @xmath , Eq. ( 46 ) has real roots and the solutions
contain a constant mode and a decaying one. Similar solutions can be
found in the matter dominated era. The addition of the source term
@xmath on the right-hand-side of Eq. ( 33 ) leads to an attractor
solution for the quintessence perturbations in the long-wavelength
limit, @xmath . In fact from Eq. ( 33 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

that is constant as long as the quintessence is in the tracker regime.
As a consequence this solution does not hold in the kinetic and
particularly in the potential phase when the quintessence exits away
from the tracker.

#### 10.2 Numerical analysis

In this section we present the analysis of the numerical solution of the
system of equations Eq. ( 32 - 37 ), where we have imposed adiabatic
initial conditions. We consider a quintessence SUGRA inspired model
described in Chapter \thechapter . The scalar field potential is
specified by Eq. ( 22 ) where we set the slope @xmath and the parameter
@xmath such that today @xmath . The initial conditions for the
homogeneous part of the scalar field @xmath have been set such that the
tracker solution is reached deep in the radiation dominated era. In
figure 8 we plot the behaviour of @xmath against the conformal time for
three different wavenumbers.

We can see that as the system enters the tracker regime, decaying
oscillations are set for all the three modes with a constant frequency
given by Eq. ( 48 ). Since @xmath is negligible in Eq. ( 48 ) the
frequency of these oscillations is the same for all modes. When the
second term in the right-hand-side of Eq. ( 33 ) becomes comparable to
the term @xmath the fluctuations evolves onto the attractor solution
given by Eq. ( 49 ). In the specific case we consider there is not an
exact tracking and consequently the ratio @xmath scales linearly and not
steadily as in the exact tracking case. This explains why @xmath
increases with time in the long wavelength mode. As different scales
cross the horizon they leave this attractor solution. For instance the
shortest wavelengths ( @xmath ) enter the horizon after matter radiation
equality. Due to the decay of the gravitational potential the first term
on the right-hand-side of Eq. ( 33 ) becomes large leading to a decaying
solution with small damped oscillations whose frequency is set by the
effective mass term @xmath on the left-hand-side of Eq. ( 33 ). The
presence of an attractor solution for the scalar field perturbations is
evident in figure 9 , where we plot the phase space @xmath .

As the system evolves in the tracker regime, @xmath and @xmath spiral
toward the attractor point @xmath . As soon as the tracker terminates
the long wavelength fluctuations have converged to the same values and
their evolution is indistinguishable. In minimally coupled quintessence
models the effects of the scalar field perturbations on the structure
formation process are negligible. This is because the quintessence
interacts only gravitationally with the other fluid components and it is
usually a subdominant component during the epochs that are relevant for
the formation of the early structures. Therefore the clustering of the
dark energy can have detectable effects only at late times through the
time evolution of the gravitational potentials. As we shall see in
Chapter \thechapter this produces a characteristic imprint in the CMB
anisotropy power spectrum. In figure 10 we plot the behaviour of the
gravitational potential @xmath normalized to the cosmological constant
case for @xmath (upper panel) and @xmath for three different
quintessence models whose dynamics have been described in Chapter
\thechapter : (model A) the SUGRA potential Eq. ( 22 ) with slope @xmath
(blue solid line); (model B) the two exponential potential Eq. ( 23 )
with @xmath and @xmath (red dash line) and (model C) @xmath and @xmath
(blue dash dot line). We may note a number of features that arises from
the presence of dark energy perturbations and a different expansion rate
of the Universe compared to the @xmath CDM model. Let us consider the
mode @xmath that crosses the horizon during the matter era. For model B
(red dash line) the quintessence energy density is always negligible
during the matter era and consequently there are no effects due to the
perturbations in the evolution of the gravitational potential. On the
other hand because of the scalar field dynamics the late time expansion
rate of the Universe is different compared to the @xmath case, hence
@xmath diverges from the unity. In contrast in models A and C the
quintessence energy density dominates earlier, especially in model C
where @xmath is a large fraction of the total energy density (see figure
7 ). In this case we can distinguish two different evolutionary regimes
of the gravitational potential. At redshift @xmath the Universe is
matter dominated and the quintessence is in the tracker solution with an
equation of state very close to the matter value. Therefore during this
period the expansion rate is the same as in the @xmath model and we
would expect @xmath . The fact this ratio deviates from unity is due to
the presence of the dark energy perturbations. On the other hand the
evolution of the gravitational potential at @xmath is caused by the
accelerated phase of expansion. This can be seen by the change of the
slope of @xmath at a redshift @xmath when the acceleration starts. The
late time decay of the gravitational potential sources the formation of
CMB anisotropy through the late Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect (ISW). The
same arguments hold for the mode @xmath that enters the horizon soon
after matter-radiation equality. However it is worth noticing that in
the case of model C, the early contribution of dark energy causes the
scalar field perturbations to produce a bigger effect on the decay of
@xmath , leading to a larger early ISW effect. From this analysis we
conclude that different dark energy models will lead to a characteristic
signature in the CMB power spectrum and will prove this point in a more
general way in Chapter \thechapter .

## Chapter \thechapter Constraining the quintessence potential

Cosmological distance measurements test the expansion rate of the
Universe at different redshifts. Therefore they can be used to constrain
the dark energy properties and eventually disprove the @xmath CDM model.
A lot of effort has gone into constraining the value of the dark energy
equation of state with the current available data. In this Chapter we
will review some of the constraints obtained in previous works. Then we
will describe the analysis of the Sn Ia data and the measured position
of the CMB peaks that we performed to constrain the shape of a general
quintessence potential [ 110 ] . We will comment on our results and
compare them to those obtained in other related work.

### 11 Upper bounds on the cosmic equation of state

Different dark energy models are usually constrained assuming that the
dark energy behaves as a perfect fluid with a constant equation of state
@xmath . This can take into account for models such as a network of
topological defects with @xmath ( @xmath is the dimension of the defect)
[ 111 ] and as first approximation time dependent tracker quintessence
models with @xmath . Different values of @xmath will lead to a different
expansion rate and consequently to a different cosmological distance. In
particular for larger negative values of @xmath the phase of
acceleration starts at earlier times and therefore cosmological distance
indicators will appear farther than in models with smaller negative
values of @xmath . This can be seen in figure 11 , we plot in the solid
line the redshifts @xmath when the Universe starts accelerating and in a
starred line the redshift @xmath when the dark energy starts dominating
as a function of @xmath for different values of @xmath . For a flat
Universe The redshift @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the redshift @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note for @xmath we have @xmath . For a flat Universe the effect on
cosmological distances produced by varying @xmath is degenerate with
@xmath and with the Hubble parameter @xmath .

By making use of the Sn Ia data the authors of [ 53 , 112 ] find the
constraint @xmath (2 @xmath ) for @xmath . We will comment in the next
Chapter about the bias effect introduced in the analysis of data by
assuming a constant equation of state. The position of the Doppler peaks
in the CMB anisotropy power spectrum is another indicator of the
cosmological distance to the last scattering surface and hence can be
used to constrain @xmath . In [ 113 ] a constant effective equation of
state

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

has been constrained with the Sn Ia, CMB and the LSS data. The authors
find @xmath (2 @xmath ) with @xmath being best fit. They comment that
tracker models can marginally accommodate the Sn Ia and LSS constraints
at the same time (see figure 12 ).

Such an inconsistency can be explained as follows. The supernova
luminosity distance is sensitive to the value of @xmath , while large
scale structure data are more sensitive to the amount of clustered
matter @xmath through the matter power spectrum. This implies that dark
energy models with different values of @xmath will not change the
likelihood in @xmath of the large scale structure data. In fact assuming
the value of the effective equation of state to be @xmath , this shifts
the Sn Ia likelihood towards smaller values of @xmath ( i.e. larger
values of @xmath ). As we will show later, extending the likelihood
analysis to the slope of the tracker potential enables us to find models
that simultaneously fit the whole data. Similar constraints from Sn Ia
and CMB data have been found by Efstathiou [ 114 ] , namely @xmath (2
@xmath ). In a different approach Saini et al. [ 115 ] have
parameterized the luminosity distance and by constraining their
parameter space with the Sn Ia data they have been able to reconstruct
the redshift dependence of the dark energy equation of state. They find
a time dependence with @xmath today and @xmath at @xmath . Waga and
Frieman have constrained the slope of the Inverse Power Law potential
@xmath (see Eq. ( 20 )) by making use of the Sn Ia and lensing statistic
data [ 116 ] . Imposing @xmath they obtain an upper limit on the present
value of the equation of state @xmath that implies @xmath . The combined
analysis of the CMB power spectrum measured by the Boomerang and MAXIMA
experiments with Sn Ia and large scale structure, limits a constant
equation of state to be @xmath with @xmath being the favoured value [
117 ] .

### 12 Parameterized quintessence potential

We have seen in Chapter \thechapter that for tracker models the present
value of the equation of state depends of the shape of the scalar field
potential. In particular for SUGRA inspired models [ 100 , 118 , 96 ,
101 ] the equation of state parameter varies in the range @xmath , while
Inverse Power Law potentials require larger values. A general potential
which can accommodate for these classes of scenarios is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath is fixed in such a way that today @xmath , where
@xmath is the critical energy density. For @xmath Eq.( 53 ) becomes an
inverse power law, while for @xmath we have the SUGRA potential proposed
by [ 96 ] . For @xmath , @xmath and starting with a large value of
@xmath , the Quintessence field evolves in a pure exponential potential
[ 77 ] . We do not consider this case further since it is possible to
have a dark energy dominated universe, but at the expense of fine tuning
for the initial conditions of the scalar field. Larger values of @xmath
mimic the late time evolution of the model studied in [ 101 ] . For
@xmath the potential has a minimum, the dynamics can be summarized as
follows: for small values of @xmath and for a large range of initial
conditions, the field does not reach the minimum by the present time and
hence @xmath . For example, if the Quintessence energy density initially
dominates over the radiation, the @xmath field quickly rolls down the
inverse power law part of the potential eventually resting in the
minimum with @xmath after a series of damped oscillations [ 119 ] . This
behaviour however requires fine tuning the initial value of @xmath to be
small. On the other hand, this can be avoided if we consider large
values of @xmath and @xmath (figure 13 a). In these models the
fractional energy density of the quintessence field, @xmath , is always
negligible during both radiation and matter dominated eras. In fact, for
small initial values of @xmath , @xmath acts like an inverse power law
potential, hence as @xmath enters the scaling regime its energy density
is subdominant compared to that of the background component. Therefore
nucleosynthesis constraints [ 103 ] are always satisfied and there are
no physical effects on the evolution of the density perturbations. The
main consequence is that for a different value of @xmath the Universe
starts to accelerate at a different redshift (figure 13 b).

This implies that different values of @xmath and @xmath lead to a
different luminosity distance and angular diameter distance.
Consequently by making use of the observed distances we may in principle
determine an upper limit on @xmath , potentially constraining the
allowed shape of the quintessence potential [ 120 ] .

### 13 CMB peaks

The CMB power spectrum provides information on combinations of
fundamental cosmological parameters. The physical processes responsible
for the anisotropy are well understood allowing us to accurately predict
the shape of the anisotropy power spectrum for a given cosmological
model. The presence of acoustic oscillations of the photon-baryon plasma
before the recombination epoch establishes a multiple peaks pattern in
the power spectrum. For a review of the subject we refer to [ 121 ] .
During the radiation dominated era the equation describing the effective
temperature fluctuation @xmath of the CMB is of the form [ 122 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the gravitational potential sourced by the energy
density perturbations in the different matter components, @xmath is the
sound speed of the barotropic fluid and the primes are derivatives with
respect to @xmath , @xmath being the conformal time and @xmath the
comoving wavenumber. Eq. ( 54 ) has the form of a perturbed harmonic
oscillator, therefore when the photons decouple from the baryons their
energy carries an imprint of such oscillations. The characteristic
frequency of these oscillations is fixed by the size of the sound
horizon at the decoupling @xmath . Therefore we have a series of
compressions and rarefactions at scales @xmath . Today such scales
appear at angles that are multiple integers of the angular size of the
sound horizon at the decoupling @xmath , where @xmath is the distance to
the last scattering surface for a space-time with curvature @xmath . As
a consequence of these the position of the ‘Doppler’ peaks in the power
spectrum depends on the geometry of the Universe. For a flat Universe
the peaks will appear at the multipoles

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the mean sound speed and @xmath , @xmath are the
conformal time today and at last scattering respectively. However the
acoustic oscillations are perturbed by the evolution of the
gravitational potential @xmath on the right-hand-side of Eq. ( 54 ),
which shifts the position of the peaks by an amount that depends on the
cosmological parameters that are relevant before the recombination. This
results in a better estimate for the peak positions being given by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an overall shift [ 122 ] and @xmath is the shift of the
@xmath -th peak. These corrections depend on the amount of baryons
@xmath , on the fractional quintessence energy density at last
scattering ( @xmath ) and today ( @xmath ), as well as on the scalar
spectral index @xmath . Analytic formulae, valid over a large range of
the cosmological parameters, have been provided to good accuracy for
@xmath and @xmath [ 123 ] . Of crucial importance is the observation
that the position of the third peak appears to remain insensitive to
other cosmological quantities. This is because at small scales, well
inside the horizon, @xmath is usually negligible, hence we recover the
unperturbed harmonic oscillator equation for Eq. ( 54 ) that describes
oscillations with zero point offset. Hence we can make use of this fact
to test dark energy models [ 124 , 125 ] . As we shall discuss in more
detail in Chapter \thechapter , the quintessence field can leave a
distinctive signature on the shape of the CMB power spectrum through
both the early integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect (ISW) and the late one [
126 ] . The former is important if the dark energy contribution at the
last scattering surface is not negligible [ 100 , 118 ] or in
non-minimally coupled models [ 82 , 127 , 128 ] , whereas the late ISW
is the only effect in models with @xmath such as those described by our
parameterized quintessence potential [ 129 ] . However the late ISW
produces an imprint on the CMB power spectrum of the order of @xmath and
therefore is not detectable with the pre-WMAP measurements. In such a
case an accurate determination of the position of the Doppler peaks is
more sensitive to the actual amount of dark energy.

### 14 Likelihood analysis and results

#### 14.1 Constraints from supernovae

We want to constrain the set of parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
confined in the range: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , subject to the
assumption of a flat universe. This choice of the parameters allows us
to account for a large number of models. We use the Sn Ia data fit C of
Perlmutter et al. (1999) [ 53 ] , that excludes 4 high redshift data
points, which are very likely reddened by their host galaxies. The
magnitude-redshift relation is given by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the ‘Hubble constant free’ absolute magnitude and @xmath
is the free-Hubble constant luminosity distance. In a flat universe

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the conformal time today and @xmath is the conformal
time at the red-shift @xmath of the observed supernova. Both of these
quantities are calculated solving numerically Eq. ( 18 ) and Eq. ( 19 )
for each value of @xmath and @xmath . In @xmath we neglect the
dependence on a fifth parameter ( @xmath in [ 53 ] ) and assume it to be
0.6, the best fit value in [ 53 ] . We then obtain a gaussian likelihood
function @xmath , by marginalizing over @xmath . In figure 14 a we
present the one-dimensional likelihood function normalized to its
maximum value for @xmath . When considering only Sn Ia data, there is a
maximum at @xmath , such a high value of @xmath is required if we impose
the constraint @xmath and it is in agreement with the analysis in [ 130
] . In figure 15 a we present the likelihood contours in the @xmath
parameter space, obtained after marginalizing over @xmath . Note that
all values are allowed at the @xmath level. The confidence regions for
the Sn Ia data correspond to Quintessence models with @xmath for @xmath
, an upper limit that agrees with those found in [ 53 , 114 ] .

#### 14.2 Constraints from Doppler peaks and Sn Ia

We now compute the position of the three Doppler peaks @xmath and @xmath
using Eq. ( 56 ). In addition to the parameter space used in the
supernovae analysis we consider the physical baryon density and the
scalar spectral index varying respectively in the range @xmath and
@xmath . The Hubble constant is set to @xmath in agreement with the
recent HST observations [ 29 ] . It is worth remarking that the baryons
density and @xmath are degenerate with the quintessence parameters. In
fact increasing @xmath reduces the value of @xmath causing a shift of
the CMB peaks towards large multipoles. The same effect occurs for low
values of the Hubble constant, therefore the results of this analysis
will depend on the HST prior. The predicted peak multipoles are then
compared with those measured in the Boomerang and DASI spectra [ 131 ] .
Note, that the third peak has been detected in the Boomerang data but
not in the DASI data. In table 1 we report the position of the peaks
with @xmath errors estimated from the Boomerang, DASI and WMAP data with
a model independent analysis. Since the errors are non Gaussian (see
also [ 132 ] ), to be conservative we take our @xmath errors on the data
to be larger than those reported in [ 131 ] , so that our analysis is
significant up to @xmath .

We then evaluate a gaussian likelihood function @xmath . The combined
one-dimensional likelihood function for the peaks is shown in figure 14
b, where we find @xmath . The likelihood for all the data sets combined
is shown in figure 14 c, where we find @xmath . These results are in
agreement with the analysis in [ 148 , 21 , 133 ] .

The likelihood functions, combining all the CMB peaks data, for the
scalar spectral index and the physical baryon density are shown in
figure 16 . Since the dependence of the peak multipoles on @xmath and
@xmath is weak, it is not possible to obtain some significant
constraints on these cosmological parameters. In figure 15 b- 15 d we
plot the two-dimensional likelihood function in the plane @xmath for
each peak, obtained after having marginalized over @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Their shape reflects the accuracy in the estimation of the
position of the peaks. Actually the first one is very well resolved,
while we are less confident with the location of the second and third
peak. Therefore their likelihoods are more spread and flat in the @xmath
plane. The @xmath confidence contour (figure 15 b) for the first
acoustic peak constrains the slopes of our potential in the range:
@xmath and @xmath . In particular the likelihood has a maximum at @xmath
and @xmath , corresponding to an equation of state @xmath for @xmath ,
in agreement with the recent analysis in [ 133 ] . However, the second
and third peaks constrain a complementary region where the equation of
state is compatible with the cosmological constant value. Therefore the
effect of including all the data in the likelihood analysis is to move
the constraint from models with @xmath to models with an equation of
state @xmath . The constraints on the slopes of the quintessence
potential allows us to infer an upper limit on the present value of the
equation of state only after having fixed the value of @xmath . In fact
the scalar field potential Eq. ( 53 ) is fully specified by three
numbers that are @xmath . However the map @xmath is not one-to-one and
therefore it is not possible to transform the likelihood @xmath .
Therefore there is a substantial difference between inferring the bounds
on the dark energy equation of state by directly constraining its
present value and constraining the scalar field potential. As we can see
in figure 18 the values of @xmath and @xmath , allowed by the likelihood
including all the data (figure 17 ), correspond to our models with
values of @xmath in the range @xmath at @xmath for our prior probability
@xmath . Assuming smaller values of @xmath relaxes the constraints on
@xmath , for instance for @xmath we have @xmath at @xmath . The results
of our analysis can be interpreted as follows. At the @xmath level the
position of the first peak is inconsistent with the position of the
other two. A possible explanation of this discrepancy is that the
multipoles @xmath and @xmath are less sensitive to small shifts induced
by the dependence on @xmath and @xmath . Therefore we can obtain a
different constraint on the dark energy equation of state if we consider
the peaks individually. It is worth remarking that the position of the
first peak in the Boomerang data prefers slightly spatially closed
models. Having assumed a flat geometry affects our upper bounds on the
slope of the potential in a region corresponding to @xmath . On the
other hand the location of the third peak inferred in [ 131 ] , is at
@xmath , for which values of @xmath fit this multipole better than
models with @xmath . In fact the peaks are shifted toward larger
multipoles as @xmath approaches the cosmological constant value. This is
because, in models with @xmath the Universe starts to accelerate earlier
than in those with @xmath , consequently the distance to the last
scattering surface is farther and hence the sound horizon at the
decoupling is projected onto smaller angular scales.

A possible source of bias in our analysis is due to the prior on the
value of @xmath , in fact assuming @xmath implies that models with a
large negative equation of state and large value of @xmath are
preferred. However our results are consistent with other studies which
assume similar priors. For instance in [ 133 ] , using the complete set
of available CMB measurements the slope of the Inverse Power Law
potential has been constrained to be @xmath under the prior @xmath ,
corresponding to @xmath . Similarly in [ 134 ] , by making use of the
CMB, Sn Ia and large scale structure data, it has been found @xmath for
a constant equation of state. A time dependent dark energy equation of
state, characterized by a late time transition, has been constrained
using all cosmological data in [ 135 ] , where it has been found @xmath
.

### 15 Discussion

The analysis of Sn Ia data and the location of the CMB peaks in
Boomerang and DASI data constrain the slope of a general quintessence
potential in a range of values such that the quintessence field is
undergoing small damped oscillations around a minimum of the potential
(see figure 13 ). Such a situation implies that the value of the
quintessence equation of state has to be very close to @xmath . However
this does not imply that the dark energy is the cosmological constant.
What our result means is that the quintessence field today is evolving
in a nearly vacuum state. In fact models where the scalar field is
rolling down a very flat region of the potential can fit the data and
pass the constraints even though they are not included in our analysis.
Another important caveat is that this study does not take into account
quintessence scenarios where the contribution of the dark energy is not
negligible. In such a case we would have to take into account physical
effects not only on distance measurements, but on the structure
formation process itself (see for instance [ 136 , 104 ] ). These
effects however are not detectable with the level of accuracy provided
by the recent balloon and ground CMB experiments. A revised analysis of
the Boomerang data has been recently published in [ 22 ] , the position
of the peaks has been determined with a better accuracy, in particular
the third peak is shifted at a smaller multipole than previously
detected. This slightly changes our results, relaxing the lower bounds
on the slope @xmath . Here we want to stress the fact that it seems
likely the present value of the dark energy equation of state is close
to @xmath . However the possibility that the equation of state was
largely different from @xmath cannot be excluded, as it is shown by the
class of models that best fit the Sn Ia data and the CMB peaks. The new
generation of satellite experiments we will probably be able to detect
the specific effects produced by a time varying dark energy component.

## Chapter \thechapter A model independent approach to the dark energy
equation of state

The detection of time variation in the dark energy equation of state can
be considered as the ‘smoking gun’ for the cosmological constant
scenario. The new generation of experiments in cosmology will provide
high precision measurements that in principle can discriminate between
different dark energy candidates. On the other hand it is unrealistic to
assume we can infer some general information constraining some
particular quintessence model. In fact a plethora of scalar field
potentials have been proposed, all leading to similar late time
behaviour of the universe, hence to a lack of predictability. In this
Chapter, we first review some of the methods that have been proposed in
the literature to constrain the time features of a general quintessence
component. We then introduce a model independent approach which simply
involves parameterizing the dark energy equation of state in terms of
known observables [ 137 ] . This allows us to analyse the impact dark
energy has had on cosmology without the need to refer to particular
scalar field models and opens up the possibility that future experiments
will be able to constrain the dark energy equation of state in a model
independent manner.

### 16 The effective equation of state

Measuring the present value of the dark energy equation of state can
distinguish between a cosmological constant scenario and a
quintessential component if @xmath . Using the tracker properties of the
quintessence field, the most reliable method to infer a bound on @xmath
would be to constrain directly the quintessence potential. However this
could result in a difficult challenge, for instance in Table 2 we show a
list of proposed tracker quintessence potentials. Therefore, because
there are no fundamental physical principles that can specify the nature
of the dark energy, we are left with a potentially infinite set of
families of theoretical models to compare with the data.

As a consequence of this it is to be hoped that a more general way of
constraining the dark energy can be developed. A simple method to take
into account a large number of dark energy models is to consider a
constant effective equation of state defined by Eq. ( 52 ). Using the
energy conservation equation, the redshift evolution of the dark energy
density is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

The effective equation of state appears through the Hubble equation in
the coordinate distance defined by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

Hence the value of @xmath can be constrained by measurements of the
luminosity distance and the angular diameter distance, that in a flat
space-time read as @xmath and @xmath respectively. There is a general
consensus that an accurate determination of @xmath from high redshift Sn
Ia measurements with the proposed SNAP satellite [ 140 ] can determine
@xmath to better than 5 per cent [ 141 ] . In such a case if @xmath is
much larger than @xmath it will be possible to rule out the @xmath CDM
model. However if @xmath the results of the data analysis have to be
carefully considered. In fact it has been shown by Maor et al. [ 142 ]
that assuming a constant @xmath introduces a bias that leads to
misleading conclusions about the properties of the dark energy. In order
to make this point clear, let us consider a sample of mock data
generated from a dark energy model with an equation of state of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath and @xmath . The constraints on a constant equation of state
@xmath obtained from the statistical analysis of such a sample, will
push the bounds towards values of @xmath . This effect has been noticed
also in other works, see for instance [ 145 , 146 ] and can be explained
as follows. For a model with @xmath given by Eq. ( 61 ) the energy
density evolves as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

As we may note, comparing Eq. ( 59 ) with Eq. ( 62 ), if @xmath and
@xmath , fitting the data with a constant equation of state roughly
requires @xmath . In other words the fitting procedure will pick out
values of @xmath that are more negative than the fiducial one. Hence a
time varying dark energy component can be confused with a cosmological
constant, while allowing @xmath to vary in a range of values more
negative than -1, will shift the best fit models towards @xmath .
Therefore it is very possible that the claims for the existence of
phantom matter (with @xmath ) [ 143 , 144 ] are just a consequence of
assuming a constant equation of state in the data analysis.

### 17 Cosmological distance fitting functions

Several methods to constrain the time dependence of the dark energy
equation of state have been discussed in the literature [ 115 , 147 ,
148 , 149 , 150 , 151 , 145 , 152 , 153 , 146 ] . Since the dark energy
became dominant only recently, it is reasonable to concentrate on local
redshift measurements, such as the Sn Ia. The coordinate distance and
the Hubble parameter are uniquely related by @xmath . Thus we can
estimate @xmath from cosmological distance indicators and unambiguously
calculate @xmath and @xmath . This allows us to reconstruct @xmath
provided the value of @xmath is given. In fact the Hubble equations in
the presence of matter and a scalar field are:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the dot is the derivative with respect to the time. These
equations can be rewritten in the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Using the definition of the scalar field equation of
state we find:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

The idea is then to introduce a fitting function for the coordinate
distance, so that once its parameters have been determined from the data
analysis, its first and second derivatives with respect to the redshift
can be analytically calculated. The authors of [ 115 ] suggest

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are fitting parameters, while Huterer
@xmath Turner [ 147 ] consider both a polynomial fitting function

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

and a Pade’ approximate

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

It has been pointed out in [ 146 ] that such a general method fails to
accurately reproduce the correct behaviour of given scalar field models,
even assuming strong priors on the value of @xmath . The difficulty
arises because the formula Eq. ( 67 ) depends on the derivatives of
@xmath . Therefore even though @xmath can mimic the @xmath of a specific
model, this may be not true for its derivatives.

### 18 Statefinder method

A different approach has been developed by Sahni et al. [ 154 , 155 ] .
They suggest a method to distinguish amongst different dark energy
scenarios by measuring geometrical parameters that are constructed in
such a way they are more sensitive to the expansion rate of the
Universe. Such parameters, called Statefinder pair, are defined by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

For a flat Universe the relation to the dark energy equation of state
@xmath and its time derivative @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Hubble parameter. In general the value of such
parameters evolves with the time, but for the cosmological constant (
@xmath ) we have @xmath at all the times. Moreover, since @xmath are
geometrical quantities, they can naturally take into account braneworld
models in which the accelerated expansion is caused by five dimensional
gravity effects and which lead to modifications of the Hubble equations.
The Statefinder pair can be estimated using the following ansatz for the
Hubble parameter,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , and @xmath . In such a case @xmath are of the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

The value of the fitting parameters @xmath can be inferred from a
likelihood analysis of cosmological distance measurements, such as the
Sn Ia. From Eq. ( 75 ) it appears obvious that an accurate estimation of
@xmath needs a precise knowledge of the amount of non-relativistic
matter. In [ 155 ] it has been shown that imposing a Gaussian prior
probability distribution on @xmath with variance @xmath , the high
redshift Sn Ia measurements provided by the proposed SNAP satellite will
accurately determine the Statefinder pair offering the chance to
distinguish between different dark energy models. Therefore the
Statefinder method seems to be highly sensitive to the nature of dark
energy and avoids the main difficulties of the reconstructing procedure.
In fact it only needs to constrain fitting parameters that appear in the
Hubble equation and does not constrain directly the equation of state
that affects the expansion rate apart from through a time integrated
effect. A potential limitation of such an approach is that the
determined values of @xmath do not give us any information about the
physical properties of the dark energy, unless their values are a priori
known for specific classes of models.

### 19 Low redshift parameterization

In the absence of theoretically motivated dark energy models we can
consider a low redshift expansion for @xmath and the parameters of such
an expansion can be interpreted as fundamental dark energy parameters.
Therefore the constraints on a parameterization of the equation of state
would provide a model independent determination of the dark energy
properties. Such a parameterization should satisfy the following
requirements:

-   it should depend on a minimal number of parameters @xmath that
    specify the physical properties of the dark energy;

-   the functional form of the parameterization has to be such that for
    a given set @xmath the behavior of the equation of state @xmath
    reproduces the @xmath predicted by proposed quintessence models and
    can account also for more general cases.

In [ 148 , 146 ] it was suggested the use of a logarithmic expansion,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

while the authors of [ 145 , 151 , 153 ] used a polynomial fitting
function,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

The general drawback of using a redshift expansion formula for the dark
energy equation of state is that the number of fitting parameters is now
larger than assuming a simple time constant behaviours and consequently
the degeneracy in the dark energy parameter space is enlarged. In fact
the coordinate distance is related by a multi-integral expression to the
equation of state and therefore widely different @xmath can have the
same multi-integral value. There is a general consensus that assuming
strong priors on the value of @xmath it will be possible to tightly
constrain @xmath , but it will be more difficult to put tight bounds on
the other parameters. The solution would be to combine different data
sets that can break the degeneracy in the parameter space. The
expansions specified by Eq. ( 77 ) and Eq. ( 78 ) both have limited
applicability. For instance Eq. ( 77 ) can take into account only for
quintessence models with slowly varying behaviours and breaks down at
large redshifts, as we can see in figure 19 .

On the other hand the polynomial expansion Eq. ( 78 ) introduces a
number of unphysical parameters whose values are not directly related to
the properties of a dark energy fluid. The consequence is that, unless
we pay the cost of considering very unphysical values, their application
is limited to low redshift measurements and cannot be extended to the
analysis of high redshift data sets such as the CMB data. An interesting
alternative to the fitting expansion approach, has recently been
proposed in [ 156 ] . The authors of this study developed a method to
reconstruct the time behavior of the equation of state from cosmological
distance measurements without assuming the form of its parameterization.
In spite of the efficiency of such an approach, it does not take into
account the effects of the possible clustering properties of dark energy
which become manifest at higher redshifts. Hence its application has to
be limited to the effects dark energy can produce on the expansion rate
of the universe at low redshifts. On the other hand, it has been argued
that dark energy does not leave a detectable imprint at higher
redshifts, since it has only recently become the dominant component of
the universe. Such a statement, however, is model dependent, on the face
of it there is no reason why the dark energy should be negligible deep
in the matter dominated era. For instance CMB observations constrain the
dark energy density at decoupling to be less then 10 per cent of the
critical one [ 104 ] . Such a non negligible contribution can be
realized in a large class of models and therefore cannot be a priori
excluded. Consequently it is of crucial importance to find an
appropriate parameterization for the dark energy equation of state that
allows us to take into account the full impact dark energy has on
different types of cosmological observations.

### 20 An exact parameterization for the dark energy equation of state

Our goal is to determine an appropriate analytical form of the equation
of state @xmath valid at all redshifts in terms of physical quantities,
so that it can describe a general fluid and take into account most of
the proposed dark energy models. In Chapter 2 we have seen that the
specific evolution of @xmath , depends on the shape of the potential,
however there are some common features in its behaviour that can be
described in a model independent manner and which allow us to introduce
some physical parameters. As we have seen in Chapter 2 a large number of
quintessence models are characterized by the existence of the ’tracker
regime’. It consists of a period during which the scalar field, while it
is approaching a late time attractor, evolves with an almost constant
equation of state whose value can track that of the background
component. Here we consider a broad class of tracking potentials. These
include models for which @xmath evolves smoothly, as with the inverse
power law [ 73 ] , @xmath (INV) and the supergravity inspired potential
[ 96 ] , @xmath (SUGRA). Late time rapidly varying equation of states
arise in potentials with two exponential functions [ 100 ] , @xmath
(2EXP), in the so called ‘Albrecht & Skordis’ model [ 118 ] (AS) and in
the model proposed by Copeland et al. [ 101 ] (CNR). To show this in
more detail, in figure 20 we plot the equation of state obtained by
solving numerically for each of these potentials the scalar field
equation of motion defined by Eq. ( 18 ) and Eq. ( 19 ).

There are some generic features that appear to be present, and which we
can make use of in our attempts to parameterize @xmath . For a large
range of initial conditions of the quintessence field, the tracking
phase starts before matter-radiation equality. In such a scenario @xmath
has three distinct phases, separated by two ‘phase transitions’. Deep
into both the radiation and matter dominated eras the equation of state,
@xmath , takes on the values @xmath and @xmath respectively, values that
are related to the equation of state of the background component @xmath
through:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath etc. For the case of an exponential potential,
@xmath , with @xmath , but in general @xmath . Therefore if we do not
specify the quintessence potential the values of @xmath and @xmath
should be considered as free parameters. The two transition phases can
each be described by two parameters; the value of the scale factor
@xmath when the equation of state @xmath begins to change and the width
@xmath of the transition. Since @xmath is constant or slowly varying
during the tracker regime, the transition from @xmath to @xmath is
always smooth and is similar for all the models (see figure 20 ). To be
more precise, we have found that @xmath and @xmath during this
transition, the former number expected from the time of matter-radiation
equality and the latter from the transition period from radiation to
matter domination. However, when considering the transition in @xmath
from @xmath to the present day value @xmath , we see from figure 20 that
this can be slow ( @xmath ) or rapid ( @xmath ) according to the slope
of the quintessence potential. For instance in models with a steep slope
followed by a flat region or by a minimum, as in the case of the two
exponentials, the AS potential or the CNR model, the scalar field
evolves towards a solution that approaches the late time attractor,
finally deviating from the tracking regime with the parameter @xmath
rapidly varying. In contrast the inverse power law potential always has
a slower transition since @xmath is constant for all times. Given these
general features we conclude that the behavior of @xmath can be
explained in terms of functions, @xmath , involving the following
parameters: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The authors
of [ 135 ] have recently used an expansion in terms of a Fermi-Dirac
function in order to constrain a class of dark energy models with rapid
late time transitions.

In what follows we find that a generalisation of this involving a linear
combination of such functions allows for a wider range of models to be
investigated. To be more precise, we propose the following formula for
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

The coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are determined by demanding
that @xmath takes on the respective values @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
during radiation ( @xmath ) and matter ( @xmath ) domination as well as
today ( @xmath ). Solving the algebraic equations that follow we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (82)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , and the value of and @xmath and @xmath can be arbitrarily
chosen in the radiation and matter era because of the almost constant
nature of @xmath during those eras. For example in our simulations we
assumed @xmath and @xmath . In table LABEL:fitpar we present the best
fit parameters obtained by minimizing a chi-square for the models we
have considered and in figure 21 we plot the associated fitting
functions @xmath . It is encouraging to see how accurately the
Fermi-Dirac functions mimic the exact time behavior of @xmath for the
majority of the potentials.

In figure 22 we plot the absolute value of the difference @xmath between
@xmath and @xmath . The discrepancy is less then @xmath for redshifts
@xmath where the energy density of the dark energy can produce
observable effects in these class of models and it remains below @xmath
between decoupling and matter-radiation equality. Only the CNR case is
not accurately described by @xmath due to the high frequency
oscillations of the scalar field which occur at low redshift as it
fluctuates around the minimum of its potential. In fact these
oscillations are not detectable, rather it is the time-average of @xmath
which is seen in the cosmological observables, and can be described by
the corresponding @xmath . There are a number of impressive features
that can be associated with the use of @xmath in Eq. ( 80 ).

For instance it can mimic the behavior of more general models. As an
example of this in figure 23 we plot @xmath that approximately
corresponds to three cases: a K-essence model [ 157 ] (blue solid line);
a rapid late time transition [ 158 ] (red dash-dot line) and finally one
with an equation of state @xmath (green dash line). The observational
constraints on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath lead to
constraints on a large number of dark energy models, but at the same
time it provides us with model independent information on the evolution
of the dark energy. It could be argued that the five dimensional
parameter space we have introduced is too large to be reliably
constrained. Fortunately this can be further reduced without losing any
of the essential details arising out of tracker solutions in these
Quintessence models. In fact nucleosynthesis places tight constraints on
the allowed energy density of any dark energy component, generally
forcing them to be negligible in the radiation era [ 103 , 159 ] . The
real impact of dark energy occurs after matter-radiation equality, so we
can set @xmath . Consequently we end up with four parameters: @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Although they increase the already large
parameter space of cosmology, they are necessary if we are to answer
fundamental questions about the nature of the dark energy. The
parameters make sense, if @xmath evolves in time, we need to know when
it changed ( @xmath ), how rapidly ( @xmath ) and what its value was
when it changed ( @xmath ). Neglecting the effects during the radiation
dominated era it proves useful to provide a shorter version of Eq. ( 80
), in fact since we can neglect the transition from radiation to matter
dominated eras, then the linear combination Eq. ( 80 ) can be rewritten
as ¹ ¹ 1 We thank Eric Linder for pointing this out to us. :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

As we can see in figure 24 , the relative difference between the exact
solution @xmath of the Klein-Gordon equation and Eq. ( 85 ) is smaller
than @xmath for redshifts @xmath , therefore it provides a very good
approximation for the evolution of the quintessence equation of state.
Both Eq. ( 80 ) and Eq. ( 85 ) are very useful in that they allow us to
take into account the clustering properties of dark energy (see for
instance [ 160 ] ) and to combine low redshift measurements with large
scale structure and CMB data.

## Chapter \thechapter Dark energy effects in the Cosmic Microwave
Background Radiation

The physics of the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation has been deeply
studied during the past 30 years. The theoretical developments in
understanding the different processes responsible for the temperature
anisotropies have given to us the possibility to accurately predict the
spectrum of the CMB fluctuations for a given cosmological model. The
existence of these cosmological temperature fluctuations was initially
confirmed by the COBE satellite [ 163 ] , but it is only with the recent
generation of balloon and ground experiments, such as Boomerang [ 19 ] ,
Maxima [ 23 ] and DASI [ 24 ] , that the observations reached the level
of accuracy necessary for testing different cosmological scenarios. As
we have reviewed in Chapter \thechapter , these measurements have
detected the multiple peak structure of the CMB power spectrum,
providing an accurate determination of the cosmological parameters. The
improvements in the CMB experiments are mainly due to the high
performance of the new high frequency microwave detectors. The recent
WMAP satellite, using this technology has started a new generation of
satellite experiments that will measure the temperature and polarization
anisotropies close to the theoretical ‘cosmic variance’ limit. It is
therefore of crucial importance to study the imprint dark energy leaves
in the anisotropy power spectrum. In this Chapter we start reviewing the
main concepts of the CMB physics. Using a model independent approach we
study the impact of different dark energy models in the CMB spectrum. In
particular we find that features of the dark energy equation of state
can leave a characteristic imprint in the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect
[ 161 , 162 ] . We will identify the dark energy models that are
distinguishable from the cosmological constant. In conclusion we will
show the limits on a class of dark energy models that can be obtained by
cosmic variance limited experiments.

### 21 A beginner’s guide to CMB physics

The starting point of the CMB anisotropy calculation is the kinetic
theory of photons in a perturbed space-time. Here we shall briefly
review the main concept of the subject and for more authoritative
reviews we refer to [ 126 , 121 , 164 ] .

#### 21.1 Basic equations

Let us consider a flat pertubed background. In the Newtonian gauge the
metric element is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the metric perturbations and @xmath is the
conformal time. The properties of a gas of photons propagating in this
space-time are described by the distribution function @xmath that
depends on the three spatial coordinates @xmath and the three conjugate
momenta @xmath . In the Newtonian gauge the relation between @xmath and
the proper momentum @xmath measured by an observer at a fixed spatial
coordinate is given by @xmath . In order to eliminate the metric
perturbations from the definition of the momenta it is convenient to
replace @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath being the
module and the cosine directions respectively. In the early Universe the
photons propagate in a hot ionized medium and interact through the
Compton scattering with free electrons and ions. As a consequence of
this the distribution function is conserved along the perturbed geodesic
apart for a collisional term. The evolution of the distribution function
is described by the Boltzmann equation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath accounts for the Compton scattering and the geodesic
equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

In addition the linearized Einstein equations determine the equations
for the metric perturbations @xmath and @xmath in term of the
perturbations in the multiple fluids system. At the zeroth order we can
consider the Universe as being unperturbed, in such a case @xmath is
independent of @xmath and @xmath and if the collision between photons
and charged particles conserve energy, then @xmath is time independent
and consequently @xmath is as well. This is a good approximation, since
the free electrons are non-relativistic and the Compton scattering is
primarily Thomson scattering in which momentum and not energy is
transferred. The equilibrium distribution function @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the factor 2 accounts for the number of polarization states of the
photon and @xmath is the temperature of the radiation today. The effects
of the perturbed background can be described by expanding the
distribution function @xmath about the equilibrium state,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is given by Eq. ( 89 ) and @xmath is the perturbed part of
the distribution function. Substituting Eq. ( 90 ) into Eq. ( 87 ) and
taking only the first order terms we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

For practical purposes it is convenient to write the perturbed part of
the distribution function in term of the brightness function @xmath ,
that is the fractional perturbation in the effective temperature of the
photons, @xmath . Expanding @xmath around @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (92)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Comparing Eq. ( 90 ) with Eq. ( 92 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

Substituting Eq. ( 93 ) into Eq. ( 91 ) and taking the Fourier transform
the Boltzmann equation becomes [ 18 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the differential optical depth, with @xmath the
ionization fraction, @xmath the electron number density and @xmath the
Thomson cross section; @xmath is the isotropic component of @xmath ,
@xmath is the baryon velocity and @xmath is the anisotropic stress
perturbation for the photons. Hence the collisional term couples the
evolution of the photon perturbation to that of the baryons. The
equations for the baryon perturbations are obtained by linearizing the
conservation equation of the stress energy tensor:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (96)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the velocity perturbation of the photons. It is useful
to expand the brightness function in a Legendre series:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using the definition of the photon stress energy tensor in term of the
distribution function @xmath , it can be shown that @xmath and @xmath .
Substituting Eq. ( 98 ) in Eq. ( 94 ) and using the explicit form of the
Compton scattering term Eq. ( 95 ) we obtain the hierarchy equations [
165 , 166 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

The anisotropy power spectrum is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

From Eq. ( 94 ) we note there are two sources of anisotropy formation,
the Compton scattering that couples the photons to the baryons and the
gravitational effect produced by the presence of density fluctuations in
all the matter components.

#### 21.2 CMB anisotropies

##### Acoustic Oscillations

Before recombination the differential optical depth @xmath is very large
and the scattering between photons and baryons is extremely rapid and
efficient. In this regime, called the tight coupling limit ( @xmath ),
the photons and the baryons behave as a single fluid. Because of this
the baryons and photons velocity are the same at the zeroth order,
@xmath . In such a case Eq. ( 97 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the baryon to photon ratio. Inverting this equation in
terms of @xmath and substituting in Eq. ( 100 ) we obtain the iterative
first order solution,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

These equations can be combined into a single second order equation [
167 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The source function @xmath arises from the gravitational
potentials and is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

From Eq. ( 107 ) we can distinguish three different contributions to the
evolution of the isotropic part of the brightness function during the
tight coupling regime:

-   the radiation pressure given by the term @xmath which dominates on
    subhorizon scales and supports oscillations of the photon-baryon
    plasma;

-   the gravitational infall of the photon-baryon fluctuations in the
    potential well, @xmath ;

-   the @xmath term that sources the oscillations at scales that enter
    in the horizon between the epochs of matter-radiation equality and
    decoupling. The @xmath term contribute as a friction term.

Neglecting time variations in the gravitational potentials, Eq. ( 107 )
describes a forced harmonic oscillator equation. On subhorizon scales
the photon pressure balances the gravitational collapse of the
perturbations and causes the propagation of pressure waves in the
photon-baryon plasma. The characteristic scale upon which these waves
can propagate is fixed by the size of the sound horizon @xmath . When
the photons last scatter, the imprint of these compression and
rarefaction regions will appear as a series of peaks in the anisotropy
power spectrum on the angular scales smaller than the angle subtended by
the sound horizon at the decoupling. The odd and the even peaks
correspond to photons coming from regions that are respectively in
compression and expansion phases at last scattering. However the
compression and rarefaction phases are not completely equivalent. In
fact the baryons increase the effective mass of the barotropic fluid and
consequently the gravitational infall generated by the density
fluctuations leads to a deeper trough during the compression phase (
baryon drag ). The compression is enhanced over rarefaction resulting in
a larger amplitude of the odd peaks relative to the even ones. Therefore
the relative heights of the acoustic peaks is extremely sensitive to the
baryon density @xmath . An additional source of anisotropies is due to
the motion of the fluid at the last scattering surface due to the
Doppler shift of the CMB photons. However due to the large value of
@xmath this effect is subdominant.

##### Sachs-Wolfe effect

In the large wavelength limit ( @xmath ) the Boltzmann equation Eq. ( 99
) reduces to the form @xmath ( @xmath ). The solution of this equation
depends on the initial condition of the solution of the linear density
perturbation equations. In fact @xmath and for adiabatic initial
conditions @xmath , reflecting the fact that the photons are
overdensities inside the potential well. However due to the decay of the
gravitational potential after matter-radiation equality the photon
temperature at decoupling becomes @xmath , where @xmath is the conformal
time at decouplings. When the photons last scatter they climb out of the
potential well @xmath so that the effective superhorizon perturbations
in the photon temperature is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the so called Sachs-Wolfe effect [ 168 ] . It is the dominant
source of anisotropies on large angular scales and is responsible for
the plateau at the low multipoles in the CMB power spectrum. Since these
scales are superhorizon at the time of decoupling the amplitude of this
Sachs-Wolfe depends on the primordial spectrum of the density
fluctuations.

##### The Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect

The time evolution of the gravitational potentials is a source of
primary anisotropies, in fact as the photons free stream after
decoupling the solution to the Boltzmann equation is given by [ 169 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the Bessel functions. The first term represents the
contribution of the Sachs-Wolfe effect, while the second term is the
Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect (ISW) [ 170 ] . We can distinguish two
contributions to the ISW: an early and a late ISW. The former is due to
the decays of the gravitational potentials after horizon crossing at the
end of the radiation dominated era. The latter occurs in dark energy
dominated cosmologies, as the Universe starts accelerating the rapid
expansion causes the decay of the density fluctuations that drive the
decay of the gravitational potentials. The combined effect of the SW and
the two components of the ISW can be studied by analysing the the
anisotropy power spectrum per logarithmic @xmath and @xmath interval
defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

In figure 25 we show the density plots of Eq. ( 111 ) integrated up to
@xmath ( left panel ) and to @xmath ( right panel ) for a @xmath CDM
with @xmath . The brighter regions correspond to values of the
wavenumbers and multipoles where there is more power. Since for the
model we have considered the acceleration starts at redshift @xmath ,
the contribution of the late ISW can be emphasized by comparing the
distribution of power in the left panel with that in the right panel. As
we expect, we note that due to the projection onto the last scattering
surface the wavenumbers @xmath and the multipoles @xmath are strongly
correlated. As a consequence of this the power at redshift @xmath is
shifted toward lower multipoles than at @xmath . This is simply because
the last scattering surface is closer to the observer at redshift @xmath
and different scales are projected on larger angles. The filamentary and
periodic structure of the density plots are due to the Bessel functions.
We therefore expect a different structure in the case of an open or
closed space-time. Note that the power is distributed along an upper and
a lower ridge respectively. The latter is the contribution of the
Sachs-Wolfe effect caused by modes that are superhorizon at decoupling (
@xmath ) while the upper ridge is produced by the early ISW. Since this
latter effect arises closer to the present time, the corresponding
anisotropies are projected on angular scales larger than the SW effect
itself. The bright spot at the top of the panels correspond to the rise
of the first Doppler peak, the other peaks do not appear in these plots
since we limited our analysis to scales larger than the horizon at
decoupling ( @xmath ). As we can see in the right panel, integrating the
modes over the period of time when the Universe started to accelerate
boosts the power at lower multipoles. In fact the signature of the late
ISW can be noticed from the fact that the upper ridge becomes brighter
than that in the right panel. Note that the two plots have slightly
different brightness scales, this is because the late ISW overlaps with
the SW leading to a different distribution of the power on the large
angular scales.

##### Damping mechanisms

The overall amplitude of the CMB power spectrum is suppressed by the
effects of diffusive mechanisms. The most important of these effects is
due to the diffusion of the photons on scales smaller than their mean
free path @xmath . In fact due to the Compton scattering the photons
randomly walk through the baryons with a mean free path @xmath . After
@xmath collisions the diffusive length is @xmath . Consequently on
scales @xmath the diffusion exponentially suppresses the amplitude of
anisotropies. The baryons suffer a similar effect, in fact from Eq. ( 97
) we can see that on scales @xmath the Compton scattering can drag the
baryons in and out of the potential wells leading to a destruction of
the baryonic oscillations ( Silk damping [ 171 ] ). Another damping
effect arises from the fact that he last scattering process is not
instantaneous. The photons we observe today in a given direction of the
sky may have decoupled from different points along the line of sight.
Therefore fluctuations on scales smaller then the thickness of the last
scattering surface have destructively interfered causing a ‘washing out’
of the anisotropies on very small angular scales. The reionization
history of the Universe also contributes to the overall damping of the
temperature anisotropy power spectrum. In fact when the first stars form
they reionize the intergalactic medium, therefore a fraction of the CMB
photons are scattered on scales smaller then size of the horizon at the
epoch of reionization. This lead to a suppression of the power at large
multipoles. In light of the recent WMAP measurements of the
temperature-polarization cross power spectrum, it is worth mentioning
that the reionization sources the polarization of the anisotropies.
Consequently a late reionization, @xmath , will produce significant
power at low multipoles in the temperature-polarization spectrum.

### 22 Dark energy and the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect

We have previously discussed the importance of distinguishing between
different dark energy models from the “concordance” @xmath CDM model.
The ISW is particularly sensitive to the late time evolution of the
Universe. In fact during the matter dominated era the gravitational
potential @xmath associated with the density perturbations is constant
and there is no ISW effect. However, we have seen that in @xmath CDM
models @xmath starts decaying at redshifts when @xmath starts to
dominate, producing large angular scale anisotropies [ 172 ] . In dark
energy scenarios the cosmic acceleration is not the only contribution to
the decay of @xmath : on large scales the clustering properties alter
the growth rate of matter perturbations [ 76 , 173 ] . It is the signal
of this clustering [ 174 ] that we are hunting in as model-independent a
way as possible. We assume a flat spatial geometry and fix the value of
the Hubble constant @xmath Km @xmath @xmath , and the amount of matter
(CDM) @xmath . We can usefully distinguish two classes of models,

-   those with a slowly varying equation of state for which @xmath , as
    in the case of the inverse power law potential [ 79 ] ;

-   a rapidly varying @xmath , such as the ’Albrecht-Skordis‘ model [
    118 ] and the two exponential potential [ 100 ] , with @xmath . This
    class also includes many interesting radical models such as vacuum
    metamorphosis [ 175 ] , late-time phase transitions [ 176 ] , and
    backreaction-induced acceleration [ 177 ] .

We show these two classes in figure 26 . The red solid line corresponds
to dark energy that tracks the dust during the matter era ( @xmath ) and
evolves slowly toward @xmath , and the blue dotted line corresponds to a
model with a rapid transition in its equation of state at @xmath (
@xmath ). Given current data it is worth studying the case with @xmath ,
(since it is also the most difficult to distinguish from @xmath CDM)
whilst allowing the other parameters @xmath and @xmath , to vary. We
have modified the CMBFAST code [ 178 ] in order to include the effects
of a dark energy fluid and its perturbations by specifying the time
evolution of the equation of state.

Figure 27 shows the anisotropy power spectrum, @xmath , produced through
the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect by a rapidly evolving ( @xmath @xmath
) and a slowly evolving ( @xmath @xmath ) equation of state; the red
(solid) line corresponds to the @xmath CDM model. As we can see in the
top left panel (figure 27 a), varying @xmath can produce a strong ISW.
The effect is larger if the transition in the equation of state occurs
at redshifts @xmath . On the other hand the @xmath is the same as in the
cosmological constant regime if @xmath ( @xmath ). In the top right
panel (figure 27 b) we plot the ISW for two different values of @xmath ,
corresponding to @xmath (dashed line) and @xmath (dot-dash line). We
note that the signal is larger if the quintessence field is perfectly
tracking the background component. But as @xmath diverges from the dust
value the ISW effect approaches that of @xmath CDM. This means that even
for rapidly varying @xmath (small @xmath ), the ISW is distinguishable
from that in the @xmath CDM scenario only if @xmath during matter
domination closely mimics the dust value and the transition occurs at
low redshifts, @xmath .

We can see that the amplitude of the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect is
smaller in slowly varying models ( @xmath @xmath ). As we expect the
@xmath is independent of @xmath (figure 27 c), since for these models a
different value in the transition redshift does not produce a large
effect on the evolution of the dark energy density. In figure 27 d, the
ISW power spectrum is large for @xmath (dash line) and becomes smaller
than the cosmological constant on horizons scales as @xmath has negative
values (dot-dashed line), and increases toward @xmath for @xmath
approaching @xmath . This class of models is then more difficult to
distinguish from the @xmath CDM if the equation of state today is close
to @xmath . This can be qualitatively explained noting that perfect
tracking between dark energy and CDM causes a delay in the time when the
gravitational potential starts to decay, compared to the case of @xmath
CDM. This effect is stronger for models with a rapidly varying equation
of state since the rapid change in @xmath produces a stronger variation
in the gravitational potential.

### 23 Differentiating dark energy models with CMB measurements

The information in the CMB power spectrum can be encoded in the position
of the first three Doppler peaks, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and in
three parameters, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath that account for the
amplitude [ 179 ] . These are the height of the first peak relative to
the power at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

the height of the second peak relative to the first,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the height of the third peak relative to the first,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

In principle the position of the second and third peaks is not necessary
to characterize the CMB power spectrum, since their value is set by the
position of the first peak through the harmonic relation Eq. ( 55 ).
However, as we have previously discussed in Chapter \thechapter this
relation is affected by pre-recombination effects and therefore the
value of @xmath and @xmath carry information about a combination of the
cosmological parameters. Since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath quantify the
amplitude of the power spectrum on different multipoles we expect they
are sensitive in different ways to the cosmological parameters. For
instance since @xmath depends on the ratio between @xmath and @xmath it
mainly depends on the scalar spectral index @xmath , the physical baryon
density @xmath due to the baryon drag that changes @xmath , @xmath
through the ISW and the reionization since increasing @xmath will lower
the first peak. On the other hand @xmath is sensitive only to @xmath and
@xmath . Since the baryons affect in the same way the height of the
third and first peak, @xmath depends only on the matter density @xmath
and @xmath . This implies that if the amplitude of the first three peaks
is accurately determined the degeneracy between @xmath and @xmath can be
broken and their value can be measured with high precision. We use
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath to determine the overall effect of the dark
energy in the CMB spectrum. In particular we expect @xmath to be
extremely sensitive to a quintessential effect through the ISW, while
@xmath and @xmath are weak indicators of such a signal. We have computed
the CMB spectra for the class of models with @xmath described in the
previous section and we have inferred the values of @xmath and compared
them with those of the @xmath CDM model for the same values of the
cosmological parameters.

In figure 28 we plot the absolute value of the relative difference of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath to the @xmath CDM model. The rapidly varying
models are shown in the top panels. We can see the strong ISW effects
produced by changing @xmath are now evident in the large discrepancy
between @xmath and @xmath (blue line) (figure 28 a): it can be larger
then 20 per cent for @xmath . The effect on @xmath and @xmath is
smaller. However varying @xmath (figure 28 b) produces a discrepancy of
only order @xmath per cent on @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath remain
the same as in @xmath CDM. For a slowly varying equation of state,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are independent of @xmath (figure 28 c). The
dark energy imprint is only on @xmath for which the discrepancy to the
@xmath case is about 10 per cent. This discrepancy decreases when
changing the value of the quintessence equation of state during matter
from @xmath to @xmath (figure 28 d). Values of the equation of state
today @xmath imply a stronger ISW effect. Consequently the curves of
fig.3 are shifted upwards. For instance in figure 29 we plot the class
of models previously analysed, with @xmath . We note the same behavior
as we vary the dark energy parameters, but the discrepancy with the
@xmath CDM model is now larger. In figure 29 d it is worth noticing the
case @xmath , that corresponds to a model very similar to a ‘k-essence’
model [ 157 ] . We can see that the relative difference with the @xmath
CDM case is of the order of a few percent, in agreement with [ 180 ] for
the same value of @xmath . At this point we ask the key question whether
such differences are observable. We have shown that @xmath is a good
estimator of the ISW effect, and that it is a tracer of the dark energy
imprint on the CMB. However its estimation from the data will be
affected by cosmic variance at @xmath . Hence with even perfect
measurements of the first acoustic peak the uncertainty on @xmath will
be dominated by the @xmath per cent uncertainty due to cosmic variance.
With the plots of figures 28 - 29 in mind, this means that if the
present value of the equation of state is close to @xmath , slowly
varying dark energy models are hardly distinguishable from @xmath CDM,
while rapidly varying ones can produce a detectable signature only if
the transition in the equation occurred at @xmath , but in any case it
will be difficult to constrain @xmath . Moreover it should be taken into
account that @xmath is degenerate with other cosmological parameters,
such as the scalar spectral index @xmath , the optical depth @xmath and
the scalar to tensor ratio @xmath . Hence only an accurate determination
of the angular diameter distance, inferred from the location of the
acoustic peaks, would allow detection of such deviations from the
cosmological constant model.

The shift of the multipole positions ( @xmath ) of the acoustic peaks
caused by the evolution of the dark energy in the class of models
analysed in figure 27 can be seen in figure 30 , where we plot the
relative difference of @xmath and @xmath to the @xmath case. We note
that due to the additional shift induced on the first acoustic peak by
the ISW effect the difference with the @xmath CDM model for the first
peak is generally larger than for the second and third peaks. As with
the comparison of the amplitude of the CMB spectrum, the largest effect
is produced by models with a rapid transition occurring at small
redshifts. However the degeneracy of the angular diameter distance, in
particular with the value of Hubble constant and the amount of dark
energy density, will limit our ability to put tight constraints on the
dark energy parameters. There are alternative ways in which these
problems can be alleviated, for instance cross-correlating the ISW
effect with the large scale structure of the local universe [ 181 , 182
, 183 ] . An efficient approach would be to combine different
observations in order to break the degeneracies with the cosmological
parameters [ 184 , 185 ] .

### 24 Testing dark energy with ideal CMB experiments

The new generation of CMB satellite experiments is going to provide an
estimation of the anisotropy power spectrum close to the ideal case,
where the only source of indetermination is due to the cosmic variance.
It is therefore interesting to test the sensitivity of such CMB
measurements to the dark energy effects. As we have described in the
previous section, the class of models most difficult to distinguish from
the @xmath CDM case corresponds to a dark energy fluid with a slowly
varying equation of state characterized by @xmath . This can be
considered as the most pessimistic situation since it can prevent us
from understanding the nature of the dark energy. We have studied the
information on this class of models that can be inferred from cosmic
variance limited measurements [ 162 ] and generated a sample of ideal
CMB power spectrum data assuming a fiducial model specified by the
following values of the cosmological parameters: @xmath , @xmath Km
@xmath @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Assuming a flat
geometry, no tensor contribution, the scalar spectral index @xmath and
the baryon density @xmath , we have binned the input power spectrum in
@xmath data points plotted in figure 31 . A library of CMB spectra has
then been generated using a modified version of CMBFAST [ 178 ] assuming
the following uniform priors: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . As extra priors we have assumed @xmath (slowly varying equation
of state) and the remaining parameters have been set as follows: @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . Since we are not considering the effect of
systematics, but only cosmic variance errors we evaluate a simple
likelihood defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the likelihood parameters, @xmath is a normalization
constant and @xmath is the cosmic variance at @xmath . The superscripts
@xmath and @xmath refer to the theoretical quantity and to the real data
respectively.

The results are shown in figure 32 , where we plot the two dimensional
likelihood contours in the @xmath (left panels) and @xmath (right
panels) planes respectively. We find @xmath , @xmath , whereas assuming
a prior on @xmath improves the constraints on @xmath to @xmath at @xmath
. The likelihood plot in the @xmath plane shows that @xmath is
undetermined. This result is expected since for this class of models the
value of @xmath does not affect the evolution of the dark energy. On the
contrary we find @xmath , but the @xmath case cannot be excluded at
@xmath . The constraint does not improve assuming the @xmath prior. This
is because @xmath and @xmath are degenerate, hence marginalizing the
likelihood over @xmath shifts the best fit value of @xmath towards more
negative values. However it is remarkable that there is still some
sensitivity to the value of @xmath , such that the best fit is not for
@xmath . Therefore we can conclude that if @xmath , a large class of
models will not be distinguished from a @xmath CDM scenario even with
ideal CMB measurements. It is possible that by combining different
cosmological data, as Sn Ia, large scale structure and quasar clustering
the degeneracy between @xmath and @xmath can be broken and more
information on this class of dark energy models can be inferred [ 185 ]
.

## Chapter \thechapter Alternative cosmological test with higher order
statistics

In the recent past the number of papers devoted to the analysis of high
order statistics of the CMB anisotropy has dramatically increased. In
fact the simplest inflationary models predict to first order a Gaussian
distribution of temperature fluctuations, and deviations from
gaussianity could be the signature of other phenomena occurring in the
anisotropy formation process. On top of that different mechanisms can
also be a source of non-Gaussian signals at different angular scales.
This is the case of non-linear effects during the inflationary epoch or
the presence of topological defects. The present CMB data strongly
constrains the level of non-gaussianity on the scales so far probed by
the experiments. In this Chapter we will briefly review the higher order
statistics of the CMB anisotropies. We will focus on the use of the
angular bispectrum as an estimator of non-gaussianity, and introduce a
formalism that allows us to analytically calculate the spectrum and
bispectrum in the case of a random distribution of localized
anisotropies in the CMB sky. We will argue that applying this analytical
approach to the analysis of localized anisotropies such as the
Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect or radio point sources, it is possible to
constrain the clustering properties of these objects and determine the
cosmological parameters.

### 25 Higher order statistics

Let us expand the temperature fluctuation field in the direction @xmath
of the sky into spherical harmonics:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

the @xmath are the multipole coefficients that contain all the
statistical information of the anisotropy field. For @xmath these are
complex numbers satisfying the condition @xmath . The statistics of the
CMB anisotropies depends on the physical process responsible for the
generation of the initial density perturbations. Simple inflationary
models predicts a Gaussian spectrum of fluctuations [ 186 , 187 ] ,
consequently we expect the anisotropy field to be Gaussian. In such a
case the @xmath are random Gaussian variables with Gaussian distributed
amplitudes and with uniformly distributed phases. As consequence of this
the statistical distribution of the CMB anisotropies is entirely
specified by its second order moment ( i.e. the power spectrum),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this Gaussian case the higher odd moments of the distribution vanish,
while the even moments can be expressed in term of the variance @xmath .
Therefore any deviation from gaussianity will inevitably produce non
vanishing high order statistics. Since there is a potentially infinite
number of higher moments, the non-Gaussian hypothesis cannot be
disproved. Several methods have been proposed in the literature to
measure statistical estimators of the skewness (third moment) and
(kurtosis) from the analysis of CMB maps (for a list of these methods we
refer to [ 188 ] ). A simple method is to measure the correlation
between the temperature fluctuations in different directions of the sky.
In this case the higher order moments are estimated by the angular
correlation functions. For instance the @xmath angular correlation
function is defined as:

  -- -- -- -------
           (118)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath are unitary vectors pointing at @xmath directions of the
sky and the average @xmath is taken over the whole sky. In particular an
estimate of the skewness is provided by the collapsed three-point
correlation functions @xmath , that is a specific configuration of the
three-point correlation function between two points of the sky separated
by an angle @xmath and defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . In terms of the multipoles it reads as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Legendre polynomial of degree @xmath , @xmath is the
experimental window function in the multipole space and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

are a combination of the Wigner-3J symbols. The @xmath measured from the
COBE-DMR sky maps has been found to be consistent with the Gaussian
hypothesis within the cosmic variance errors [ 188 ] . These results
strongly limit the allowed amount of non-gaussianity in the CMB
anisotropies at large angular scales, in particular they constrain the
parameter space of a class of non-Gaussian models [ 189 , 190 , 191 ,
192 ] . Similarly the collapsed three-point correlation function
inferred from the WMAP data is also consistent with Gaussian
expectations [ 193 ] . Any non-gaussian analysis can be carried out in
the multipole space as well, in this case the equivalent of the
three-point correlation function is the angular bispectrum defined by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

This estimator is rotationally invariant [ 194 , 195 ] and satisfies
geometrical conditions such that the only non vanishing @xmath are those
with @xmath ( @xmath ) for all permutations of indices and @xmath . A
normalized version of the angular bispectrum has been applied to the
analysis of COBE-DMR maps for the configuration @xmath [ 196 , 197 , 199
, 198 ] . More recently the bispectrum has been estimated from the WMAP
map and has been found to be consistent with the Gaussian hypothesis [
200 ] .

### 26 Frequentist approach and estimation of higher moments

The frequentist approach is the usual procedure adopted to test
gaussianity. This implies the measured value of a higher order
statistical estimator is compared against the probability distribution
function obtained from random Gaussian simulations of the data sample.
If there is a low probability that the measured value is consistent with
the Gaussian simulation, then the Gaussian hypothesis is ruled out. For
instance this approach allowed the authors of [ 196 ] to rule out the
gaussianity of the anisotropies at multipole @xmath in the COBE-DMR
data. However it is worth mentioning that so far only the diagonal
component of the bispectrum has been measured and in order to be
statistically significant the data analysis should be extended to the
estimation of the non-diagonal term of the bispectrum. If this is not a
problem at low multipoles it could be a computationaly challenge at
higher orders. On the other hand it has been pointed out in a number of
papers [ 199 , 201 ] that within the frequentist approach some
non-Gaussian theories will be indistinguishable from the Gaussian one.
We will try to make this point more clear with a specific example and we
refer to the fundamental statistics textbook [ 202 ] for a more detailed
derivation of the formula used in what follows.

Let us consider a sample of data @xmath ( @xmath ) generated from a
random Gaussian process @xmath such that each @xmath is an independent
Gaussian random variable with zero mean @xmath and the second order
moment @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to avoid confusion we will use Greek letters for the moments of
the generating function @xmath , @xmath its @xmath -th moment and Roman
letters for the moments obtained from the statistics of the data sample.
In particular the @xmath -th moment @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mean value of the sample. Making @xmath realizations
of this data sample, @xmath ( @xmath ), we can infer the distribution
function @xmath of the @xmath moment statistic @xmath , which is the
frequency (number of times to the total number of realizations) of a
certain value @xmath appearing in the sample @xmath . The expectation
value of this distribution @xmath (the mean value of @xmath estimated
from the K realizations) will be indicative of the @xmath -th moment
@xmath of the generating Gaussian distribution function. The expectation
value @xmath and the variance @xmath can be related to the moments
@xmath of the generating function through approximate relations valid up
to @xmath [ 202 ] . It can be shown that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

For practical purposes we prefer to work in terms of cumulants @xmath ,
that are an equivalent set of numbers characterizing the generating
function @xmath . The cumulants @xmath and the moments @xmath are
related through Eq. (3.33) in [ 202 ] . Let us consider the third order
moment-statistic @xmath , from Eq. ( 125 ) and Eq. ( 126 ) and using the
relation between moments and cumulants we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the Gaussian generating function we have considered @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , consequently we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand let us consider a sample of data generated from a
non-Gaussian random process. A general non-Gaussian random generating
function can be constructed by using an Edgeworth expansion around the
Gaussian distribution defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by Eq. ( 123 ), the @xmath are the Hermite
polynomials and the cumulants @xmath are free parameters. It can be
shown that Eq. ( 131 ) gives a good approximation to any distribution
function provided all moments are defined and the higher order terms do
not dominate over the Gaussian one. We can limit the non-gaussianity to
first order by imposing only the presence of a non vanishing skewness
@xmath and kurtosis @xmath . In this case Eq. ( 125 ) and Eq. ( 126 )
becomes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note from Eq. ( 133 ) the kurtosis and the skewness can sum up in such a
way that they cancel each other. In such a case the frequency
distributions of the third order moment-statistic @xmath inferred from
the @xmath realizations of the Gaussian and non-Gaussian process, @xmath
and @xmath respectively, will have the same variance. This makes
difficult to establish whether the population of the data had been
generated from a Gaussian or a non-Gaussian process by estimating @xmath
.

This analysis is confirmed by the numerical simulations in which we
simulated two populations of data from two different random processes.
The Gaussian sample has been generated assuming the generating function
Eq. ( 123 ) with @xmath , @xmath , while the non-Gaussian population has
been obtained assuming Eq. ( 131 ) with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . From these two populations we inferred the distribution
functions of the third moment-statistic @xmath . The results are shown
in figure 33 , where we plot @xmath ( red bars ) and @xmath ( blue bars
). Note that @xmath is peaked at @xmath , while @xmath has a maximum at
@xmath . Even so the variances of the two distributions are the same.
This naive argument shows that for some non-Gaussian models little
information can be obtained using a frequentist approach when analysing
the third order statistics unless higher order moments of the CMB
anisotropies fields are measured as well. Such simulations are necessary
to take into account the systematic experimental sources of
non-gaussianity. However they make these tests computationally
expensive. Therefore it is important to have a theoretical prediction of
the amplitude of non-Gaussianity at least for known non-Gaussian
anisotropies such as the secondary ones.

### 27 Modelling localized non-Gaussian anisotropies

Localized patterns of anisotropies produce a non-Gaussian signature in
the CMB statistics. This is the case of secondary sources of
anisotropies such as radio point sources or the Sunyaev-Zeldovich (SZ)
effect caused by the interaction of the CMB photons with the hot gas
associated with clusters of galaxies [ 203 ] . Active sources of
non-Gaussianity include topological defects such as cosmic strings,
domain walls (see for a general review [ 204 ] ) or primordial bubble
relics of a first order phase transition during the inflationary era [
205 , 206 ] . For these classes of models analytical formula of the
higher order correlation functions have been calculated in a number of
papers [ 208 , 191 , 192 ] . As far as the non-Gaussianity arising from
secondary source of anisotropies is concerned, an analytical estimate of
the three point correlation function has been obtained in the case of
the Rees-Sciama effect [ 207 ] , while the value of the bispectrum
produced by the S-Z effect and extragalactic radio sources has been
obtained in [ 209 ] , whilst the case of the Vishniac effect has been
considered in [ 210 ] . In what follows we determine the spectrum and
the bispectrum for the case of a distribution of localized anisotropies
in the CMB sky, using a formalism introduced in [ 208 ] .

##### Power Spectrum

Let us consider a nearly circular spot on the sky and perform the
spherical harmonic decomposition in the frame where the @xmath -axis
coincides with the center of the spot. The brightness of the temperature
fluctuation of the spot is @xmath , and @xmath is its angular profile.
In this frame, we can write the temperature fluctuation as @xmath ,
expanding it in spherical harmonics we find [ 208 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Legendre polynomial and @xmath is a perturbation
induced by the irregularity of the spot. As a first approximation it can
be neglected, as the CMB measurements do not have the enough resolution
to resolve its @xmath -angular structure. For a distribution of @xmath
spots, performing a rotation to a general frame where the @xmath -th
spot is at the angle @xmath and summing over all the spots we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the brightness of the @xmath -th spot and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the Legendre transform of its temperature profile. We can now
calculate the power spectrum,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (138)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have used the completeness relation of the spherical harmonics
and @xmath , with @xmath taking into account the possibility that the
spots are uncorrelated ( @xmath ), as for a Poisson distribution, or
that are correlated two by two ( @xmath ). Therefore by expanding the
sums we finally obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume now that the spots have about the same brightness and the same
temperature profile: @xmath and @xmath where the average is taken over
the ensemble of spots. Because the number of spots in a circular ring
centered on a single spot is proportional to the angular extension of
the ring we can substitute the sums over the number of spots with an
integral over the whole sky. Hence we can substitute the discrete
correlation coefficient @xmath with the two-point angular correlation of
the spots, @xmath . If the spots correspond to radio sources or clusters
of galaxies @xmath would be the angular correlation function estimated
from large scale structure observations. The mean value over the spot
distribution of Eq. ( 139 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a normalization constant and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

From Eq. ( 140 ) we may note that the contribution to the anisotropy
power spectrum from a localized distribution of spots increases with the
brightness @xmath . If the spots are uncorrelated the second term @xmath
drops from the equation and the only contribution is due to the
projection of the spot’s signal in the multipole space @xmath . In
particular the largest contribution will occur in the range of
multipoles that correspond to the effective angular size of the spots.
If the spots are correlated, the overall contribution to the power
spectrum will depend on the sign of @xmath .

##### Bispectrum

Following the same procedure as just described we calculate the angular
bispectrum. Substituting Eq. ( 136 ) in Eq. ( 122 ) we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (143)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath takes into account all the possible correlations between
the spots up to third order,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the correlation between three different spots. Using the
definition of the Wigner 3J symbols in terms of an angular integral of
three spherical harmonics and the completeness relation of the spherical
harmonics Eq. ( 143 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (145)
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
     @xmath      (147)
     @xmath      (148)
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to the background isotropy of the space, we are free to choose
@xmath . As consequence the integrals Eq. ( 147 - 149 ) become:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (150)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (151)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As for the power spectrum, we can average over the ensemble of all the
spots and substitute the sums over the spots with integrals over the
whole sky. In this case the discrete correlation coefficient @xmath and
@xmath are replaced with the corresponding angular correlation function
@xmath and @xmath . After tedious calculations we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath defined by Eq. ( 137 ) and Eq. ( 141 )
respectively and @xmath defined by Eq. ( 142 ). As we can see from Eq. (
153 ) for a Poisson distribution @xmath and @xmath vanish, but the
bispectrum remains non-vanishing due to the term @xmath that account for
the localized structure of the anisotropies.

### 28 Discussion

In the previous section we presented a general formalism to calculate
the contribution to the power spectrum and the bispectrum of a
distribution of spots in the CMB sky. The formulae Eq. ( 140 ) and Eq. (
153 ) have to be considered as a starting point for further
investigation. They take into account several effects, for instance the
brightness and the angular size of the signals contribute at zeroth
order to the spectrum and the bispectrum. On the other hand the presence
of internal correlations in the spot distribution, which are described
by the angular correlation functions @xmath and @xmath , contribute as
first and second order effects respectively. As a specific application,
Eq. ( 140 ) and Eq. ( 153 ) can be computed in the case of a
distribution of spots caused by the SZ effect of a cluster of galaxies.
Approximating the shape of this signal with a Gaussian profile
characterized by a given width, it will be possible to numerically
compute the integrals Eq. ( 137 ). Moreover without loss of generality
the angular correlation function @xmath can be assumed to be a power
law. In such a case the integrals Eq. ( 141 ) can also be numerically
computed. The resulting power spectrum can be compared with the
prediction of numerical simulations. This will allow us to test how
crucial is the assumption that @xmath and @xmath . The next generation
of CMB measurements will measure the bispectrum at very high multipoles,
therefore using Eq. ( 153 ) in a specific case such as the SZ effect
offers an alternative way of inferring cosmological information.

## Conclusion and prospects

In this thesis we have discussed various aspects of dark energy
dominated cosmologies. In Chapter 1 we have reviewed the observational
evidence of the dark energy. We have seen that different cosmological
measurements are consistent only if the dark energy accounts for most of
the matter content of the Universe. In Chapter 2 we have discussed some
of the proposed dark energy candidates and we have focused on the
quintessence scenario. In spite of the theoretical difficulties of a
viable quintessence model building, this scenario has a number of
interesting features that can be tested with cosmological measurements.
In particular in Chapter 3 we reviewed the dynamics of scalar field
perturbations for two different class of minimally coupled quintessence
models. We have learnt that quintessence perturbations have no active
role during the structure formation. However their presence can lead to
time integrated effects in the evolution of the gravitational potential.
Therefore they can leave a characteristic imprint in the Cosmic
Microwave Background anisotropy power spectrum through the Integrated
Sachs-Wolfe effect. In Chapter 4 we have constrained with Sn Ia data and
the position of the CMB peaks a parameterized quintessence potential
that accounts for a large class of quintessence models. Using the
properties of the tracker regime we have been able to put upper limits
on the present value of the quintessence equation of state. We have
found that by the present time the scalar field is evolving in flat
region or close to a minimum of its potential. However the results of
this analysis clearly indicate that the possibility the quintessence
equation of state was largely different from its present value cannot be
excluded. In this direction a lot of effort has been made to detect time
variation of the quintessence with cosmological distance measurements.
In Chapter 5 we reviewed some of the proposed methods and we pointed out
a number of potential problems. In particular the use of a constant
equation of state to parameterize the dark energy leads to misleading
conclusions. Using a very general argument we showed that if the dark
energy is time varying the constraints on a constant equation of state
will be pushed towards large negative values. Therefore all the results
obtained using this approach have to be carefully interpreted. In
particular the fact that several data analysis found the equation of
state best fit value to be @xmath can be just a bias effect. On the
contrary we have proposed a time parameterization of the dark energy
equation of state in terms of physical parameters. This accounts for
most of the proposed dark energy models and moreover is valid at all the
redshifts. Hence this approach allows us to take into account in a model
independent way not only the effects dark energy has had on the
expansion rate of the Universe but also on the structure formation. In
Chapter 5 we have applied this parameterization to study the dark energy
effects in the CMB power spectrum. As conjectured in Chapter 3 we have
found that the dark energy leaves a characteristic imprint through the
ISW effect. The amplitude of this signature selects the class of models
which are distinguishable from the cosmological constant scenario. In
particular we have shown that using ideal CMB data, only models
characterized by a rapid transition of the equation of state can be
distinguished from the @xmath case. In Chapter 7 we have introduced an
alternative cosmological test using higher order statistics of the CMB
anisotropies. We have computed the spectrum and the bispectrum for a
distribution of localized non-Gaussian anisotropies. These can be
applied to specific cases such as the SZ effect to constrain
cosmological parameters through the non-gaussianity produced by the
imprint of cluster of galaxies. We can find a number of directions where
the work so far reviewed can be further extended. Under some general
assumptions it would be interesting to test the formulae developed in
Chapter 7 with the predictions of the SZ effect from numerical
simulations of cluster galaxies [ 211 ] . A complete likelihood analysis
of the parameterized dark energy equation of state is currently in
progress. We make use of the full cosmological data so far available. We
intend to extend this analysis to the quasar clustering, that is a good
candidate for testing the dark energy [ 212 ] . An interesting issue
arises from the recent WMAP data. In fact it has been found that the
quadrupole and octupole are suppressed in contrast with the prediction
of @xmath CDM cosmologies [ 32 ] . The possibility that this is caused
by a cancellation mechanism between the SW and ISW effects due to
clustering properties of the dark energy needs further investigation [
35 ] . At moment there are no final conclusions about the nature of the
dark energy, luckily the upcoming and future cosmological data will
provide a new insight of the dark energy phenomenology. It has to be
hoped that such measurements will help us to formulate the new paradigm
of Cosmology that will allows us to correctly address the dark energy
problem. The history of science shows that no scientific activity is
possible in subjects where no paradigms have been found. Therefore we
should ask ourself what direction will the cosmological investigation
take if the dark energy problem remains unsolved.
