# Acknowledgements

First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor, Prof. Kazimierz Bodek
for supporting this work with ideas, helpful comments and suggestions
and for providing advice on drafts.
I would especially like to thank Dr Klaus Kirch for all his support,
guidance and for providing stimulating conversations. Many of his great
ideas allowed much of this work to be done.
I would like to acknowledge Prof. Reinhard Kulessa for allowing me
preparing this thesis at the Nuclear Physics Department of the
Jagiellonian University and Prof. Bogusław Kamys for a great support.
I also thank Tomek Bryś for his suggestions, fruitful discussions and
for being a great friend.
I thank fellow students at the Nuclear Physics Department: Joanna
Przerwa, Michał Janusz, Marcin Kuźniak and Tytus Smoliński for providing
a great atmosphere.
Finally I would like to say a big ’thank you’ to my family and all my
friends for supporting me totally and unconditionally throughout my
studies. I would especially like to thank my grandparents: Mirosława and
Stanisław Skrok for unremitting support and encouragement.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Physics of ultra-cold neutrons
    -    1.2 Methods of the UCN production
        -    1.2.1 Conventional UCN extraction
        -    1.2.2 Superthermal UCN production
-    2 sD @xmath as a super-thermal source
    -    2.1 Neutron scattering in sD @xmath
        -    2.1.1 Coherent and incoherent scattering
        -    2.1.2 Inelastic neutron scattering from deuterium molecules
-    3 Experiment
    -    3.1 Experimental setup
        -    3.1.1 General overview of the VCN and UCN setup
        -    3.1.2 The cryostat and the target cell
        -    3.1.3 The Raman spectroscopy setup
        -    3.1.4 The Camera
        -    3.1.5 VCN/UCN detector and DAQ
        -    3.1.6 The neutron chopper
-    4 Results and data analysis
    -    4.1 Deuterium properties
    -    4.2 Neutron data analysis
        -    4.2.1 VCN data
        -    4.2.2 UCN data
-    5 Conclusions
-    A Time of flight spectrum and calibration
    -    A.1 VCN experiment
        -    A.1.1 Dead time correction of time of flight spectra
        -    A.1.2 Deconvolution of the time-of-flight spectra
        -    A.1.3 Zero time calibration method
        -    A.1.4 Background measurements
    -    A.2 UCN experiment
        -    A.2.1 Dead time consideration
        -    A.2.2 Calibration of the timing in the TOF spectra
        -    A.2.3 Background measurements

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Physics of ultra-cold neutrons

Ultra-cold neutrons (UCN) are neutrons of very low energy: the kinetic
energy of a UCN is smaller than the effective Fermi potential @xmath of
a given material:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath = 939 \mega \electronvolt is the neutron mass, @xmath is
the number density of atoms and @xmath is the bound coherent scattering
length of the material. Materials which are used in UCN physics are
normally chosen to have a high Fermi potential, typically of the order
of \power 10-7 \electronvolt . For example Be ( @xmath = 252 \nano
\electronvolt ) and @xmath Ni ( @xmath = 335 \nano \electronvolt ) are
often incorporated as wall coatings in UCN equipment. UCN undergo total
reflection at any angle of incidence from the surface of a material. As
a consequence UCN can be trapped in bottles for times comparable with
the free neutron lifetime of about 887 \second . Alternatively, UCN can
be stored in magnetic traps: the UCN are confined to a trap region
defined by a strong magnetic field that acts as a barrier through the
interaction of the neutron magnetic moment and the magnetic field [ 1 ,
2 ] .

The fact that one can store and observe UCN for such long periods makes
them an excellent tool to study fundamental properties of the neutron.
Stored UCN offer the possibility of a precise measurement of the neutron
lifetime that plays a key role for Big Bang nucleosynthesis and also is
one of the main input parameters in tests of the Standard Model.
Moreover, stored UCN are ideal for electric dipole moment (EDM)
experiments. The existence of a permanent non-zero neutron EDM violates
both parity (P) and time reversal (T) invariance and, through the
conservation of the combined symmetry CPT, also violates CP symmetry (C
refers to charge conjugation). CP violation, which is believed to be
responsible for the baryon asymmetry of the Universe, has been measured
in the K @xmath and the B @xmath mesonic systems. These results are
consistent with the description of CP violation in the Standard Model
using the Cabibo-Kobayashi-Maskawa mass mixing matrix (CKM) ansatz. CP
violation as described in the Standard Model is however at a level which
is orders of magnitudes too low to generate the observed baryon
asymmetry which suggests an existence of a mechanism for CP violation
which is beyond the Standard Model. UCN can thus, through a measurement
of their EDM, form a very sensitive probe for physics beyond the
Standard Model. Other fields where UCN can be used are also emerging:
surface physics [ 3 ] and the observation of quantum states in the
Earth’s gravitational field [ 4 , 5 ] .

Many of the experiments with UCN are limited by the statistics that is
achieved in present sources. Next generation experiments that aim to
improve these sensitivities rely on the development of new high
intensity UCN sources.

### 1.2 Methods of the UCN production

Neutrons produced in a nuclear reaction in a spallation source or in a
fission reaction in a nuclear reactor have energies of the order of
\mega \electronvolt . These fast neutrons are moderated to thermal
velocities by a moderator (e.g. heavy water) and can subsequently be
slowed down into the cold regime upon interaction with a cold source
(e.g. at the Institute Laue-Langevin (ILL) liquid deuterium at a
temperature of 25 \kelvin acts as a cold source). To obtain neutrons
with energy in the UCN region two methods can be used:

-   the conventional method which relies on extracting slow neutrons
    from the tail of the Maxwellian distribution of neutrons from the
    cold source,

-   a method in which cold neutrons are converted to UCN through a
    superthermal UCN production mechanism.

#### 1.2.1 Conventional UCN extraction

The velocity spectrum of the neutrons in the cold source follows a
Maxwellian velocity distribution. There will thus be a fraction, albeit
a small fraction, of neutrons of UCN energy present in the low energy
tail of the spectrum. The thermal spectrum of the moderator of
temperature @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the total thermal neutron flux and @xmath is the mean
thermal velocity. Integration of 1.2 for the energies ranging from zero
to the potential @xmath that corresponds to the Fermi potential of the
wall material gives the maximum UCN density:

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.3)
  -- -- -- -------

Ultra-cold neutrons can be extracted from the cold source through a
vertical guide. Gravity is acting on the neutrons traveling upwards and
decelerate faster neutrons to the lower energies. The mechanical
deceleration can be used as well: a moving scatterer interacts with the
neutrons and will carry away some of the neutron momentum. The number of
UCN generated however is limited by Liouville’s theorem: the phase space
density of the neutrons must be conserved if the particle move under the
action of forces which are derivable from a potential. The final UCN
density cannot be higher than the density at the cold neutron source
because the compression in the neutron velocity space dilutes the
neutron number density.

The method described here is used at the UCN source operating at the
Institute Laue-Langevin in Grenoble, France. It is in fact the strongest
source of UCNs in the world. Extraction of the UCN from a liquid
deuterium cold source is done through a vertical guide. Neutrons that
travel the 17 meters upward through the guide and pass through a curved
guide part at the end have kinetic energies in the very-cold neutron
region. These VCN are guided into a turbine where they interact with
moving mirror blades that slow them further down, by mechanical
deceleration, to UCN energies. The details of the turbine can be found
in Ref. [ 3 ] . The UCN density obtained in this set-up reaches 40
\centi \rpcubic \metre in a storage bottle placed immediately outside
the turbine. Further improvement in this density is not expected because
of the limitation imposed by Liouville’s theorem.

#### 1.2.2 Superthermal UCN production

##### The principle of superthermal UCN production

UCN can also be created from cold neutrons in a superthermal process. In
this process neutrons interact with a medium that acts as a moderator to
the cold neutrons and converts these neutrons into UCN by inelastic
scattering. The medium must posses specific properties such as well
defined energy levels and excitations that enable this down-scattering
to take place. Superthermal UCN production was first proposed by Golub
and Pendlenbury in a paper in which the UCN production in superfluid
@xmath He through this mechanism was studied [ 6 ] . The understand the
principle, consider a moderator with two energy levels, a ground state
and an excited state, separated by an energy @xmath . The moderator in
the ground state can be excited by absorbing an energy @xmath through
inelastic interactions with neutrons of energy @xmath . The neutrons
will thus be down-scattered to UCN energies. The inverse is also
possible: the moderator falls back to its ground state by releasing an
energy @xmath and UCN can absorb this energy and thus be up-scattered
out of the UCN energy region. The principle of detailed balance for this
system leads to a relationship between the down-scattering rate (UCN
production) and the up-scattering rate (UCN losses):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the up-scattering rate of a neutron with energy @xmath
and @xmath is the down-scattering rate of a neutron with energy @xmath .
At low enough temperatures the up-scattering rate will be suppressed and
the down-scattering will dominate resulting in a net production rate of
UCN. It is noteworthy that this process is not limited by the
Liouville’s theorem for the neutrons alone.

The UCN density that will be obtained with a system in equilibrium
depends on the ratio of the production rate @xmath and the loss rate 1/
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The loss factor is determined by a combination of loss mechanisms such
as the neutron lifetime and losses specific to the design of the
superthermal source such as nuclear absorption in the moderator, wall
losses etc.

##### Superthermal UCN sources

There is a range of materials that could, in principle, be suitable as
superthermal converters. Superthermal UCN sources based on superfluid
helium and on solid D @xmath have already reached an advanced stage and
have shown to be generating high densities of UCN. Furthermore
converters such as CD @xmath [ 7 ] and O @xmath [ 8 , 9 ] are currently
being studied and appear to be promising candidates for further progress
in this field.

The first superthermal converter that was proposed is superfluid helium
[ 6 ] . One of the major advantages of superfluid helium is that the
storage lifetime of UCN in such a medium is very long: @xmath He has got
zero neutron absorption cross section and the up-scattering modes can be
strongly suppressed by keeping helium at temperature of 0.5 \kelvin .
UCN are produced in superfluid helium by down-scattering cold neutrons
through creation of phonons. The dispersion curves of a free neutron and
a phonon intersect, apart from at the origin, only at one energy of 1
\milli \electronvolt . This means that, due to conservation of both
energy and momentum, neutrons of only one wavelength, 9 \angstrom , can
be down-scattered to UCN energies. The fact that the production of UCN
can proceed through the interaction of cold neutron of one single energy
only results in a helium UCN production rate about two orders of
magnitude lower as compared with solid deuterium where there is no such
restriction on the incident neutron energy in the down-scattering
process. Furthermore, efficient extraction of UCN from the superfluid
has proved to be extremely difficult and thus most superthermal UCN
sources are incorporated in single dedicated experiments (a neutron
lifetime experiment at NIST [ 10 ] , neutron EDM experiments at LANL [
11 ] and ILL [ 12 ] ). A superthermal UCN source based on superfluid
helium that will feed several independent experiments is being studied
only at Osaka [ 13 ] .

After the first work on @xmath He UCN sources, other materials emerged
as a possible medium to create UCN. Most noticeable is the development
of the solid D @xmath based sources (that have an absorption lifetime of
150 \milli \second , which is about four orders of magnitude lower than
that for He) together with the idea of the “thin film superthermal
sources” [ 14 , 15 ] . The thin film superthermal source is based on the
notion that the UCN density in a storage volume that contains converter
material is independent of the actual volume of the converter material.
The use of the pulsed neutron source in combination with the converter
with a short neutron lifetime was first pointed out by Pokotilovski [ 16
] . In this scheme the moderator is connected to a UCN storage volume
only for a short time. After the neutron pulse has occurred a valve
closes separating the conversion and storage regions, this enables the
UCN to survive for long times as they are no longer interacting with the
absorbing converter material.

Superthermal UCN sources based on solid deuterium are currently under
intense investigation at PSI [ 17 ] and at Los Alamos [ 18 , 19 , 20 ,
21 ] . The production of UCN using sD @xmath has first been studied at
PNPI Gatchina where a gain factor of 10 in UCN production was obtained
compared to the UCN production using liquid deuterium source [ 22 , 23 ]
. At Los Alamos a prototype sD @xmath based UCN source was operated and
UCN densities in excess of 100 \centi \rpcubic \metre have been
reported. The UCN source being built at PSI, also based on sD @xmath ,
aims at achieving densities of 3000 \centi \reciprocal \metre in a 2
\cubic \metre volume. A detailed discussion about sD @xmath as a UCN
moderator is presented in the next chapter.

## Chapter 2 sD@xmath as a super-thermal source

A good superthermal converter needs to possess a number of properties
that are directly related to the creation and losses of UCN. In this
chapter the properties of deuterium are described with the focus on its
use as superthermal UCN converter material. Some of the properties of
deuterium are already quite favourable: deuterium has a relatively low
neutron absorption cross section (the absorption cross section for
thermal neutrons is 519 \micro \barn ) and it is a light element. Also,
deuterium has a large down-scattering cross section because the phonon
density of states has a large overlap with the cold neutron spectrum.

### 2.1 Neutron scattering in sD@xmath

#### 2.1.1 Coherent and incoherent scattering

To investigate the suitability of using solid deuterium as a
superthermal UCN converter it is important to understand the neutron
scattering from this material. The interaction potential between a
neutron and a rigid array of N nuclei in the first Born approximation is
[ 24 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the neutron mass, @xmath is the bound nucleus scattering
length for the @xmath th nucleus and @xmath is the position vector of
the l th nucleus. The final state @xmath and the initial state @xmath of
a neutron, defined by the wave vectors @xmath and @xmath , respectively,
are given by plane waves. For a large box of volume @xmath the states
@xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The initial state of the system composed of the incident neutron and the
scatterer is described by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the state of the scatterer with energy @xmath .
The transition rate from the initial state @xmath to the final state
@xmath is given by the Fermi’s golden rule [ 25 ] :

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.5)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath refers to the interaction potential that causes the
transition. @xmath is the density of the neutron final states per unit
energy interval

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The cross section is obtained by dividing the transition rate @xmath by
the incident flux of neutrons @xmath . Using the Dirac notation we can
write the double differential cross section as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the defined by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting expression 2.1 for the scattering potential one obtain the
differential cross section per solid angle per atom:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the momentum transfer at the scattering. @xmath
represents the weight for the state @xmath , which is proportional to
the Boltzmann factor @xmath .
We can write equation 2.9 as:

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity @xmath is the average of @xmath over a random nuclear spin
orientation and a random isotope distribution and is described by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting 2.11 into 2.10 , the cross section can be split in two
parts:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coherent cross section is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the incoherent cross section

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath represents the response function or dynamic structure factor and
@xmath is the energy lost by the neutron in the scattering process. The
response function is given by the Fourier transform of the density
correlation function @xmath which represents the probability that, given
a particle located at the origin at time @xmath , any particle is found
at position @xmath at time @xmath .

##### Elastic scattering

If the scattering system has no internal structure (no excited states)
then the energy of the scattered neutron is identical to that of the
incident neutron. Such scattering is referred to as elastic scattering.
For elastic scattering @xmath and the total coherent and incoherent
cross section reduces to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the coherent scattering there is a strong interference between the
waves scattered from neighbouring nuclei. Thus the coherent scattering
is present only if strict geometrical condition are satisfied. In the
incoherent scattering there is no interference at all and the cross
section is isotropic.

When a neutron with spin @xmath interacts with a nucleus of a deuterium
atom of spin @xmath it can do so in states of total spin @xmath or
@xmath . Therefore the scattering lengths @xmath and @xmath should be
associated with these two states. We have 4 substates of spin 3/2 and 2
substates of spin 1/2, so the statistical weight of the @xmath state is
@xmath and that of @xmath state is @xmath . The scattering lengths
@xmath and @xmath are thus averaged over these two scattering modes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the measured values @xmath = 9.5 \femto \meter and @xmath = 1.0
\femto \meter we find @xmath = 5.59 \barn and @xmath = 2.04 \barn .

##### Scattering from static inhomogeneities

If the neutron scattering takes place on nuclei that move we are dealing
with an energy dependent function @xmath . For elastic scattering with a
static target, where @xmath is zero, the response function @xmath ,
where @xmath is called “structure factor”. All the information about the
static distribution of atoms in the scattering system is then
represented by the structure factor. The scattering from static
inhomogeneities with radius @xmath and uniform density difference to the
surrounding medium @xmath leads to [ 3 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spherical Bessel function of order 1. Thus the total
coherent elastic cross section is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the detector aperture. The integral in 2.20 is [ 26 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In section 4.2.1 this model will be used to interpret the transmission
data from the VCN neutron experiment.

#### 2.1.2 Inelastic neutron scattering from deuterium molecules

##### Deuterium molecule

The deuterium molecule consists of two deuterons of spin 1 and thus can
form states of total nuclear spin S = 0, 1 and 2. State of S = 0 and 2
refer to ortho-deuterium and state of S = 1 refers to para-deuterium. ¹
¹ 1 At room temperature the deuterium is a mixture of 66.7 @xmath
ortho-D @xmath and 33.3 @xmath para-D @xmath . Higher ortho-D @xmath
concentration up to 98.5 @xmath can be achieved by using the ortho-para
converters [ 27 ] . The molecular dynamics of deuterium is determined by
the motions which are represented as the translation of the center of
mass, the inter-molecular oscillations and rotations. To excite the
first vibrational state (vibrational quantum number @xmath ) of
deuterium molecule an energy of 386 \milli \electronvolt is required and
thus for the low energy neutrons ² ² 2 Cold neutrons have energies below
10 \milli \electronvolt the vibrational excitations do not contribute to
the scattering cross section. The rotational energy spectrum for
diatomic molecules with the moment of interia @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using for the deuterium molecule the values @xmath = 3.75 \giga
\electronvolt and @xmath = 0.37 \angstrom ³ ³ 3 The separation between
the two nuclei in D @xmath is 0.74 \angstrom the energy becomes @xmath =
3.75 @xmath \milli \electronvolt .

The state with total nuclear spin @xmath can only have even values of
rotational quantum number @xmath , and for the para state ( @xmath )
only odd values of @xmath are allowed. The population of a state, @xmath
, with the rotation quantum number @xmath follows the Boltzmann
distribution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the temperature of the system. At temperatures where
deuterium is in the solid phase @xmath 18 \kelvin the molecules are in
their lowest rotational state, which is @xmath for ortho-deuterium and
@xmath for para-deuterium. The transitions between even and odd @xmath
states are prohibited by the spin selection rules in the case of a
non-interacting gas. For the solid phase such a transition is possible
due to a spontaneous spin flipping, however, such a conversion is
extremely slow compared with the time scale of experiment [ 8 , 28 ] .

##### Properties of the sD@xmath lattice

To evaluate the cross section for solid deuterium one has to consider
the dynamics of the lattice. Many properties of solids can be
successfully described by a simple continuum Debye model. The dynamical
properties of the solid lattice are characterised by the Debye
temperature @xmath , which defines an effective maximum phonon frequency
@xmath in the solid:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

For solid deuterium the Debye temperature is @xmath = 110 \kelvin [ 29 ]
.
The normalized phonon density of states according to the Debye model is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The position vector of the @xmath th atom in the crystal of N atoms can
be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the equilibrium position of the @xmath th atom.
The displacement @xmath of the atoms from their equilibrium
configuration for the harmonic lattice can be written as [ 3 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the phonon annihilation and creation
operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath represents the normal-mode frequencies, the index s=1,2,3 denotes
the three solution for @xmath for each @xmath [ 24 ] and @xmath is
related to the polarization vector. We assume that all the atoms have
the same mass @xmath . Substituting 2.26 and 2.27 into the matrix
element of 2.14 gives

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (2.31)
                             
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

Applying a Taylor expansion of the exponential function in the operator
we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath annihilate and create, respectively, phonons, we
see that the second term changes the phonon number by one while the
third term changes the phonon number by two or zero.
To calculate the one-phonon contribution to the neutron cross section we
can use 2.28 , 2.29 and 2.30 and write 2.31 as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the term @xmath , the Debye-Waller factor, describes the zero
phonon expansion. For a cubic lattice @xmath is [ 24 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mean squared displacement of a nucleus.
Using 2.33 the incoherent double differential cross section of 2.14
becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, after replacing the summation over s,q by the normalized
density of states [ 24 ] one obtains:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy lost by the neutron. The subscript @xmath in
2.36 stands for the average over a surface in @xmath with constant
@xmath and in cubic symmetry this average is equal to @xmath . The
coherent scattering is usually small because it is restricted by the
energy and momentum conservation and very often it is sufficient to use
the “incoherent approximation”, which consists of using 2.36 with @xmath
replaced by @xmath . The validity of “incoherent approximation” is
discussed in [ 8 ] .

We can now apply the resulting formula 2.36 to the solid ortho-deuterium
system and find an expression for the cross section. Deuterium
crystallises in the hcp structure with an intermolecular separation of
3.7 \angstrom . At low temperatures ( @xmath 18 \kelvin ) the
vibrational @xmath and rotational @xmath quantum numbers are zero. Thus
the ortho-deuterium molecule is spherically symmetric and may be
considered as a single particle with a neutron scattering length @xmath
[ 30 ] where @xmath is the coherent scattering length of the deuteron
(Eq. 2.17 ). @xmath is a spherical Bessel function, @xmath denotes the
separation between the deuterons in the molecule ( @xmath = 0.74
\angstrom ) and @xmath is the momentum transfer:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the angle between @xmath and @xmath . Following Liu et
al. [ 28 ] we can use a cubic lattice to describe the solid deuterium
structure so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The population number @xmath of phonons with the frequency

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

is given by Bose-Einstein statistics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figure LABEL:upscatt shows the up-scattering cross section for VCN
calculated from 2.38 .

## Chapter 3 Experiment

### 3.1 Experimental setup

The experiment was carried out at the Intitute Laue-Langevin (Grenoble,
France) on the VCN and UCN beam-line during 2003. A total of 2 reactor
cycles (reactor cycle 135 and 136, 50 days each) had been allocated for
these experiments. Reactor cycle 135 was devoted to the VCN measurements
and reactor cycle 136 was devoted to the measurement on the UCN test
position.

#### 3.1.1 General overview of the VCN and UCN setup

Figure LABEL:setupvcn shows a schematic view of the experimental setup
at the VCN beam position. Neutrons with velocities of 20 \metre \per
\second to 200 \metre \per \second pass the setup as discrete packets
created by a neutron chopper and are detected in a position sensitive
micro-strip gas counter. The sD @xmath crystal was grown in the target
cell with a volume of 40 \centi \cubic \metre . The cryostat with the
target cell was placed at the end of the neutron flight path between the
chopper and detector. During the experiment the detector was located at
two positions: ‘‘front’’ and ‘‘extended’’. For the ‘‘front’’ detector
position the total length of the flight path ¹ ¹ 1 Distance between the
chopper and the middle of the neutron detector is 1434 \milli \metre .
The collimator assembly of a length of 1260 \milli \metre consists of:
the 20 \milli \metre diameter boron collimator placed directly after the
chopper, the 20 \milli \metre diameter cadmium collimator placed before
the target cell and four Cd/Cu collimators (Fig. LABEL:coll ) of total
length 150 \milli \metre placed 600 \milli \metre after the chopper. The
reasons for having the detector at two position are the calibration of
time-of-flight spectrum and the scattering measurements at small
scattering angles.

A similar setup was used for the UCN experiment (Fig. LABEL:setupucn ).
For these measurements the cryostat with the sD @xmath crystal was
placed in the flight path of length 1247 \milli \metre directly after
the chopper. For the neutron scattering measurements a collimator with a
length of 30 \milli \metre and a diameter of 20 \milli \metre was placed
upstream of the chopper. After passing through the cell neutrons enter a
neutron guide that consist of a movable tube. With this tube setup,
scattering measurements at various acceptance solid angles could be
performed.

#### 3.1.2 The cryostat and the target cell

In this section the general concept of the target cell and the cryostat
will be described together with the method of preparing the crystal.
Further details can be found elsewhere [ 27 ] . Figure LABEL:cryostat
shows the cryostat designed to obtain temperatures down to 5 \kelvin in
the sD @xmath cell. These temperatures are required to study solid
deuterium transmission properties for the superthermal UCN source.

The cell is made of an aluminum alloy AlMg @xmath and has four windows:
two optical windows and two windows for neutrons. The optical windows,
made from sapphire, serve for Raman spectroscopy as well as for optical
investigation of the crystal. The neutron windows, made from aluminium,
are 0.15 \milli \metre thick and have 26 \milli \metre diameter. The
distance between the entrance window and the exit window is 10 \milli
\metre .

##### Method of freezing

The cell is designed in such a way that the crystal is frozen from the
liquid phase. A high-resolution digital camera permanently monitors this
process. Gaseous D @xmath kept in the aluminium storage container is
passed through the gas system into the cryostat and is subsequently
liquefied in the target cell. The process of freezing is carried out at
a temperature close to the triple point (18.7 \kelvin ), this procedure
takes about 12 \hour . The crystal that is obtained under these
conditions is fully transparent and clear. In Fig. LABEL:crystal a
series of pictures shows how the crystal is being grown from the melt.

The speed at which the deuterium is frozen is a very important parameter
in this process. Figure LABEL:slowfast shows crystals grown at two
cooling speeds and demonstrates the dependency of the crystal quality on
the speed of cooling. Because of a temperature gradient that arises
during the filling of the cell the deuterium in the upper part of the
cell will be frozen before the complete crystal is formed. This will
affect the flow of the rest of the deuterium as it moves into the cell
and can cause problems to the formation of the remaining part of the
sample. However, we have developed an annealing technique in which the
deuterium is kept at a constant temperature for several hours. This
annealing procedure has greatly improved the crystal homogeneity. Figure
LABEL:anneal shows the annealing process of a crystal as it is grown in
the cell. Once the crystal reached a temperature of 18 \kelvin it was
cooled down further to a temperature of 5 \kelvin . This last step in
the process of creating the final form of the solid deuterium was
performed at a reduced cooling speed: in most cases with a typical
cooling speed of 2 \kelvin \per \hour .

The interpretation of the data is based on the measured neutron
transmission through the sample. It is thus important to know accurately
the amount of deuterium of the neutron beam passage. The deuterium
concentration as a function of position in the cell is obtained by
analysing the pictures as recorded by the digital camera (section 3.1.4
).

#### 3.1.3 The Raman spectroscopy setup

The system which is used for Raman spectroscopy consists of three main
parts: the argon-ion-laser, the Raman head, and the Raman spectrometer.
A detailed description of the setup and method of the data analysis can
be found in Ref. [ 27 ] .

Raman spectroscopy has been used to investigate the ratio of ortho-D
@xmath to para-D @xmath as well as the crystal structure. Hydrogen
contaminations in form of HD or H @xmath can also be measured. The
ortho-para concentration can be calculated from the intensity ratio of
the S @xmath (0) and S @xmath (1) lines of the rotational Raman spectrum
(section 4.1 ) while the lattice structure of the solid deuterium can be
determined from the S @xmath (0) signal which produces a multiplet
unique to the crystal structure. From the relative line intensity within
the multiplet one can deduce the crystal (crystallites) orientation with
respect to the direction of the Raman collector (section 4.1 ). Figure
LABEL:raman shows the Raman head mounted on the cell.

#### 3.1.4 The Camera

Throughout the measurements the digital camera is permanently mounted on
the cell (Fig. LABEL:nikon ). The camera allowed to monitor both the
optical properties and the total amount of deuterium that is formed.
More information can be found in Ref. [ 27 ] .

The pictures generated by the camera are used to study the optical
difference for a specific crystal at different temperatures and prepared
in different ways.

#### 3.1.5 VCN/UCN detector and DAQ

The same neutron detector and DAQ system has been used for the VCN
transmission and the UCN transmission experiments. Although the
efficiency of the detector varies with the neutron energy, relative
measurements are obtained directly by comparing the neutron transmission
through the different samples and measurements taken with the cell being
empty.

##### Detector

The neutron detector, a so-called “Bidim80” developed at the ILL, is a
2-dimensional micro-strip detector that consist of an MSGC plate placed
in a sealed cylindrical metal container filled with a mixture of 50
\milli \bbar of @xmath He and 1 \bbar of CF @xmath . The entrance window
to the detector is a 100 \micro \metre thick Al foil. Because of the 50
\milli \bbar overpressure the detector window was slightly bulged but
this has no noticeable effect on the final results. A part of the
detector is shown in Fig. LABEL:bidim : the MSGS plate and an aluminium
diaphragm are mounted on a stainless steel flange that is equipped with
a valve through which the gas can be filled. The two electrical
feed-throughs mounted on a flange are used to apply the voltage onto the
electrodes and to extract the neutron signal.

The MSGC is made of a semiconductive glass plate with a chromium pattern
of strips, the total sensitive area is 80x80 mm @xmath . The 10 \micro
\metre wide anodes are engraved on the front side of the plate, the 980
\micro \metre cathodes are placed on the rear side of the plate
orientated perpendicular to the anodes. The spatial resolution for
neutron detection is about 1.5 \milli \metre . The X and Y position of
the detected neutron is determined from pulse height asymmetries of
signals from the electrodes in the following way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The position of the signal on the detector was obtained by performing
measurements with a cadmium mask (Fig. LABEL:mask ) placed on the front
flange of the detector. Figure LABEL:maskview shows a two dimensional
picture from the detector with the Cd mask mounted. The distance between
the window and the MSGC plate is 30 \milli \metre (for a flat window).

The high voltage applied between the entrance window and the anodes and
cathodes is 1200 \volt . Neutron are detected through the reaction
@xmath He(n,p) @xmath H. The energy release in this reaction is 764
\kilo \electronvolt and the cross section is 5330 \barn for thermal
neutrons. Scaling the cross section to VCN and UCN energies gives a
reaction cross section of the order of mega-barns and forms a very
efficient basis for neutron detection. The proton and triton emerging
from the reaction will create electrons by ionising the gas mixture. The
electrons drift in the electric field toward the MSGC plate. On
approaching the glass plate these electrons are accelerated in very
strong electric field in the vicinity of the anodes leading to secondary
ionisation and creation of avalanche. The electrons penetrate the glass
plate and produce electron-hole pairs along its track, the number being
proportional to the energy loss. The electric field applied between the
anodes and cathodes separates the pairs before they recombine; electrons
drift towards the anode, holes to the cathodes on the rear side. Due to
the semiconductive properties of the glass, the signal from the rear
side is equal to the one on the front side. The electric pulses thus
generated are passed through a pre-amplifier before being converted by
ADCs ² ² 2 Port Modules and the MPA-3 BASE module . A typical pulse
height spectrum is shown in Fig. LABEL:pulses .

##### DAQ and data format

An MPA-3 Multiparameter System was used for data acquisition. The
complete description of this system can be found in Ref. [ 31 ] . The
main hardware modules of MPA-3 are:

-   An MPA-3 PCI Card with an internal 20 \mega \hertz clock reset by a
    TTL signal from the chopper.

-   An MPA-3 BASE module with four ADC ports for the connection of
    external ADCs and two BNC type auxiliary connectors AUX 1 and 2. One
    of this is used to accept a TTL signals from the chopper.

-   ADC Port Modules: an interface for the 4 ADCs.

Data is written in a list mode file format and stored on the RAID disk
system. A detailed description can be found in Ref. [ 31 ] . Each event
contains the information on the ADCs channel, 16 bit ADC data and real
time clock RTC value in three 16 bit words rtc0, rtc1 and rtc2. The RTC
value is calculated according to the formula
(rtc2*65536+rtc1)*65536+rtc0. It starts from a preset value which was
rtc0=65528, rtc1=65536, rtc2=65536 and counts down in 50 \nano \second
intervals.

#### 3.1.6 The neutron chopper

All the measurements of the neutron transmission through the crystal
have been performed at specific neutron wavelengths selected using a
neutron chopper and time-of-flight techniques. For the UCN and VCN
measurements different choppers have been used.

##### The VCN chopper

The VCN chopper uses a rotating disk made of aluminium coated with a
neutron absorbing Gd and @xmath LiF layer and it has two slits through
which neutrons can pass. A 20 \milli \metre diameter boron collimator is
placed directly after the chopper and is centered on the beam axis. The
chopper was operated at a rotation frequency of @xmath = 7 \hertz . A 5
\micro \second long TTL signal is generated before the slit reaches the
neutron beam center. This signal triggers the data acquisition system.
The cross section area of the beam that is cut by the chopper slit and
the collimator at a given time defines the chopper opening function.
This can be calculated by integrating the overlapping area of the slit
and collimator as the slit moves through the beam area. The width of the
TOF channel (80 \micro \second ) defines the time step for this
calculation. The chopper opening functions have been calculated for the
nominal chopper frequency of @xmath = 7 \hertz and also for a chopper
frequency of @xmath = 3 \hertz at which some measurement were carried
out. These chopper functions are plotted in Fig. LABEL:vcnchopper_1 .
The transmission profiles obtained by the opening functions can play an
important role in the interpretation of the TOF spectra that are
measured: the transmission profiles have been used to deconvolve the raw
data. The details of the deconvolution are given in Appendix A.1.2 .

##### The UCN chopper

The UCN chopper consists of three rotating disks made from
polycarbonate: one disk rotates slowly while two other disks rotate at
the higher speed. The ratio of the speeds of the disks is fixed at 1:6.
The ’slow’ disk opens a time window of 22 \milli \second with a typical
operation frequency of about 3 \hertz to 4 \hertz and produces a neutron
pulse. The two fast disks sharpen the rising and falling slope of the
pulse. The disks in the chopper are driven by a stepping motor, the
stepping motor is computer-controlled through a “PCI 7324” card and
LabView software. The trigger signal needed for the TOF measurements is
provided by the light being reflected by one of the reflection sensors
and being detected by infrared diodes. The reflector is a 7 \milli
\metre long piece of aluminium mounted on the wheel of the slow disk,
which together with the rotation speed determines the length of the
pulse. To correct for this effect, a shaping stage was applied. The
length of the TTL signal, after passing this stage is 5 \micro \second .
A full chopper turn takes 864 steps. The chopper was routinely operated
at @xmath = 3 \hertz . The stepping motor can be run at a slow enough
speed that allows for an experimental determination of the chopper
opening function, Fig. LABEL:ucnchopper_1 shows the neutron yield (and
thus the chopper opening) as a function of time (blue points). The
results with the best statistic are obtained at a chopper speed of 2
steps/ \second which corresponds to 2 \milli \hertz . The curve thus
measured has been fitted with a polynomial function, Fig.
LABEL:ucnchopper_1 shows the resulting curves. In order to get the
chopper opening function for the typically used speed of 2500 steps/
\second , we used the obtained polynomial parameters to evaluate
appropriate values and the result of this procedure is presented in the
Fig. LABEL:ucnchopper_2 . The effect of convolution of the obtained
opening function with the raw UCN TOF spectrum was calculated to be
negligible in the analysis of the data. The stepping motor can also be
operated in a way so as to obtain a precise calibration of the TOF
spectra. This technique is described in Appendix A.2.2 .

## Chapter 4 Results and data analysis

A typical set of data consist of neutron transmission measurements
through liquid and solid deuterium. It took from 4 to 7 days.
Measurements with the deuterium in the gaseous phase were also carried
out in some cases. Once the transmission measurements of the deuterium
in the liquid phase had been completed, the crystal was grown from the
melt and was subsequently annealed (section 3.1.2 ). The transmission
through solid deuterium is measured as a function of the crystal
temperature range from 5 \kelvin to 18 \kelvin in 2 \kelvin steps in
most cases. from 18 \kelvin . Simultaneously Raman Spectroscopy was
performed as well as an optical investigation with the digital camera.
For the “front” detector position, two sets of measurements with
deuterium containing a high ortho-D @xmath concentration were carried
out and one set of measurement with normal deuterium was done. We also
performed a few additional measurements testing in what way the method
of freezing influences the neutron transmission. This section focuses on
regular measurements. Others are only shown to emphasise some important
effects that have been observed.

The analysis of one deuterium crystal consists of the following:

-   Determination of ortho-D @xmath concentration from the Raman spectra
    (usually from the liquid measurements).

-   Optical inspection of the measured crystal using pictures recorded
    by the digital camera.

-   Analysis of the S @xmath (0) line splitting in the ortho solid which
    gives information about the relative orientation of the crystal (or
    crystallites).

-   Analysis of the neutron data including measurements with liquid,
    solid at various temperatures and an empty cell.

### 4.1 Deuterium properties

To investigate the ratio c @xmath of ortho-D @xmath to para-D @xmath
deuterium in the measured sample the Raman spectroscopy method has been
used. Figure LABEL:lraman shows spectrum of rotational excitations for
liquid ortho-deuterium with c @xmath = (98.7 @xmath 0.2) @xmath . The
ortho-deuterium concentration is determined by comparing the Raman line
intensities for the J=0 @xmath 2 and J=1 @xmath 3 transition (lines S
@xmath (0) and S @xmath (1) respectively) and taking into account the
proper transition matrix element. The Ar II (493.3209 \nano \metre )
line which is seen in Fig. LABEL:lraman is produced by the laser.

Figure LABEL:s18raman shows the Raman signal for solid ortho-deuterium
at temperature of 18 \kelvin . The S @xmath (0) line is split into a
triplet which is a signature of the hcp structure of the crystal [ 32 ]
. The hcp symmetry of deuterium crystal makes the J = 2 level form three
energy bands belonging to m = @xmath 1 ( @xmath ) m = @xmath 2 ( @xmath
) and m = 0 ( @xmath ). Change of the S @xmath line shape with crystal
temperature is shown in Fig. LABEL:merged

The pictures which were taken with the digital camera allow us to study
the optical transparency of the deuterium crystal at various
temperatures. It appears that only carefully prepared crystal at
temperature of 18 \kelvin is fully transparent (Fig. LABEL:temp ).

### 4.2 Neutron data analysis

The neutron total cross section was evaluated from the neutron beam
attenuation in the deuterium sample. The neutron count-rate @xmath has
been measured for the beam passing through an empty target cell and the
neutron count-rate @xmath for the beam passing through the target cell
filled with deuterium has been measured. These count-rates are related
through:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the density of the sample, @xmath is the length of the
cell and @xmath is the total cross section. The density of a deuterium
sample was calculated from the molar volume @xmath , taken from Ref. [
33 ] , in the following way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is Avogadro’s number. The molar volume @xmath is equal to
23.21 \centi \cubic \metre \per \mole for liquid deuterium at 19 \kelvin
and 20.34 \centi \cubic \metre \per \mole for solid deuterium.

A single run takes normally 1800 \second . In most cases data were taken
for 2 hours at one temperature. The empty cell transmission measurements
have been also performed in the range from 5 \kelvin to 20 \kelvin . No
noticeable temperature dependency has been found.

#### 4.2.1 VCN data

Figure LABEL:liqsol shows neutron total cross section versus neutron
wave vector @xmath that have been measured with liquid deuterium and
with solid deuterium at 18 \kelvin and 5 \kelvin . The solid deuterium
data were obtained with the same crystal with a high ortho-deuterium
concentration of (98.7 @xmath 0.2) @xmath .

The fitting was done with the MINUIT package following two @xmath
minimisation methods: Simplex [ 34 ] and Migrad [ 35 ] . Both lead to
the same results.

For the liquid deuterium we fitted the total cross section vs. @xmath
using:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the neutron wave vector in the material and @xmath can
be interpreted as an energy independent incoherent elastic cross
section. The total cross section @xmath is the sum of energy independent
incoherent elastic cross section @xmath (4.1 \barn ) and the capture
plus inelastic cross section (up-scattering) which both are inversely
proportional to the neutron wave vector. In Fig. LABEL:l19 , the
experimental data is plotted together with the fitted function. One
notices that there is no visible deviation from the 1/ @xmath law. The
parameter @xmath which is a measure of inelastic cross section is @xmath
= (0.742 @xmath 0.009) \barn \usk \reciprocal \angstrom . The incoherent
cross section value obtained from the fit is @xmath = (4.19 @xmath 0.11)
\barn and agrees with the theoretical value to within one standard
deviation.

The fitted function used for liquid deuterium is not suitable for the
transmission data taken with the solid deuterium. Different dynamics of
neutron scattering from the solid phase requires more advanced models,
e.g. a model that includes the elastic coherent scattering due to
inhomogeneities in the crystal. The fitted function which was applied to
the data from the measurements of solid deuterium at 18 \kelvin follows
the idea of Engelmann and Steyerl. In their paper [ 26 ] they show that
very cold neutron transmission can be used to investigate
inhomogeneities in the matter (section 2.1.1 ). The developed technique
is alternative to the more conventional small angle scattering. In this
model the elastic scattering is described by the Eq. 2.20 of chapter 2.
The total cross section may be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by Eq. 2.21 , @xmath = 20 \degree is the detector
aperture and @xmath refers to the radius of submicroscopic structures.

Figure LABEL:s18 shows the experimental data and the obtained fit. The
incoherent elastic contribution @xmath was taken from the measurement
with liquid deuterium and @xmath and @xmath were varied.

The parameter A = (0.266 @xmath 0.004) \barn \usk \reciprocal \angstrom
obtained from the fit is 2.8 times lower than that of liquid deuterium
at a temperature of 19 \kelvin . This indicates strongly suppressed
up-scattering for the solid deuterium as compared with liquid deuterium
and agrees with a calculation presented by Keinert [ 36 ] : for the
neutron energy of 200 \nano \electronvolt Keinert calculated the
up-scattering rate for solid ortho-deuterium at temperature of 17
\kelvin to be 3.1 times lower than that of liquid deuterium at a
temperature of 19 \kelvin .

The interpretation of parameter @xmath is the following [ 3 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the bound coherent scattering length, @xmath is the
density difference to the surrounding medium.

Parameter @xmath refers to the radius of spherical inhomogeneities and
the value obtained from the fit is @xmath = (9.6 @xmath 1.9) \angstrom .

The same fitting procedure was applied to the data from the transmission
measurements of the crystal at temperatures of 16 \kelvin , 14 \kelvin
and 12 \kelvin . The experimental data and obtained fits are shown in
Figs. LABEL:s16 , LABEL:s14 and LABEL:s12 , respectively.

The interpretation of the total cross section measurement for the
deuterium crystal at temperatures below 12 \kelvin is also based on the
model which includes both incoherent inelastic scattering (proportional
to 1/ @xmath ) and coherent elastic scattering (proportional to 1/
@xmath ). The function which fits the best the data taken with the
crystal at the temperatures below 12 \kelvin has a form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where parameter @xmath is a measure of inelastic scattering and @xmath
gives an information about the strength of coherent elastic scattering.

Figure LABEL:s5 shows that the experimental point are well represented
by the curve of the form 4.6 .

The value for A = (0.056 @xmath 0.011) \barn \usk \reciprocal \angstrom
is now about 3 times smaller than that obtained for crystal measurements
at 18 \kelvin .

The same analysis was applied to the data from the transmission
measurements for crystal at temperatures of 10 \kelvin and 6 \kelvin .
Figures LABEL:s10 and LABEL:s6 show the experimental data and the
obtained fits for 10 \kelvin and 6 \kelvin , respectively.

We compared the experimental values of parameter @xmath with the one
phonon up-scattering cross sections (Eq. 2.38 ) calculated for the
initial neutron wavelength of 60 \angstrom (or wave vector @xmath = 0.1
\reciprocal \angstrom ). In Fig. LABEL:upscatt1 the experimental and
theoretical values, given in \barn \usk \metre \usk \reciprocal \second
, are plotted versus the temperature of solid deuterium. It is seen that
the experimental results reveal a different trend then theory. They
agree well only for the crystal temperature of 18 \kelvin .

To check the reproducibility of the measurement and sample preparation
procedures we repeated the transmission measurements with another
deuterium crystal with high ortho-deuterium concentration prepared in
the same way. In Figs. LABEL:comp and LABEL:stest2 the curves are
plotted for both crystal samples at temperatures 18 \kelvin and 5
\kelvin , respectively. We conclude that both measurements are
consistent.

#### 4.2.2 UCN data

Figure LABEL:ucnld2sd2 shows plots of the neutron transmission loss
cross section versus neutron wave vector @xmath for the liquid
ortho-deuterium ( @xmath = (98.2 @xmath 0.9) @xmath ) and solid
ortho-deuterium at temperatures of 18 \kelvin and 5 \kelvin . The
up-scattering cross section for the neutron wavelength of 550 \angstrom
(or an energy of 270 \nano \electronvolt ) is 2.7 times smaller for
solid deuterium at 18 \kelvin as compared with that for liquid deuterium
and agrees with the value obtained from the VCN analysis. In Fig.
LABEL:ucnld2sd2 one also sees that, over the full energy range covered,
at 5 \kelvin the inelastic cross section is a factor 2.2 smaller than at
18 \kelvin . This is 2 times less than the result obtained from the VCN
analysis.

Figure LABEL:ucnsd2all shows the cross section as a function of the
deuterium crystal temperature. One can notice the tendency of
suppression of the total cross section with decreasing temperature of
the crystal. However, the difference in the cross section values between
5 \kelvin and 10 \kelvin is not visible. It is noteworthy that the
measurement of the UCN yield from the model of solid-deuterium UCN
source performed by Serebrov et al. [ 37 ] does not show any difference
between the crystal at 10 \kelvin and 5 \kelvin either. Figure
LABEL:sd210-5 shows the total cross sections for solid deuterium at
temperatures of 10 \kelvin and 5 \kelvin from both VCN and UCN
measurements. It is seen that at the shorter wavelengths (30 \angstrom -
100 \angstrom ) the cross section values for crystal at 10 \kelvin are
higher as comapred with 5 \kelvin data, which may indicate that the
coherent scattering plays a crucial role at the larger wavelengths. This
effect is especially important at temperatures below 10 \kelvin where
the incoherent up-scattering cross section is relatively low. The cross
section curves for solid deuterium at 18 \kelvin and 5 \kelvin are
plotted in Fig. LABEL:sd218-5 .

## Chapter 5 Conclusions

For the construction of a high density superthermal UCN source several
parameters need to be optimized. The production of UCN in the converter
medium and the losses of UCN in this medium are defining the overall
efficiency at which such a source can operate. Also the extraction
efficiency from the source into an experiment itself is of great
importance.

To investigate the losses of UCN before they can exit the solid
deuterium converter, neutron transmission measurements through solid
deuterium samples have been performed with VCN and UCN beams. The
storage lifetime related to these UCN losses in solid deuterium is
dominated by four contributions [ 21 ] :

-   the nuclear absorption of neutrons on deuterons,

-   temperature dependent phonon - UCN interaction in the deuterium
    crystal,

-   UCN up-scattering processes by contaminants such as H @xmath ,

-   the presence of para-D @xmath which behaves as a contaminant.

The work presented in this thesis was devoted to the understanding of
the temperature dependent losses namely losses due to up-scattering of
UCN by picking up energy from phonons present in the deuterium.

We have shown that the inelastic cross section for neutron wavelength
range between 40 \angstrom and 500 \angstrom in deuterium decreases by a
factor 2.8 at the solidification of liquid deuterium (section 4.2.1 ).
This is in agreement with the calculations done by Keinert [ 36 ] for a
neutron wavelength of 640 \angstrom as well as with the results
presented by Serebrov [ 37 ] . The experimental value of incoherent
cross section obtained from the liquid deuterium data is (4.19 @xmath
0.11) \barn and agrees with the theoretical value to within one standard
deviation.

For solid deuterium the one phonon up-scattering is believed to be the
only mechanism which is responsible for temperature dependent losses of
UCN (inelastic cross section). The interpretation method of the solid
deuterium data that we used is based on a model developed by Steyerl and
collaborators. It includes thermal inelastic scattering and the coherent
elastic scattering on spherical inhomogeneities which are present in the
material. Our measurements carried out with very cold neutrons (in the
wavelength range of 40 \angstrom - 190 \angstrom ) give results that are
consistent with this model. However, our data as obtained with
ultra-cold neutrons (wavelength range 210 \angstrom - 500 \angstrom )
cannot be properly described by this model. The most likely explanation
for this difference lies in the wavelength dependence of the neutron
scattering on the material structure: the sensitivity to the scattering
on inhomogeneities in the material is increased significantly at the
larger wavelengths [ 38 ] .

From the fits according to the model mentioned above we were able to
distinguish the inelastic part (parameter @xmath ) of the total cross
section (section 4.2.1 ) for the temperatures of the crystal between 18
and 5 \kelvin . The comparison between up-scattering cross sections at
different crystal temperatures shows that for wavelength range of 40
\angstrom - 190 \angstrom :

-   At the temperature of 10 \kelvin the up-scattering cross section
    decreases 12 times as compared with liquid deuterium and 4.2 times
    as compared with solid deuterium at 18 \kelvin .

-   Further cooling of the crystal to the temperature of 5 \kelvin
    suppress the up-scattering only by 10 @xmath .

At the wavelengths of 210 \angstrom - 500 \angstrom we observed that:

-   The up-scattering cross section for a crystal temperature of 10
    \kelvin decreases 6 times as compared with that for liquid deuterium
    and 2.2 times as compared with solid deuterium at 18 \kelvin . This
    is about 2 times less than the result obtained from the VCN
    analysis.

-   There is no visible reduction of inelastic cross section between
    measurements with the crystal at 10 \kelvin and 5 \kelvin .

A possible explanation of those effects could be connected with a
strongly enhanced coherent scattering of UCN. For a full understanding
of this phenomenon more extensive models are required.

The results from neutron transmission studies are in accordance with
optical investigation of deuterium crystal and with Raman spectroscopy.
From the pictures that were taken with the digital camera we can see
that the transparency of crystal is changing with the temperature and
the number of cracks is increasing with decreasing temperature. The
analysis of Raman spectra shows that the orientation of the crystallites
is changing during cooling which may influence the coherent scattering
of neutrons. Clearly, measurements of this type will prove to be very
important in further optimising the way sD @xmath is prepared and kept
in the UCN source.

## Appendix A Time of flight spectrum and calibration

### a.1 VCN experiment

#### a.1.1 Dead time correction of time of flight spectra

The time-of-flight (TOF) spectra were measured for VCN packages that
passed the neutron chopper. The raw spectra have to be corrected for the
effect of dead time - specific for detectors and subsequent electronics.
When the detecting system processes an event no additional events can be
registered during a time interval of approximately 20 \micro \second .
The influence of the detector dead time on the count rate can be
calculated by analysing the distribution of time interval between
subsequent events.

The expected exponential distribution for an ideal (zero dead time)
system follows from the Poisson statistics. The TOF spectra are divided
into 2 \milli \second bins and for each bin we build a distribution of
time difference between subsequent events. Figure LABEL:timedistr shows
an example of this distribution for TOF between 20 and 22 \milli \second
taken in one run.

The analysis consist of two steps. In the first one we determine the
average dead time correction for every 2 \milli \second bin:

-   An exponential function is fitted to an exponential function to the
    data between 0.05 and 0.35 \milli \second (Fig. LABEL:timedistr ).

-   The integral of the fitted exponential distribution function
    extrapolated to zero time difference is calculated.

-   The ratio of the integral of the fitted function to the observed
    number of events is determined and it is this number that gives the
    dead time correction.

In the second step the dead time loss factor as a function of TOF is
interpolated using cubic splines (see Fig. LABEL:spline ). The
interpolation is restricted to the values for which 0.6 @xmath 1.7.
@xmath values refer to the fitted exponential functions from the first
step. Figure LABEL:tofdead shows the effect of the dead time correction.
The dead time correction changes the shape of the spectrum and can reach
25 @xmath in the maximum of the TOF distribution.

#### a.1.2 Deconvolution of the time-of-flight spectra

The raw TOF spectra are convolved with the chopper opening function as
described in section 3.1.6 . To obtain the true TOF spectra a
deconvolution procedure is necessary. We tried two methods (i) direct,
based on FFT technique and (ii) iterative. The stable result in the
direct deconvolution is strongly dependent on the input data as FFT
techniques are sensitive to noise. Since the measured TOF spectra carry
a non-negligible fraction of noise, the iteration method seems more
appropriate. The iteration method assumes an analytical form of the
unfolded function (i.e. the true spectrum) with free parameter and
performs a convolution with the known chopper opening function. The
resulting spectrum should be a good approximation to the raw spectrum as
recorded by DAQ system. To optimize the fit, the following expression
for chi-square is evaluated:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the folded theoretical function, @xmath is the value
experimentally measured and @xmath is the weight of the data point
(inverse square of the statistical error). The deconvolution factor is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are the values before and after the convolution
respectively. The deconvolved spectra (with their natural statistical
fluctuations) are then obtained by multiplying the raw data by the
deconvolution factor.

The analytic function used to parameterise the VCN TOF spectra is a sum
of two modified Maxwellian time distributions and a constant background.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Figure LABEL:deconv_1 shows the experimental data and the fitted
function @xmath . The effect of deconvolution is presented in Fig.
LABEL:deconv_2 . The deconvolution factor @xmath is shown in Fig.
LABEL:deconv_4 and the deconvolved experimental spectrum is presented in
Fig. LABEL:deconv_3 .

#### a.1.3 Zero time calibration method

The TOF spectrum needs to be corrected for an effect that arises because
of a difference in the time at which the chopper start signal is
generated and the actual time at which the neutrons start passing
through the chopper. This effect will appear as a shift in the TOF
spectrum. This section describes the calibration method to determine the
zero point on the time scale.

For calibration, data was collected with the detector placed at two
positions: “front” (F) and “extended” (E), with the same collimation
(section 3.1.1 ). The difference in the flight path between these two
configurations is @xmath = 511 \milli \metre . Figure LABEL:calib1 shows
the time-of-flight spectra recorded at these two positions.

Assuming that the mean arrival time does not change with spreading of
the TOF spectrum, the mean velocity can be calculated by dividing the
distance @xmath by the difference in the mean arrival time at both
positions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

A true mean arrival time at the “front” position is then determined by
dividing the length of the flight path ( @xmath = 1436 \milli \metre )
by the mean velocity:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The correction to the arrival time was than calculated by subtracting
the measured time from the true time.

There are two contributions to the systematic error connected with this
calibration method:

-   gravitational and beam divergence effects,

-   determination of the distance with the assumption that neutrons
    react with the @xmath He in the middle of the detector.

To minimise this uncertainty, the TOF spectra have been built for the
events falling into the collimator projected spot area defined by the
spot size parameter @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the diameter of the collimator, @xmath is the
collimation length and @xmath is the distance from the collimator to the
detector (see Fig. LABEL:beamspot ). Thus the beam spot size is 26
\milli \meter for the “front” detector localization ( @xmath = 174
\milli \metre ) and 42 \milli \metre for the “extended” detector
position ( @xmath = 685 \milli \metre ). Figures LABEL:beamclose and
LABEL:beamext show the beam profiles for the “front” and “extended”
detector position. Divergence of the beam and gravitation cause missing
of events at the “extended” detector position, and consequently,
changing of the mean arrival time. The contribution from this effect to
the calibration error was estimated to be of 0.04 \milli \second . The
uncertainty in determining the exact flight path length gives a
systematic error of 0.28 ms.

The obtained correction to the arrival time (shift in the TOF spectrum)
is (0.80 @xmath 0.28) ms. The effect of calibration is shown in Fig.
LABEL:calib3 : one curve shows a TOF spectrum before and the other one
after calibration.

In order to check the reliability of this method we calculate the
time-of-flight distribution at the close position from known
distribution at the “extended” position. The comparison is shown in Fig.
LABEL:calib2 .

#### a.1.4 Background measurements

The background rate for the VCN experiment was measured to be about 2
events per second. The measurement was performed with the main shutter
closed when the reactor was running. The main contribution comes
directly from the turbine.

### a.2 UCN experiment

#### a.2.1 Dead time consideration

The neutron flux at the UCN test position is considerably lower than
that at the VCN beam: the UCN flux of the order of 20 \centi \rpsquare
\metre \usk \reciprocal \second for v = 13 \metre \per \second and about
4000 \centi \rpsquare \metre \usk \reciprocal \second at the velocity of
70 \metre \per \second . Consequently, for the experiments carried out
with the UCN beam, no dead time corrections are required.

#### a.2.2 Calibration of the timing in the TOF spectra

As is the case of the VCN experimental setup, the neutron chopper
operating in the UCN setup generates a start signal that does not
exactly coincide with the opening of the neutron window itself (section
3.1.6 ). This causes shift in the TOF spectra and needs to be corrected
by a calibration procedure. Two independent methods have been developed
to calibrate UCN time-of-flight spectra.

The first one is based on a direct experimental determination of the
number of steps the stepping motor moves between the moment the TTL
start signal appears and the moment the neutron start passing through
the chopper. The chopper is driven slowly, step by step, by a control
program running in the LabView environment. This is why the exact
angular position of the stepping motor at which the TTL signal appears
can be determined. Likewise by driving the chopper further, step by
step, the exact angular position of the stepping motor at which the UCN
pass through the chopper and are detected by the detector is determined,
too. One thus knows the exact number of steps @xmath between the TTL
start signal and the chopper opening. Knowing also the frequency @xmath
at which the stepping motor is driven one can then calculate the time
offset @xmath to be applied to raw TOF spectra. In a similar procedure,
one can also experimentally determine the number of steps @xmath of the
motor between opening and closing the chopper window as well as the
number of steps of a full chopper cycle. This method was applied for the
measurements with the beam collimator and without it. The obtained
results are collected in Tab. A.1 .

In the calculations we have assumed that @xmath = 0 in the centre of the
chopper opening. For the measurements with the chopper speed of 2500
steps/s (3 \hertz ) the calculated offset is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The precision of this results, limited by the uncertainty in counting
the number of steps performed, is 1 \milli \second .

The other method of calibrating the TOF spectra is based on measuring
the arrival time of the fastest (slowest) neutrons at various chopper
speeds and fitting a linear function to the data. Examples for the
measurements without collimator are plotted in Figs LABEL:slow and
LABEL:fast . The time offset between TTL signal and chopper window
opening is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the fit parameter and @xmath is the chopper frequency.
The calculated offset (average from both measurements) is @xmath = (250
@xmath 2) \milli \second .

Both these calibration methods rely on a precise knowledge of the
chopper speed. The chopper has been tested and has shown to be operating
stable over long periods. The chopper speed scales linearly with the
true disks speed. Both calibration methods gave consistent results.
Figures LABEL:ucncal_1 and LABEL:ucncal_2 show a time-of-flight spectrum
with no calibration applied and a plot of the same spectrum with proper
timing calibration.

#### a.2.3 Background measurements

The background for the UCN experiment appears to be of the order of 0.1
counts per second. It was measured with the main shutter closed and the
reactor running.