# Abstract

The abundance of iron, magnesium, calcium and sodium in @xmath Centauri
A ( @xmath Cen A) is determined from strong lines of these elements
using the theory of collisional line broadening of alkali and other
spectral lines by neutral hydrogen developed by Anstee & O’Mara [1] and
the spectrum synthesis program of John Ross [2]. The derived abundance
is independent of non–thermal motions in the photosphere and is in good
agreement with the results obtained by Chmielewski et al. [3] and
Furenlid & Meylan [4] within the uncertainties involved.

As the abundances are derived from the wings of strong lines they are
independent of non–thermal motions in the photosphere of @xmath Cen A.
The microturbulence is then determined using medium–strong lines of iron
by fixing the abundance of iron to the value determined from the strong
lines of iron, and adjusting the microturbulence to match the observed
equivalent width of each line. The microturbulence is the average of the
values obtained for all lines. This microturbulence can then be used in
determination of the abundance of other elements for which there are no
strong lines in the spectrum.

The abundances of iron, magnesium, calcium and sodium in @xmath Cen A
are approximately 0.2 dex higher than in the Sun. Also the
microturbulence in the atmosphere of @xmath Cen A which is (with the aid
of the improved theory of line broadening) determined independently of
the abundances is 1.34 km/s i.e., 0.20 km/s greater than on the Sun.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

A sound procedure for the determination of chemical composition of the
Sun and stars is important if we are to understand how elements are
synthesised by thermonuclear burning in stellar interiors, and how, in
turn, this relates to the chemical evolution of galaxies. The Sun and
stars with similar surface temperatures are important as lines of
neutral and singly ionised metals are prevalent in these stars allowing
abundances to be determined for a wide selection of elements. The
chemical composition of the Sun is particularly important as it is used
as a standard to which all other stars are referenced. The lines best
suited to abundance determinations are strong lines as their wings are
not affected by uncertainties in the line of sight motions
(microturbulence) of the absorbing atoms and their intrinsic strengths
(f–values) can be accurately determined in the laboratory.

In the past, a major impediment to the use of such lines has been the
lack of an adequate theory for the broadening of these lines by
collisions with neutral hydrogen atoms. Recently Anstee & O’Mara (1991)
[1] developed a theory which they tested by applying it to the sodium
D–lines in the solar spectrum. Anstee & O’Mara (1995) [5] used the
theory to construct tables of line broadening cross–sections for s–p,
p–s transitions covering a range of effective principal quantum numbers
for the upper and lower levels of the transition. Anstee, O’Mara & Ross
(1997) [9] used these data in the determination of the solar abundance
of iron from the strong lines of Fe I. The derived abundance was in
excellent agreement with the meteoritic value ending a long standing
controversy about possible deviations of the solar abundance from the
meteoritic value. As a result of this work abundances can now be derived
with some confidence from strong lines with the resulting abundance
being independent of non–thermal motions in the photosphere.

In the past medium–strong lines have often been used whose equivalent
widths are sensitive to non–thermal motions in the stellar photosphere,
and consequently it has been difficult to determine whether the chemical
composition of a star like @xmath Cen A differs from that of the Sun.
For example, Bessell (1981) [10] obtained a solar composition for this
star assuming a microturbulence of 1.7 km/s while more recently Furenlid
& Meylan (1990) [4] and Chmielewski et al. (1992) [3] in an analysis of
@xmath Cen A & B using a microturbulence of 1.0 km/s find that the
abundance of iron is systematically greater than in the Sun by 0.12 and
0.22 dex respectively. On the other hand, if strong lines are used an
abundance of iron can be derived which is independent of any assumed
microturbulence. Moreover, once the abundance of iron has been
determined in this manner, the microturbulence can be uniquely
determined by requiring the abundance derived from medium–strong lines
match that derived from the strong lines. In this way the derived
abundance and the microturbulence can be decoupled leading to
independent values for both. The derived microturbulence can then be
used in the determination of the abundance of elements for which there
are no strong lines in the star. It is the purpose of this thesis to
test this new method of analysis by application to the chemical
composition of @xmath Cen A.

A brief review of the thesis contents:

In Chapter 2, the literature review of work on @xmath Cen is presented
which includes its physical properties and results obtained for its
chemical composition.

In Chapter 3, the theory of the broadening of spectral lines by
collisions with atomic hydrogen is reviewed, with emphasis on the more
recent work of Anstee & O’Mara (1991) [1] and Anstee & O’Mara (1995)
[5].

In Chapter 4, the spectrum synthesis software used in the thesis is
applied to selected medium–strong lines of Fe I in the solar spectrum to
deduce the microturbulence required to bring the abundance derived from
strong and medium–strong lines in the solar spectrum into agreement; a
preview of the analysis to be carried out on @xmath Cen A.

In Chapter 5, the @xmath Cen system is described and the spectra
obtained for @xmath Cen A & B are described along with the process of
reducing these data for analysis by the spectrum synthesis program and
identification of the lines.

In Chapter 6, abundances are derived from the strong and medium–strong
lines in @xmath Cen A and a microturbulence is derived.

In Chapter 7, conclusions of the analysis carried out in this thesis are
summarized and suggestions are made for future work.

## Chapter 2 Literature Review

The nearest star to our solar system, @xmath Cen, is in fact a system of
three stars viz @xmath Cen A, @xmath Cen B and Proxima Cen. The star
system @xmath Cen, one of the pointers to the Southern Cross, comprises
of a –0.3 magnitude visual binary consisting of @xmath Cen A, a G2V star
(very similar to the Sun) and @xmath Cen B a K0V star. The orbital
period is 80.089 years, the semi–major axis is 23.5 AU, the distance
1.33 pc, the masses are 1.11 and 0.92 ( @xmath 0.03) @xmath . The third
star Proxima Cen is closer to the Sun than any other star. They are all
about 4 light years away. They lie in the constellation Centaurus, in
the Milky Way and are visible from the Southern Hemisphere.

No less than 229 bibliographic references are given for @xmath Cen A in
the SIMBAD (Set of Identification, Measurements and Bibliography for
Astronomical Data 1991 edition) and 140 references for @xmath Cen B [3].
According to SIMBAD the first detailed analyses of @xmath Cen A and
@xmath Cen B were done only in 1970 by French and Powell [11].

Recent detailed investigations of composition, temperature and ages of
@xmath Cen A and B have been in agreement in their conclusion that
@xmath Cen A has temperature a little higher or nearly equal to the Sun,
is more metal–rich and is of the same age as or older than the Sun (note
that older stars usually have a lower metallicity than the Sun).
Exceptions are Bessell [10], whose analysis gives @xmath Cen A and B
having the same abundance as the Sun and Furenlid & Meylan [4] concluded
that the effective temperature of @xmath Cen A is 5710 K, which is 70 K
less than that of the Sun (here adopted solar effective temperature is
5780 K).

Here is a brief summary of what some investigators have to say about
@xmath Cen A.

Blackwell & Shallis [12] describe the infrared flux method of
determining stellar angular diameters. The accuracy of the method is
tested on Arcturus and twenty seven other stars including @xmath Cen A.
Given the angular diameter, @xmath , the effective temperature, @xmath ,
is derived from the integrated flux from the star at the earth, @xmath ,
through the defining relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

or alternatively given @xmath and the flux ( @xmath ) from a suitable
model atmosphere, @xmath can be obtained. Their result for @xmath Cen A,
using the adopted effective temperature of 5800 K, gives an angular
diameter of @xmath arcsec. The advantage of this method is that it is
applicable to cool stars, if a reasonably good model atmosphere is
available.

Bessell [10], using a grid of unpublished line blanketed models of
Gustafsson, Bell, Nordlund, Eriksson (1979) analysed Fe and Ti lines to
obtain the abundance of these elements in @xmath Cen A (and B). In his
analysis Bessell [10] obtained abundance of Fe and Ti in @xmath Cen A
equal to the solar values. Two important parameters in this analysis
were found to have higher values. One was the adopted effective
temperature of 5820 K which is 40 K higher than the effective
temperature of the Sun and the other was a higher microturbulence of 1.7
km/s, which Bessell [10] concluded must have contributed to above solar
equivalent widths of lines in @xmath Cen A. Other investigators do not
agree with Bessell [10] regarding this higher microturbulence.

Soderblom and Dravins [13] measured the lithium abundance in @xmath Cen
A. On a scale where log N(H) = 12.00, they found a lithium abundance of
log N(Li) = 1.28, which is nearly twice that of the Sun. As it is
difficult to estimate the age of a star from the lithium abundance
alone, they assume that the age of @xmath Cen A, depending on the
composition, could be as low as 4 Gyr, or as great as 8 Gyr. In this
analysis Soderblom and Dravins [13] support an effective temperature of
@xmath Cen A which is same as the Sun. Their conclusion that @xmath Cen
A has twice the lithium abundance compared to the Sun is consistent with
its greater mass (1.1 @xmath ), despite their prediction of probable
evolutionary age of @xmath Cen A to be 6 Gyr.

Soderblom [14], later in 1986, concluded that there is a good agreement
between the (wings of) H @xmath profiles of @xmath Cen A and the Sun
which suggests they have the same effective temperature. Using this
temperature and adopted luminosities he calculated the radius of @xmath
Cen A as 1.23 @xmath .

A differential abundance analysis between @xmath Cen A and the Sun has
been carried out by Furenlid & Meylan [4]. They have measured around 500
lines of 26 elements in very high @xmath ratio (500–10,000) spectra for
both objects. They find that the absorption lines in @xmath Cen A are on
average around 10 mÅ stronger than the Sun. In their analysis Furenlid &
Meylan [4] found that there is an average metal overabundance in @xmath
Cen A of around 0.12 dex ( @xmath 0.02 to @xmath 0.04 dex) on scale of
log N(H) = 12.0. The average abundance of Fe, Mg and Si relative to the
Sun was found to be 0.20 dex, using an effective temperature of 5800 K,
log g = 4.0 and microturbulence @xmath = 1.0 km/s. The effective
temperature is reduced to 5710 K and the overabundance of Fe reduces
from 0.20 to 0.11 dex, when effects of the abundance on continuous
absorption are taken into account. It is unusual to find so low an
effective temperature as no other investigator has come up with this
conclusion. Furenlid & Meylan [4] determined age of @xmath Cen A to be
4.2 @xmath 0.4 billion years which is nearly same as that of the Sun.

A detailed abundance study for @xmath Cen A and @xmath Cen B was carried
out by Chmielewski et al. [3]. Using high quality spectra with high
@xmath ratio and high resolution, they have estimated the effective
temperature, iron abundance and lithium abundance. The values they
obtained are as follows : @xmath = 5800 K, [Fe/H] = +0.22 @xmath 0.02
and log N(Li) = 1.4 @xmath 0.3. Their observations of the Ca II infrared
triplet indicate a low level of chromospheric activity for @xmath Cen A
and B compared to the Sun. From the abundance analysis they are able to
confirm that @xmath Cen A is a Metal–Rich (MR) star.

Chmielewski et al. [3] have summarised recent studies on @xmath Cen A.
Table 2.1 summarises important analysis results for @xmath Cen A (here
results of Chmielewski et al. [3] are also included).

The metallicity of @xmath Cen A has been discussed by Noels et al. [15],
Neuforge [16] and Fernandes & Neuforge [17]. All three papers have used
different calibration techniques and predicted that the metallicity is
high in @xmath Cen A compared to the Sun by a factor of 2 (0.3 dex).
Noels et al. [15] using a generalisation of the solar calibration
technique computed evolutionary sequences for 1.085 @xmath with
different values of Z, Y, and @xmath . They found that, the fraction by
mass of elements more massive than He, Z = 0.04, the helium mass
fraction, Y @xmath 0.32 and convection parameter @xmath = 1.6, where
@xmath is the ratio of the mixing length to the pressure scale height
i.e. @xmath . The helium abundance is higher than that of the Sun, which
is nearly equal to 0.28. They adopted mean values of effective
temperature as 5765 K and Luminosity log (L/ @xmath ) = 0.1853.

Neuforge [16] used the same calibration technique as that of Noels
et al. [15] but used different opacities and effective temperature. She
computed her own set of low temperature atmospheric opacities for
different values of Z ranging from 0.02 to 0.04. She adopted the
effective temperature from Chmielewski et al. [3] which is 5800 K @xmath
20 K. Neuforge [16] found the values for metallicity Z = 0.038, helium Y
= 0.321, age t = 4.84 Gyr and convection parameter @xmath = 2.10. The
value of the convection parameter @xmath is different from Noels et al.
[15] only because of different opacities.

Fernandes and Neuforge [17] discuss two calibration techniques for fixed
Z and varied Z, using models calculated with mixing length convection
theory (MLT) and explain their solution through the behaviour of the
convection parameter @xmath with chemical composition. They also
predicted a higher Z for @xmath Cen A compared to the Sun from their
analysis.

## Chapter 3 Theory of Spectral Line Broadening

### 3.1 Introduction to Line Broadening

Broadening of spectral lines in stellar atmospheres is mainly due to
three mechanisms. They are:

-   Natural broadening, due to the finite lifetimes of the upper and
    lower levels.

-   Collisional broadening, caused by perturbations of atomic energy
    levels during collisions with other particles. There are two main
    sources of collisional broadening in solar–type stellar atmospheres
    viz :

    -   Stark broadening, due to collisions with electrons and

    -   so called van der Waals broadening, due to collisions with
        atoms, mainly neutral hydrogen.

-   Doppler broadening, caused by random motions of the absorbing and
    emitting atoms along the line of sight. These random motions may be
    due to:

    -   thermal motions of the atoms in the gas (thermal broadening) or

    -   non–thermal random motions due to some form of small scale
        turbulence (microturbulence).

Natural broadening and Doppler broadening are always present and
dominate the shapes near the line centre at low densities. However,
natural broadening is important only in the cores of strong lines formed
in the upper layers of the stellar atmospheres. The line shapes are
strongly influenced by interactions of the radiating atoms or ions with
surrounding particles. Then the Collisional broadening (Pressure
broadening) comes into the picture. The most important interactions are
those between radiating systems and electrons. Because electric fields
are involved, this type of broadening is called Stark broadening. In the
atmospheres of hot stars, electron collisions are the most important
because electrons are the dominant particle species, they move rapidly
and interact strongly with the absorbing atoms. On the other hand, the
outer layers of the Sun and stars of similar effective temperature are
sufficiently hot to dissociate molecular hydrogen into atomic hydrogen
but are insufficiently hot to ionize hydrogen. The few electrons present
result from thermal ionisation of metals such as iron and as a result of
the low abundance of the metals, hydrogen atoms outnumber electrons by
about 10,000:1. The collisional broadening of absorption lines in these
stars is therefore dominated by collisions with atomic hydrogen.

In addition to the above classification of the various pressure
broadening mechanisms, there is the division into impact (collision) and
quasi–static (statistical) broadening. These are two extreme
approximations in the general theory of broadening. The quasi–static
description is valid when the perturbers move relatively slowly, so that
the perturbation is practically constant over the time of interest,
which is, at most, of the order of the inverse of the line width, the
latter being measured in angular frequency units. In the impact
approximation, on the same time scale, the duration of individual
collisions is negligibly small which is always the case for broadening
by collisions with electrons and hydrogen atoms.

As collisions with hydrogen atoms dominate the collisional broadening of
lines in cool stars like the Sun, it is important to have a satisfactory
theory for this line broadening process if strong lines are to be used
in determination of the chemical composition of these stars.

### 3.2 Broadening by Collisions with Hydrogen Atoms

A theory for the broadening of spectral lines by collisions with atomic
hydrogen developed by Anstee & O’Mara [1] is described in a paper
presented by O’Mara [18] at an IAU Conference in Sydney in January 1997.
An extract from that paper is quoted below.

  “In cool stars neutral hydrogen atoms outnumber electrons by four
  orders of magnitude, consequently the broadening of most spectral
  lines is dominated by collisions with neutral hydrogen atoms.
  Conventional vander Waals’ theory for this broadening process is known
  to underestimate the broadening of spectral lines in the Sun by about
  a factor of two. Development of a satisfactory theory is important as
  it would allow strong lines with well determined f–values to be used
  to determine abundances in cool stars in a manner which is independent
  of photospheric motions. Also such lines could also be used to
  determine surface gravities in cool stars.
  Collisions with neutral hydrogen atoms are sufficiently fast for the
  impact approximation of spectral line broadening theory to be valid.
  In this approximation the line has a Lorentz profile with a half
  half–width which is given by:

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.1)
    -- -------- -- -------

  where @xmath is the hydrogen atom number density, v is the relative
  collision speed, f(v) is the speed distribution and the line
  broadening cross–section

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.2)
    -- -------- -- -------

  where the integrand contains the product of the geometrical
  cross–section 2 @xmath and a line broadening efficiency factor @xmath
  for collisions with impact parameter b and relative speed v .
  @xmath indicates that the efficiency factor has to be averaged over
  all orientations of the perturbed atom. The efficiency factor can be
  expressed in terms of the S–matrix elements for the collision which
  are functionally dependent on the interaction energy between a
  hydrogen atom in the ground state and the perturbed atom in its upper
  and lower states. The only essential difference between various
  theoretical treatments is in the method employed to determine this
  interaction energy.
  In the theory developed by Anstee & O’Mara [1] the interaction energy
  is calculated using Rayleigh–Schrödinger perturbation theory. If
  exchange effects are neglected, the shift in energy of the two–atom
  system as a result of the electrostatic interaction V between them is
  given by

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.3)
    -- -------- -- -------

  where the unperturbed eigenstates of the two–atom system @xmath are
  products of the unperturbed eigenstates of the two atoms. As first
  pointed out by Unsöld the above expression can be greatly simplified
  if @xmath can be replaced by a constant value @xmath . Closure can
  then be used to complete the sum over j to obtain

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.4)
    -- -------- -- -------

  The second term accounts for the interatomic interaction resulting
  from fluctuations of both atoms simultaneously (dispersion) and the
  fluctuation of each atom in the static field of the other (induction).
  The second term dominates the interaction. To develop the theory
  further, the perturbed atom is described by an optical electron
  outside a positively charged core so that product states of the
  two–atom system have the form @xmath . With reference to the Figure
  3.1, the electrostatic interaction energy V , in atomic units, is

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.5)
    -- -------- -- -------

  For the state @xmath , the interaction energy can be expressed in the
  form

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.6)
       @xmath      
    -- -------- -- -------

  where @xmath is the radial wave function for the optical electron in
  the perturbed atom and @xmath are lengthy complicated analytic
  functions of @xmath and R, which have a logarithmic singularity at
  @xmath = R and which can be expressed as an asymptotic expansion in
  powers of @xmath when R is large. It can be shown that the leading
  term in this expansion leads to

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.7)
    -- -------- -- -------

  and if @xmath is chosen to be 4/9 atomic units 1/ @xmath = 9/4 which
  is the polarizability of hydrogen in atomic units. Thus

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.8)
    -- -------- -- -------

  the standard expression for the van der Waals interaction between the
  two atoms. However, the impact parameters important in the
  determination of the cross–section are always too small for this
  asymptotic form of the interaction to be valid. The terms in @xmath
  can be expressed in a similar but simpler form. It is an important
  feature of the method that the interaction energy between the two
  atoms can be determined analytically to within a numerical integration
  over the radial wave function for the perturbed atom.
  For individual transitions of interest Scaled Thomas–Fermi–Dirac or
  Hartree–Fock radial wave functions can be used in the determination of
  the interaction energy. Standard methods can then be used to determine
  the efficiency factor @xmath and these can be used to calculate the
  cross–section, and ultimately, the line width. This is perhaps the
  best method for specific lines of interest such as the Na D–lines and
  the Mg b–lines. However, without significant loss of accuracy, Coulomb
  wave functions can be used to tabulate cross–sections for a range of
  effective principal and azimuthal quantum numbers for the upper and
  lower levels of the transition. This approach enables cross–sections
  to be obtained for a wide variety of transitions by interpolation.
  Anstee & O’Mara [5] adopted this approach for s–p and p–s transitions.
  In addition to tabulating cross–sections for a collision speed of
  @xmath for a range of effective principal quantum numbers for the
  upper and lower level, they also determined by direct computation,
  velocity exponents @xmath , on the assumption that @xmath .
  With this dependence of the cross–section on collision speed the
  integration over the speed distribution can be performed to obtain the
  line width per unit H–atom density, which is given by

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (3.9)
    -- -------- -- -------

  where @xmath , and @xmath is the reduced mass of the two atoms.
  Typically @xmath is about 0.25, which leads to a temperature
  dependence of @xmath for the line width. At present, tabulated values
  of @xmath and @xmath are only available for s–p and p–s transitions
  but work is in progress to extend the results to p–d, d–p and d–f, f–d
  transitions.”

The relation between this treatment of broadening by collisions with
hydrogen atoms and others is discussed by Anstee & O’Mara [1] and Anstee
[19].

### 3.3 Conclusions

It is now no longer necessary to use the time honoured van der Waals’
theory to calculate broadening cross–sections for collisions with
hydrogen atoms which are known to underestimate the broadening by a
factor of two. The tabulated data of Anstee & O’Mara [5] can be used to
obtain cross–sections for s–p, p–s transitions. New data for p–d, d–p
transitions have been submitted for publication by Barklem & O’Mara [20]
and work is in progress for d–f, f–d transitions. Anstee & O’Mara [5]
have shown that these data yield solar abundances from selected strong
lines which are consistent with meteoritic values and Anstee, O’Mara &
Ross [9] have shown that strong lines can now be used to obtain the
solar abundance of iron with some precision. The iron abundance obtained
is in detailed agreement with the meteoritic value, ending a long
standing controversy concerning the solar abundance of iron.

The only remaining significant approximation in this theoretical work is
the Unsöld approximation. In future it is hoped to improve on this
approximation by forcing the potentials to match more accurate
potentials obtained by other means at the long range van der Waals
limit.

These data are used in this thesis to obtain abundances, which are
independent of any assumed microturbulence, in @xmath Cen A from strong
lines with well determined f–values.

## Chapter 4 The Determination of the Microturbulence from Medium–Strong
Lines of Fe I in the Solar Spectrum

### 4.1 Introduction

Whether @xmath Cen A is predicted to be metal rich or not is critically
dependent on the assumed microturbulent velocity @xmath in the
photosphere of this star. For example Bessell [10] finds that @xmath Cen
A has the same composition as the Sun if @xmath = 1.7 km/s while
Furenlid & Meylan [4] find it to be metal rich if @xmath = 1.0 km/s. The
improved line broadening theory of Anstee & O’Mara [1] permits the
determination of the composition from the wings of strong lines in a
manner which is independent of the microturbulence. The microturbulence
can then be independently determined by requiring that the composition
derived from medium- strong lines match the abundance derived from the
strong lines. We illustrate this procedure by application to the solar
spectrum as a prelude to its application to @xmath Cen A.

### 4.2 Microturbulence Analysis of Oxford Fe I Lines

Holweger [21] discusses meteoritic and solar abundances and their
stability as cosmic reference data. During his discussion, Holweger [21]
plots log N(Fe) versus Equivalent Width (mÅ) using a standard damping
enhancement factor of 2.0 and zero microturbulence. This plot is shown
in Figure 4.1.

Omitting microturbulence altogether introduces a conspicuous hump in the
abundance pattern; most sensitive are lines of intermediate strength
with equivalent widths in the range 60- 100 mÅ. Figure 4.1 gives a clear
picture of what happens if the presence of small scale motions in the
stellar atmosphere is neglected in line formation calculations.

In this section we have used the Fe I line data from Blackwell, Lynas-
Gray and Smith [22] to study the effect of microturbulence, while
keeping the abundance fixed at the meteoritic value of 7.51. The results
are shown in Table 4.1.

As stated by Holweger [21] and described above, the lines most affected
by microturbulence are lines of intermediate strengths between 60- 100
mÅ, hence we have omitted weaker lines in our analysis. The variation of
microturbulence for equivalent widths in range of 60- 100 mÅ is between
0.9 to 1.3 km/s. The mean value is 1.14 @xmath 0.12 km/s.

### 4.3 Conclusions

Using the lines most sensitive to microturbulence with equivalent widths
in the range of 60- 100 mÅ it has been shown that a microturbulence of
1.14 @xmath 0.12 km/s is required if these lines are to yield the same
abundance of iron as that obtained by Anstee, O’Mara & Ross [9] and in
meteorites. This value is somewhat larger than 1.0 km/s, a value
commonly employed in analysis of the solar spectrum. As @xmath Cen A is
very similar to the Sun, and as a similar method will be used to
determine the microturbulence in @xmath Cen A, this new value 1.14 km/s
will be a useful benchmark for comparison.

## Chapter 5 Data Analysis for @xmath Cen A

### 5.1 @xmath Cen – the Closest Stellar System

@xmath Cen is of special interest as it is the closest stellar system to
the Sun. @xmath Cen lies 4.35 light- years from the Sun. It is not a
single star but is actually a triple star system. Its brightest and
warmest star is called @xmath Cen A. It is a yellow star with spectral
type of G2, exactly the same as that of the Sun. Therefore its
temperature ( @xmath 5800 K) and color are similar to those of the Sun.
@xmath Cen A, the brightest star in the system, is slightly more massive
and luminous, its mass is 1.09 solar masses and its brightness is 54
percent greater than that of the Sun.

@xmath Cen B, the second brightest star in the system, lies close to
@xmath Cen A. It is an orange star, cooler and smaller than the Sun. Its
spectral type is K1 and its surface temperature is 5300 K, approximately
500 K lower than that of the Sun. The mass of @xmath Cen B is 0.90 solar
masses and this star’s brightness is just 44 percent of the solar value.
The brightest components @xmath Cen A and B form a binary. They orbit
each other in about 80 years with a mean separation of 23 astronomical
units. Figure 5.1 shows the comparative size of @xmath Cen stars with
the Sun, taken from Croswell [6].

The third and the faintest member of the @xmath Cen system, @xmath Cen
C, lies a long way

from its two brighter companions. @xmath Cen C lies 13,000 AU from A and
B, or 400 times the distance between the Sun and Neptune. It is not yet
known whether @xmath Cen C is really bound to A and B, or whether it has
left the system some million of years ago. @xmath Cen C lies measurably
closer to the Sun than the other two: it is only 4.22 light- years away,
and it is the nearest individual star to the Sun. Because of its
proximity, @xmath Cen C is also called Proxima Cen. Proxima Cen is a dim
red dwarf, much fainter, cooler and smaller than the Sun. Its spectral
type is M5, temperature is half that of the Sun, mass one- tenth that of
the Sun, and brightness a mere 0.006 percent that of the Sun [6].
Proxima is so faint that astronomers did not discover it until 1915.

### 5.2 Observation and Data

The analysis of @xmath Cen A reported here is differential to the Sun
and based on an entirely new set of observational data. The
observational material for @xmath Cen A consists of high resolution,
high @xmath ratio spectra obtained at Mt. Stromlo and Siding Spring
Observatories (MSSSO), and the solar data are from the Kitt Peak solar
flux atlas of Kurucz et al. [23].

Spectral data for @xmath Cen A were taken by Dr. Mike Bessell at MSSSO.
The spectra were taken on the 74 inch telescope at Mt. Stromlo
Observatory in June and July 1996 with the echellé system. They were
taken with the 120 inch focal length coudé camera and a 31.6 groove/mm
echellé cross dispersed with a 150 lines/mm grating. The CCD was a SITe
2048x2048 CCD with 24 micron pixels. A fast rotating B star was also
observed for the red settings so that the atmospheric absorption lines
due to water and @xmath could be identified and removed. The @xmath
varied with order across the CCD because of the vignetting due to the
cross- disperser not being near a pupil. The actual resolution was about
3 pixels (these 1024 ”pixels” were double binned pixels of the 2048 CCD
pixels) leading to an effective resolving power of about 200,000. The
CCD had a gain of 2 electrons per ADU so most of the exposures were
aimed at about 60000 electrons maximum. As the data were between 60000
and 180000 electrons per resolution element, the nominal @xmath ratio
was between 200 to 400.

Around 100 spectral frames of @xmath Cen A with very high resolution
were obtained, giving almost continuous coverage from 4000–7000 Å. These
data were used for the @xmath Cen A analysis.

The data were sent in two forms. One was formatted FITS files and second
was in a hard copy plot of the data. Unfortunately, the FITS files
became unusable because of errors in the transmission and hence ASCII
files were used directly for data analysis. The spectral frames were in
blocks of nearly 16- 20 Å and strong lines were used to identify their
wavelengths. A detailed analysis (formatting) of data was carried out to
make data usable for the spectral line synthesis program (SYN) developed
by John Ross [2]. The following sections describe how the procedure was
carried out and what modifications were required in the programs.

### 5.3 Spectrum Synthesis Program (SYN)

The Spectrum Synthesis program (SYN) developed by John Ross [2], is an
adaptation of a program first used by Ross & Aller (1976) [24]. The
synthesis program, which runs on an IBM- compatible PC with an 80486 DX
processor and VGA graphics, is highly interactive. The observed and
computed spectra with the residual error multiplied by a factor of 5 are
displayed simultaneously. Parameters such as the collisional damping
constant, the abundance, the line wavelength, continuum level and so on,
can be changed at will to minimize the residual error. In addition,
blending lines can be added to the spectra in cases where they affect
the fitting process. The software is now accessible over the Internet
[2].

### 5.4 Identification of Spectral Lines

Identification of lines was carried out using the solar spectrum
identification list of Moore et al. [7] because @xmath Cen A is similar
to the Sun in composition as well as effective temperature. Using the
line identification list, the hard copy of the spectrum of @xmath Cen A,
and the solar flux atlas displayed on a computer it was easy to identify
individual lines in @xmath Cen A.

@xmath Cen A spectra were in spectral frames of approximately 20 Å and
it was not continuous. The spectral data was basically in the range of
3700 Å to 6000 Å and one additional separate range of 7000 Å to 8000 Å
was also available. Identifying major lines of Fe (iron), Mg
(magnesium), Ca (calcium), etc., was done and a table similar to the
solar atlas was made ( @xmath Cen atlas).

### 5.5 Data Formatting for SYN

The ASCII data files contained intensity values corresponding to channel
numbers. Each file had 1024 data points and had a wavelength range of
about 20 Å. A cubic least squares fitting process was used to obtain the
relationship between channel numbers and the wavelengths of identified
lines (a process popularly known as scrunching the spectrum ). The
values obtained were used in a FORTRAN program to generate data files
having intensity values corresponding to the wavelengths. The data files
with intensity and wavelengths had irregular wavelength intervals. The
data files were interpolated using MATLAB to a uniform wavelength
interval of 0.01 Å. Each data set was then scaled so that the highest
point in the continuum was 9999, the value used in the spectrum
synthesis program. Data files were merged to form 100 Å blocks, so, the
file contained data from wavelength 3700.00 Å to 3799.99 Å, 3800.00 Å to
3899.99 Å and so on. Finally these data files were converted from ASCII
to binary, the format required by the synthesis program SYN.

The @xmath Cen A spectrum was compared with the solar flux spectrum in
the ATLAS program (a program originally developed by J. E. Ross to
compare different atlases of the solar spectrum). During this comparison
some spectral frames of @xmath Cen A showed a ’tilt’ towards either of
the blue or red side of the spectrum. The ATLAS program was modified to
allow these tilts to be removed. The ATLAS program also provides the
facility to shift the spectrum both horizontally (wavelength) and
vertically (intensity) to help in straightening the spectra.

The above mentioned process and programming were carried out to satisfy
the requirements of the SYN program. The SYN program uses these binary
files to plot the observed spectrum. It also uses data files which
contain parameters from the chosen atmospheric model and atomic data for
the lines to compute the theoretical spectrum. The program then compares
the observed and the theoretical spectra to deduce the abundance of a
particular element.

SYN requires an accurate atmospheric model for the comparison of the
theoretical spectrum and the observed spectrum. SYN contains a program
for computing a model atmosphere using as input data, the assumed
temperature distribution, surface gravity and composition. As the
effective temperature of @xmath Cen A is close to that of the Sun, the
temperature distribution can be obtained by scaling the temperature
distribution of a solar model to the effective temperature distribution
of @xmath Cen A. The Holweger- Müller model [25] for the Sun was used
for this purpose.

## Chapter 6 Results and Discussion

### 6.1 Importance of Strong Lines in Determining Chemical Composition

Weak, medium- strong, and very strong lines can be used to determine the
chemical composition of a star. Weak lines have the advantage that their
equivalent widths are independent of all forms of broadening. However,
because they are faint it is difficult to measure their intrinsic
strengths in the laboratory with any precision and to observe them with
sufficient @xmath ratio in all stars other than the Sun. Also they are
very susceptible to the presence of weak unknown blends.

Medium- strong lines having equivalent widths of about 80 mÅ present
their own problems. As pointed out by Holweger [21], the abundance
derived from such lines is particularly sensitive to non- thermal
motions (microturbulence) in the stellar photosphere. This sensitivity
is largely responsible for the disparity between determinations of the
abundance of iron in the Sun by different groups.

Finally, the method which is used here and the method which is capable
of estimating abundances to quite a degree of accuracy, is the use of
very strong lines with well developed damping wings for abundance
determination. The problem which weak lines face is solved here, as the
strengths of these strong lines in laboratory sources makes it easier to
determine their f- values with some precision. The problem of non-
thermal motions is solved by the process of fitting the wings of these
lines, which excludes the line core, which is affected by non- thermal
motions of the atoms and is more sensitive to the deviations from the
local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE).

The major problem of using these strong lines for abundance
determination in the past was the lack of suitable empirical or
theoretical damping constants. Now, with the use of the tables of line-
broadening cross- sections produced by Anstee & O’Mara [5] for s- p and
p- s transitions, it is possible to obtain damping constants. Anstee &
O’Mara [5] and Anstee, O’Mara & Ross [9] have shown that these damping
constants with good f- values for a selection of strong lines produce
solar abundances that are consistent with meteoritic abundances.

This method and these damping constants are used here to determine the
abundance of selected elements in @xmath Cen A, a solar- type star.

### 6.2 Parameters for an Atmospheric Model

There are four parameters of importance in determining the atmospheric
model for a star. They are effective temperature ( @xmath ), surface
gravity (log g ), chemical composition and microturbulence ( @xmath ).
All four parameters, and how they are used in this analysis, are
described in brief below.

#### 6.2.1 Effective Temperature (@xmath)

The effective temperature ( @xmath ) of @xmath Cen A is considered to be
nearly same as that of the Sun. Its color suggests a range from the
solar effective temperature of 5780 K to 5820 K. In this analysis we
have used two models with different effective temperatures, one with the
solar effective temperature 5780 K and the other, 5820 K, obtained by
Bessell [10]. The resultant abundance of the elements obtained in these
two cases should bracket the range for @xmath Cen A.

#### 6.2.2 Surface Gravity (log g)

The surface gravity (log g ) is one of the most important parameters in
estimating the chemical composition of @xmath Cen A. Its variation has
lead to differences in the exact value of the overabundance in @xmath
Cen A. Chmielewski et al. [3] found log g to be 4.31 @xmath 0.02 while
Furenlid & Meylan [4] found a low value for log g of 4.0 @xmath 0.2. To
check the value of log g , the angular diameter @xmath arcsec from
Blackwell & Shallis [12], the parallax of 0.7506” from Furenlid & Meylan
[4], leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This value of the radius is in agreement with the value of 1.23 @xmath
obtained by Soderblom [14]. If the parallax is 0.754”, as obtained from
Hipparcos data [26], the radius comes out to be 1.228 @xmath which is in
agreement with both the above values to within the uncertainties
involved.

Using the above value of the radius, the mass of 1.085 @xmath from
Furenlid & Meylan [4] and log @xmath = 4.44 in the expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The estimated uncertainty of @xmath 0.04 is based on the uncertainty in
the parallax and in the radius. The lower surface gravity means the
number density of hydrogen atoms is less than in the Sun and hence the
line broadening is reduced. This is shown to be important later where
inspite of the profiles of strong lines in the spectrum of @xmath Cen A
being nearly the same as the Sun, a higher abundance of the element is
required to make up for the reduced line broadening.

This value of surface gravity is kept fixed throughout the analysis.

#### 6.2.3 Microturbulence (@xmath)

Microturbulence ( @xmath ) is also a very important parameter in the
determination of abundances of elements in @xmath Cen A. It has been
stated previously, in Chapter 4, that the microturbulence is very
important for lines having intermediate strengths of 60- 100 mÅ. In the
first part of this analysis, strong lines of Fe, Mg, Ca and Na are used
to obtain the abundance of these elements in @xmath Cen A, the strong
lines are not affected by microturbulence. In the second part, medium-
strong lines of iron are used to determine microturbulence, by fixing
the abundance of iron to the value obtained from the first part, thus
leading to an independent determination of the microturbulence which can
then be used in the determination of the abundance of other elements
with no strong lines in the star.

#### 6.2.4 Chemical Composition

The fourth parameter, the chemical composition, is determined from the
synthesis of the strong lines. However, as the composition has an
influence on the atmospheric model several iterations may be necessary
before the appropriate composition and model are obtained.

### 6.3 Chemical Composition Using Strong Lines

#### 6.3.1 Selection of Lines

Strong lines for determining the abundance of iron in @xmath Cen A were
obtained from Anstee, O’Mara & Ross [9]. The A grade lines of iron from
Anstee, O’Mara & Ross [9] have good f- values and lead to an accurate
abundance of iron in the Sun. Also the Mg b- lines, the Na D- lines and
the Ca I resonance line were used in the analysis.

#### 6.3.2 Atmospheric Model

Four different model configurations based on the Holweger and Müller
model [25] (hereafter referred to as the HM model) for the Sun were used
in this analysis. The first model was the HM model with a solar
composition and log g equal to 4.3 (as calculated in section 6.2.2). In
the second model the abundances obtained from the first were used to
determine a new model which reflects the higher metallicity of @xmath
Cen A. To allow for the possibility that @xmath Cen may be bluer and
hotter than the Sun the temperature distribution in the second model was
scaled to the effective temperature of 5820 K ( third model ) suggested
by Bessell [10]. A fourth model was then constructed from the third to
incorporate the higher abundances resulting from the increase in the
effective temperature.

#### 6.3.3 Abundance Analysis

The spectrum synthesis program (SYN) was used for obtaining abundances
of the strong lines. This software enables the computed profile of the
lines to be compared with the observed line profile. In the software,
the abundance was adjusted so as to minimize the difference between the
observed and the computed spectrum, which is displayed on the computer
screen scaled up by a factor of 5. The fitting process concentrates on
the damping wings of the line so that the derived abundance is
independent of the macroturbulent and microturbulent velocities.

The derived abundances obtained from the selected strong lines using the
first model are shown in Table 6.1. The difference in the last column is
the difference between @xmath Cen A and the solar abundances. The iron
abundance obtained for @xmath Cen A is compared with the iron abundance
of the Sun obtained by Anstee, O’Mara & Ross [9]. The Mg, Na and Ca
abundances for @xmath Cen A are compared with observed solar abundances.
For Ca, the difference of 0.14 dex is obtained by assuming a solar
abundance of Ca of 6.36 obtained using a selection of lines in the Sun.
A solar abundance based on only the @xmath 4226.74 line comes out to be
6.38 and hence a lower overabundance of 0.12 dex. Table 6.2 shows the
mean abundances and the mean overabundance compared to the solar
abundances.

The atmospheric model was revised to add the higher abundance obtained
for @xmath Cen A. The revised model was again used to get the abundances
of the strong lines. The abundances obtained using the second model are
shown in Table 6.3. Table 6.4 shows the mean abundance and mean
overabundance for @xmath Cen A using the higher abundance in the model
(the second model). Here also the iron abundance is compared with the
solar iron abundance obtained by Anstee, O’Mara & Ross [9].

The third revision of the model was done by scaling the temperatures by
the ratio of an estimated effective temperature of @xmath Cen A, 5820 K
(from literature reviewed) to the solar effective temperature, 5780 K
(used in previous models). The basis of this scaling follows from what
one would expect for the case of a grey model atmosphere in which the
opacity is independent of wavelength, where, the temperature
distribution for @xmath Cen A is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath is the optical depth and q( @xmath ) is a function which
is chosen to make the flux independent of depth in the grey model
atmosphere. The temperature distribution for the Sun is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking the ratio and the fourth root, we get,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Abundances obtained using the model with the higher effective
temperature after iterating the composition to reflect the higher
temperature, i.e. model 4, are shown in Table 6.5 and their average
values are shown in Table 6.6.

Figures 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 are self explanatory. The observed line profile
is shown by a solid line and the computed line profile is represented by
dots. Figure 6.1 shows the @xmath 4226.74 resonance line of neutral
calcium. This very strong line, synthesised with numerous blending
lines, give a quite accurate calcium abundance. As only this line is
used, the abundance comparison and hence the overabundance is calculated
with respect to this line only. The second plot shows the @xmath 5895.94
sodium ( @xmath ) line. Due to the fact that Mt. Stromlo is neither high
nor dry the wings suffer from considerable contamination by telluric
water vapour lines causing uncertainty in determination of the
overabundance.

Figure 6.2 shows how the process of determining abundance by strong
lines is important using spectrum synthesis. The first plot gives the
best fit to the @xmath 5269.53 iron line. The neighbouring line is a
medium- strong calcium line. The second plot shows the variation in the
wings of this line when abundance is changed by @xmath 0.1 dex. Matching
the wings of this line results in an abundance independent of
microturbulence.

Figure 6.3 shows the @xmath 5172.69 magnesium b- line. It also shows the
neighbouring medium- strong lines of iron. The second plot shows @xmath
5328.02 and @xmath 5328.53 pair of iron lines.

The results obtained for @xmath Cen A in Table 6.6 are the final results
for its chemical analysis. The results clearly show that @xmath Cen A is
a metal rich star compared to the Sun . A few important points to be
noted from this analysis are as follows:

-   The abundance of metals other than iron are obtained using the wings
    of very few lines. The Mg abundance obtained from four strong lines
    of magnesium is quite accurate, the Ca abundance could be obtained
    from the only strong line available, and the Na abundance obtained
    from two strong lines is likely to be overestimated because of
    presence of water vapour lines in the wings of these two lines as
    shown in Figure 6.1.

-   The effect of temperature on iron lines was noticeable, raising the
    temperature raises the computed abundance, with some lines more
    affected than others. The increase in the derived abundance was
    particularly noticeable for the iron line pair of @xmath 4957.29 and
    @xmath 4957.59.

-   The value of log g is known with an accuracy of at least 10% and
    therefore should not, as was the case in the analysis of Furenlid &
    Meylan [4], be regarded as an adjustable parameter in the analysis.
    The only problem in the model seems to be the value of the effective
    temperature. When medium- strong lines are used in an extension of
    this analysis one could use variations in the abundance of an
    element with excitation potential to aid in the determination of the
    most suitable effective temperature.

### 6.4 The Determination of the Microturbulence from Medium–Strong
Lines of Iron in @xmath Cen A

#### 6.4.1 Selection of Lines

Medium–strong lines having equivalent widths in the range of about
60–100 mÅ were used for estimating the microturbulence in @xmath Cen A.
The lines of Blackwell et al. [22], which were used in Chapter 4 for
solar microturbulence, are used here for @xmath Cen A. The equivalent
widths for most of the lines were available from Furenlid & Meylan [4],
while some of the lines were used from our own data, approximating the
equivalent widths by fitting computed and observed lines in the spectrum
synthesis program. Few lines which were not in the Furenlid & Meylan [4]
data and in our own data, were omitted in this analysis.

#### 6.4.2 Microturbulence from Medium–Strong Lines of Iron

The first analysis was done using the model of Holweger Müller [25] of
the Sun with log g = 4.3 and an abundance higher by 0.15 dex (the second
model). Keeping the abundance fixed at 7.66 for all medium- strong
lines, the equivalent width was adjusted to match the observed
equivalent width by varying the microturbulence. The process was done
using the SYN program of John Ross [2]. Table 6.7 shows the
microturbulence obtained using this process. The line broadening cross
sections ( @xmath ) and velocity parameters ( @xmath ) were obtained by
interpolation in the tables of Anstee & O’Mara [5]. The mean value of
microturbulence obtained from this analysis is 1.35 @xmath 0.13 km/s.

The process was repeated using the atmospheric model with higher
effective temperature and incorporated higher abundance (the fourth
model). Table 6.8 shows the microturbulence obtained using higher
effective temperature and hence the higher abundance of 7.71 (0.20 dex
higher). The effect of the temperature is clearly visible from this part
of the analysis. As the temperature increases, the abundance from strong
lines increases and consequently the microturbulence from medium–strong
lines decreases. The mean microturbulence obtained with higher
temperature and higher abundance is 1.34 @xmath 0.13 km/s.

## Chapter 7 Conclusions

The abundances of iron, magnesium, calcium and sodium in @xmath Cen A
have been determined from strong lines and are approximately 0.2 dex
higher than in the Sun. As these derived abundances are independent of
non- thermal motions in the atmosphere of @xmath Cen A, the metal rich
status of this star is unambiguous since the higher abundances derived
cannot be reduced to solar values by adopting a higher microturbulence.

The microturbulence obtained from medium- strong lines using the
abundance obtained from the strong lines is 1.34 @xmath 0.12 km/s, i.e.,
0.20 km/s larger than in the Sun, which is fully consistent with the
lower surface gravity of @xmath Cen A. This analysis gives a strong hold
on the microturbulence making it possible to derive improved abundances
of other elements for which there are no strong lines.

Future work should include:

-   extension of the abundance determination to other elements,

-   acquisition of the spectrum in the region from 6000 to 7000 Å, which
    will provide access to additional strong lines of calcium and other
    elements,

-   better determination of the angular diameter from measurements made
    by the Sydney University Stellar Interferometer (SUSI) leading to a
    better determination of the surface gravity, and

-   also spectro- photometry would lead to a better determination of the
    effective temperature.

Combined with even higher @xmath data, it should be possible to obtain
excellent abundances for @xmath Cen A. Assuming that the metal abundance
for @xmath Cen B is the same as for @xmath Cen A, it should be possible
to learn a great deal about stars somewhat cooler than the Sun from a
similar analysis of @xmath Cen B.

In summary, for the first time, an unambiguous microturbulence and
metallicity for @xmath Cen A has been obtained !

## Appendix

### @xmath Cen - a Candidate for Terrestrial Planets and Intelligent
Life

While this is outside the general thrust of the thesis, it may be of
interest to note other reasons why the @xmath Cen system has received so
much attention.

### Why @xmath Cen is Special?

The nature of the star around which a planet orbits is an important
factor in determining whether life is possible on the planet. Seventy
percent of all stars in the Galaxy are red dwarfs like Proxima Cen, too
faint, too cool and in some cases too variable to support life. About 15
percent are orange K- type dwarfs. Although the more luminous K dwarfs
like @xmath Cen B, may be bright and warm enough for life but the
fainter ones in the class may be too dim and cool. Another 10 percent of
stars are white dwarfs - dying stars that either could not have life, or
must have destroyed any life they once had. That leaves the brightest 5
percent of all stars in the Galaxy, a privileged group to which both the
Sun and @xmath Cen A belong. Most of this upper 5 percent consists of
yellow G- type stars that are bright, warm, and good for life.

Hence it is very important to study these type of stars as they might
have intelligent life around them.

### Tests for Possibility of Life

A star must pass five tests before it becomes a promising place for
existence of life [8]. They are :

-   The star should be on the main sequence to ensure maturity and
    stability.

-   Spectral type of the star.

-   A system must demonstrate stable conditions.

-   The star’s age - a star must be old enough to give life a chance to
    evolve.

-   Chemical composition of the star - does the star have the heavy
    elements that biological life needs ?

The first criterion is to ensure the star’s maturity and stability,
which means it has to be on the main sequence. Main sequence stars fuse
hydrogen into helium in their cores, generating light and heat. Because
hydrogen is so abundant in stars, most of them stay on the main sequence
a long time, giving life a chance to evolve. The Sun and all three
components of @xmath Cen pass this test.

The second test is much tougher. The star must have the right spectral
type because this determines how much energy a star emits. The hotter
stars those with spectral types O, B, A, and early F are no good because
they burn out fast and die quickly, emitting ultra–violet rays. The
cooler stars those with spectral types M and late K may not produce
enough energy to sustain life, for instance they may not permit the
existence of liquid water on their planets. Between the stars that are
too hot and those that are too cool, yellow G type stars like the Sun
can give rise to life. @xmath Cen A passes this test as it is of the
same class as our Sun. @xmath Cen B is a K1 star, so it is hotter and
brighter than most K stars, therefore it may pass this test or it may
not. The red dwarf Proxima fails this test.

For the third test, a system must demonstrate stable conditions, as
@xmath Cen A and B form a binary pair how much does the light received
by the planets of one star vary as the other star revolves around it?
During their 80- year orbit, the separation between A and B changes from
11 AU to 35 AU. As viewed from the planets of one star, the brightness
of the other increases as the stars approach and decrease as the stars
recede. Fortunately, the variation is too small to matter, and @xmath
Cen A and B pass this test. Proxima being a red dwarf, which emits
flares that causes its light to double or triple in just few minutes,
fails this test.

The fourth condition concerns the star’s age. The Sun is about 4.6
billion years old, so life on earth had enough time to evolve. A star
must be old enough to give life a chance to evolve. Remarkably, @xmath
Cen A & B are probably even older than the Sun, they have an age of
about 5 to 6 billion years, therefore they pass this test, but the study
of Proxima shows it to be younger compared to @xmath Cen A and B, so it
fails this test, too.

And the fifth and final test: Do the stars have enough heavy elements
such as carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and iron, to support biological life?
Like most stars, the Sun is primarily hydrogen and helium, but 2 percent
of the Sun’s mass is metals. Although 2 percent may not sound a lot, it
is enough to build rocky planets and to give rise to us. And again,
fortunately, @xmath Cen A and B pass this test. They are metal- rich
stars.

Thus we see that @xmath Cen A passes all five tests, @xmath Cen B passes
all but one, and only Proxima Cen could not satisfy most. The details
are summarised in the given Table A.1.

As stars of @xmath Cen, specially @xmath Cen A and B, are very similar
to the Sun and probably have the same age as the Sun, the most likely
question could be, Is there any possibility of an earth- like planet
revolving around @xmath Cen in stable orbit? The possible interpretation
given by Soderblom [27] in favour of @xmath Cen A goes something like
this:

  Three body systems are unstable unless two of the bodies are close
  together and the third is a large distance away. If the separation of
  the three are comparable, it doesn’t take long for two of them to pass
  close to each other, which sends at least one of them streaking off
  into the void, no longer bound to the other two bodies.

The distance between @xmath Cen A and B varies from about 11 to 35 AU
over the course of its 80 year orbit. An earth–like planet 1 AU from
@xmath Cen A could probably stay there indefinitely without fear of harm
from @xmath Cen B. According to Soderblom [27] the only question is
whether an earth- like planet could form in the first place at that
location. Probabilistic discussion of whether planets like earth revolve
round the @xmath Cen A or B is given by Croswell [6]. At the end of his
discussion, Croswell [6]

concludes that it is frustrating that we can’t reach any definite
conclusion. Though we can say with certainty that at least one of its
star is ideal, we can say very little about any planets there. On the
positive side, earth- like planets can have stable, earth- like orbits
around either A or B. What is lacking is any direct evidence that such
planets exist.

@xmath Centauri is therefore very special; special not only for its
proximity but also for its promise. If @xmath Cen has planets, it is
even more special since one or more of those planets could resemble
Earth. So if we ever launch missions to other stars in the Galaxy,
@xmath Cen will certainly be our first target.