# 1 Classical physics

### 1.1 Newtonian physics

Newton [ 280 ] gave us three fundamental laws of motion.

N1 Every body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a
right line unless it is compelled to change that state by forces
impressed upon it.

N2 The change of motion is proportional to the motive force impressed;
and is made in the

direction of the right line in which that force is impressed.

N3 To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction.

In the modern notation adopted, the position of a Newtonian particle is
x̱, and its velocity is @xmath where @xmath is Newton’s notion of time
(see below). Then N2 reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Newton’s momentum is p̱ = @xmath ; in most applications the mass @xmath
of the particle is taken to be constant. From ( 33 ) it follows that in
the absence of the action of external forces the momentum p̱ is
conserved.

Newton explained [ 281 ] that his laws are to be interpreted as
occurring in his all-pervading, similar and immovable absolute space
while his external absolute time flows.

There are a number of frames of reference in which N1 holds, called
inertial frames , which are at rest in absolute space or moving
uniformly through it along a right line. These inertial frames are
inter-related by the transformations of Galilean relativity :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

for constant v̱, ḵ and @xmath . Non-inertial observers perceive
additional fictitious forces . Note that ( 35 ) is a statement of
existence of absolute time up to choice of time origin. Newton’s laws
are not necessarily Galileo-invariant. This would further require [ 30 ]

‘ N4 ’ The masses, and the strengths of the forces are independent of
the motion of the centre of mass of the system of particles relative to
absolute space.

The immovable external character of absolute space and time is abhorred
by relationalists , who maintain that the laws of physics should rather
be based on relative notions alone (see I.1.5 and II–VIII).

Newton also provided an explicit form for a particular universal force:

Newton’s law of gravitation : The gravitational force on a particle of
mass @xmath at position @xmath due to a particle of mass @xmath at
position @xmath is given by ⁵ ⁵ 5 Units: in I.1.1–5 I keep @xmath
(Newton’s constant), @xmath (the speed of light) and @xmath (Planck’s
constant) explicit. I then set @xmath , @xmath . I use @xmath -indices
to run over particle labels, and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath may be written as @xmath for @xmath the gravitational potential
at @xmath due to the particle of mass @xmath at @xmath . Newtonian
gravity is linear, so one can build up by superposition the total
gravitational force at x̱ due to all the particles in the universe,
@xmath . Combining this with ( 33 ), one obtains the equation of motion
for a (constant-mass) particle (in the absence of any other type of
forces):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

Consider this for two neighbouring particles at positions x̱ and x̱ + x̱.
Then subtracting and by the definition of derivative one obtains the
tidal equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the relative acceleration of the two particles.

Finally, one requires a field equation describing how sources produce
gravitation. In

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

Newtonian gravity is very successful at describing the solar system:
Kepler’s laws and perturbations due to planet-planet interactions follow
from it. However, a small anomalous residual perihelion precession of
Mercury was eventually observed.

### 1.2 Principles of dynamics

1.2.1 Configuration space and the Euler–Lagrange equations

Theorists can choose to describe the position of a particle in
(absolute) Euclidean 3-space @xmath by 3 curvilinear coordinates.
Convenience and not any physical reality underlies which particular
choice. Mechanical systems are usually taken to be second order, so that
the initial position of the particle does not suffice to determine the
motion. One requires also e.g the initial velocity or the initial
momentum. For @xmath particles in @xmath , naïvely one requires the
prescription of @xmath coordinates to describe their positions. But, the
particles may not be free to move in all possible ways, e.g some of them
could be attached via strings, springs or rods. Such constitute
constrained mechanical systems, describable in terms of less than @xmath
independent coordinates, @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 My capital sans-serif indices
are general indices, and my @xmath -indices run over indexing sets. I
use capital sans-serif letters for objects used in the principles of
dynamics.

The space of coordinates that describe a system is its configuration
space Q . The motion of the whole system is represented by a curve in
this configuration space. Sometimes one may attempt to work with a Q
that is larger than necessary e.g a @xmath -d Q for a @xmath -particle
system with @xmath constraints. However, some aspects of the system
would be better understood if one were able to take into account the
constraints and pass to a ( @xmath – @xmath )-d @xmath .

Whereas one may attempt to study such particle systems directly using
Newton’s laws, this may be cumbersome and requires knowledge of all the
forces acting at each point in the system. A method which is often more
practical, and which extends to field theory, is that based on energy
considerations, as formalized by Lagrange, Euler and others [ 247 ] .
One computes the kinetic energy T of the system and the potential energy
V . Then one forms the Lagrangian L = T – V , knowledge of which permits
one to write down a set of equations of motion equivalent to Newton’s.
These equations arise by declaring the standard prescription of the
calculus of variations: the equations of motion are such that the action
I @xmath t L is stationary with respect to @xmath when one considers the
true motion between two particular fixed endpoints @xmath and @xmath
together with the set of varied paths (subject to the same fixed
endpoints) about this motion. Then for a second-order mechanical system,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

by parts. Now note that the last term vanishes because the endpoints
have been taken to be fixed. As @xmath is an arbitrary variation, the
laws of motion in their differential form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

These equations are easier to integrate for two special cases of
coordinate. Thus one main theme in the principles of dynamics is to
judiciously choose a coordinate system with as many special case
coordinates as possible. This extends the well-known exploitation of
conservation of momentum and angular momentum. The special cases are

1) Lagrange multipliers : if L is independent of @xmath , the
corresponding ELE is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

2) Cyclic coordinates : if L is independent of @xmath , the
corresponding ELE is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

1.2.2 Legendre transformations, Jacobi’s principle and Hamiltonian
dynamics

Suppose one has a function @xmath and one wishes to use @xmath as
variables in place of the @xmath . To obtain equivalent equations of
motion, one has to pass to a function @xmath which may always be written
as @xmath . This is the Legendre transformation . It is symmetric
between @xmath and @xmath : if one defines @xmath , the passage is to
@xmath . In particular, if the function one has is a Lagrangian @xmath ,
one may wish to use some of the (generalized) conjugate momenta

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

as variables in place of the corresponding velocities.

A first example of Legendre transformation occurs in Routhian reduction
: given a Lagrangian with cyclic coordinate @xmath , then @xmath , so
that one may pass from L to the Routhian @xmath .

A second example, is the formulation of Jacobi’s principle [ 247 ] . If
one has a @xmath which does not depend explicitly on time, @xmath . Then
one can express @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

i.e @xmath -parameterize the action by adjoining time to the positions,
where @xmath . Now as a consequence of the explicit @xmath -independence
of the original Lagrangian, @xmath is a cyclic coordinate in ( 45 ) so
(as a special case of Routhian reduction) one may pass to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

Minimization of @xmath is Jacobi’s principle . It is a geodesic
principle since its use reduces the problem of motion to the problem of
finding the geodesics associated with some geometry. I particularly use
the special case of a mechanical system which is homogeneous

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

for @xmath the line element of the configuration space geometry. Thus in
this case use of Jacobi’s principle translates the problem of finding
the motion of the mechanical system into the well-defined, well-studied
problem of finding the geodesics of a Riemannian geometry with line
element @xmath related to @xmath by the conformal transformation

@xmath .

Further examples of Legendre transformation include the passage to
first-order form in VI, in addition to well-known moves in
thermodynamics and QM. There is also the passage

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which makes use of all the conjugate momenta. The equations of motion
are now

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

Instead of working in configuration space Q , one now works in the
(naïvely @xmath -d) phase space ( Q , P ) where P is the set of the
momenta @xmath . There are canonical transformations on phase space
which generally mix up what are the positions and what are the momenta:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

Whereas configuration space has a (commonly Riemannian) geometry on it
with a symmetric metric @xmath as its preserved object, phase space has
a preserved object @xmath up to a complete differential. This gives rise
to an antisymmetric symplectic structure . This is most usefully phrased
via the introduction of Poisson brackets

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

1.2.3 Dirac’s generalized Hamiltonian dynamics

This subsection provides a systematic means of studying constrained
systems. The field-theoretical version of this is of particular
importance in this thesis. I use # A to denote the number of degrees of
freedom (d.o.f’s) in the set indexed by A . If not all the conjugate
momenta @xmath can be inverted to give the @xmath in terms of the @xmath
, then the theory has primary constraints @xmath solely by virtue of the
form of L . As Dirac noted [ 113 ] , in such a case a theory described
by a Hamiltonian @xmath could just as well be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

for arbitrary functions @xmath . Moreover, one needs to check that the
primary constraints and any further secondary constraints @xmath
(obtained as true variational equations @xmath ) are propagated by the
evolution equations. If they are, then the constraint algebra indexed by
@xmath closes, and a classically-consistent theory is obtained. This
happens when @xmath vanishes either by virtue of the ELE’s alone or
additionally by virtue of the vanishing of @xmath . Following Dirac, I
denote this weak vanishing by @xmath .

If @xmath does not vanish weakly, then it must contain further
independently-vanishing expressions @xmath in order for the theory to be
consistent. One must then enlarge the indexing set to @xmath and see if
@xmath . In principle, this becomes an iterative process by which one
may build toward a full constraint algebra indexed by @xmath by
successive enlargements @xmath .

In practice, however, the process cannot continue for many steps since
@xmath , @xmath is a small number (for field theories, a small number
per space point), and it is important for true number of d.o.f’s to
satisfy @xmath if one is seeking nontrivial theories. It should be
emphasized that there is no guarantee that a given Lagrangian
corresponds to any consistent system. The perception of the first point
post-dates Dirac (see e.g [ 355 , 11 ] , and also my comment in V),
whereas Dirac’s book contains a famously simple example of the second
point: @xmath gives the ELE @xmath .

Finally, constraints are first-class if they have vanishing Poisson
brackets with all the other constraints. Otherwise, they are of
second-class . If there are second-class constraints,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

where D and @xmath index the smallest possible set of second-class
constraints with respect to the original Poisson bracket. The Dirac
bracket is built so that if one uses it in place of the Poisson bracket,
there are no second-class constraints. Thus one may always choose to
work with first-class constraints alone.

1.2.4 Motivation for use of principles of dynamics

The principles of dynamics developed for classical mechanics have turned
out to be applicable and very useful in the study of relativistic field
theory to which the rest of this chapter is dedicated. In particular,
the ease of derivation of Einstein’s field equations of GR using the
principles of dynamics (See I.1.6 and I.2.4-5) made physicists
appreciate the value of these methods. II–VII contain many further uses
of the principles of dynamics in the study of GR.

In the development of QM (see I.3) the Hamiltonian plays a central role.
Quantization itself may be naïvely perceived as the passage from
classical Poisson brackets to commutators of the corresponding
quantum-mechanical operators:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

Finally, if one replaces @xmath by @xmath in H , one obtains the
Hamilton–Jacobi equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

to be solved as a p.d.e for the as-yet undetermined Jacobi’s principal
function S . If the system has constraints (see e.g [ 183 ] ) @xmath , (
55 ) would be supplemented by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Hamilton–Jacobi formulation is close to the semiclassical
approximation to QM.

### 1.3 Electromagnetism

Many sorts of forces appear in Newtonian physics. Physicists have tried
to subdivide these into a few fundamental forces and consequent forces.
The gravitational force ( 36 ) is regarded as a fundamental force; the
theories of the electric and magnetic forces discussed below are also
regarded as fundamental forces, in terms of which many other forces such
as friction and chemical bonding are to be understood.

The electric and magnetic force laws are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

( 57 ) is for the force on a charge @xmath at position @xmath due to a
charge @xmath at position @xmath . ( 58 ) is for the force on a wire
element at position @xmath with current @xmath due to a wire element at
position @xmath with current @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are respectively
the permettivity and permeability in vacuo.

Just as in Newtonian gravity, it is useful to think in terms of fields.
One often uses @xmath for E̱ the electric field, and @xmath for Ḇ the
magnetic field. Some of the field equations are then, in traditional
integral form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is electric charge density. In the presence of changing
magnetic fields, ( 57 ) was found no longer to hold; rather one has

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

which suggests that electricity and magnetism are not independent
concepts.

Provided that Ampère’s law in fact also includes a displacement current
correction, Maxwell found that he could consistently explain electricity
and magnetism as aspects of a single phenomenon: electromagnetism . The
differential form of the equations now reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the electric current. The displacement current was then
experimentally verified. N.B it is often convenient to rewrite Maxwell’s
equations in terms of a magnetic potential A̱ and an electric potential
@xmath , s.t. Ḇ = and E̱ = @xmath .

Here are some useful comments for later. First, from this unification of
electricity and magnetism into electromagnetism, Maxwell unexpectedly
deduced that light is nothing but electromagnetic radiation [by
combining the above equations to form two wave equations whose
propagation speed is the speed of light @xmath .

Second, whereas ( 63 ) [and ( 65 )] are the usual sort of evolutionary
laws, ( 62 ) [and ( 64 )] are constraints i.e instantaneous laws about
the permissible configurations.

Third, Maxwell’s equations are field equations, determining how sources
produce electromagnetic fields. To have a full grasp of
electromagnetism, one also requires a law to compare the motion of
(constant mass) charged and uncharged particles in the presence of

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

Fourth, if Maxwell’s equations provide an account for light waves, then
the contemporary experience with other types of waves suggested that
there should be an associated medium, the luminiferous Aether , of which
light is an excitation. Fifth, Maxwell’s equations are not invariant
under the Galilean transformations ( 34 , 35 ). Instead, one may define
a new group of transformations which leave Maxwell’s equations
invariant: the Lorentz group, most conveniently described as follows. It
consists of rotations and boosts .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

is the boost for passing from a frame at rest to a frame moving with
constant velocity @xmath in the @xmath direction. For other directions
of motion, rotate the axes, then apply the above and then rotate back.

### 1.4 Special relativity

The last two issues above have profound consequences. Given the
existence of the Aether, its rest frame would be expected to be be
privileged by Maxwell’s equations, so the lack of Galilean invariance
was not perceived as an immediate impasse. This led to the proposal that
as electromagnetism is not Galileo-invariant, experiments involving
electromagnetism could then be used to determine motion with respect to
the Aether rest frame. There were furthermore speculation that this
Aether rest-frame might coincide with absolute space.

However, in the Michelson--Morley experiment a null result ⁷ ⁷ 7 Today
this is known to be null to 1 part in @xmath [ 63 ] . was obtained for
the velocity of the Earth relative to the Aether. Furthermore, within
the framework of Aether theory, this was in contradiction with Bradley’s
observation of stellar aberration. Although Fitzgerald and Lorentz [ 258
] attempted to explain these observations constructively in terms of
somehow the inter-particle distances of particles travelling parallel to
the aether flow being contracted, Einstein had a different, axiomatic
strategy akin [ 125 , 129 ] to how thermodynamics is based on the
non-existence of perpetual motion machines. He elevated the outcome of
the Michelson–Morley experiment from a null result about motion and
electromagnetism to a universal postulate. Rather than there being
Galilean invariance for mechanics, Lorentz invariance for
electromagnetism and goodness knows what invariance for other branches
of physics, he postulated that

RP1 (relativity principle) all inertial frames are equivalent for the
formulation of all physical laws.

From this it follows that the laws of nature share a universal
transformation group under which they are invariant. There is then the
issue of which transformation group this should be. RP1 narrows this
down to two obvious physical possibilities, distinguished by whether the
laws of nature contain a finite or infinite propagation speed @xmath . ⁸
⁸ 8 If one wishes furthermore to avoid causality paradoxes one chooses
this to ba a maximum speed (rather than a minimun one for tachyons). If
one adopts absolute time as a second postulate ( Galilean RP2 ), the
infinite is selected, and one has universally Galileo-invariant physics.
The finite is selected if one adopts instead a constant velocity
postulate such as

Lorentzian RP2 : light signals in vacuo are propagated rectilinearly
with the same velocity at all times, in all directions, in all inertial
frames.

The chosen velocity serves universally [and so is unique, so taking
@xmath = (the speed of light @xmath ) is without loss of generality].
One has then a universally Lorentz-invariant physics. In the former
case, which amounts to upholding ‘ N4 ’, electromagnetism must be
corrected, whereas in the latter case Newtonian mechanics must be
corrected. Einstein chose the latter. Notice that this is the option
given by a law of nature and not some postulated absolute structure;
also whereas there was ample experimental evidence for Maxwellian
electromagnetism, existing experimental evidence for Newtonian mechanics
was confined to the low velocity ( @xmath ) regime for which Galilean
transformations are an excellent approximation to Lorentz
transformations. Indeed the investigation of the high velocity regime
promptly verified Einstein’s corrections to Newtonian mechanics. This
example of the great predictive power of special relativity is
compounded by the universality: for each branch of physics, one obtains
specific corrections by requiring the corresponding laws to be
Lorentz-invariant. The concept of non-materially substantiated media and
the above proposal were thus destroyed, and physics was rebuilt on the
premise that there was no room in any of its branches for analogous
concepts and proposals.

Minkowski pointed out that whilst Newton’s notions of absolute space and
time are also destroyed because there are no longer privileged surfaces
of simultaneity, one could geometrize space and time together as
spacetime, in which the null cones are privileged. These correspond to
the surfaces on which the free motion of light occurs (and of all other
massless particles, by Einstein’s postulates: one has a universal null
cone structure in classical physics). And massive particles are
permitted only to travel from an event (spacetime point) into the
interior of the future null cone of that event. Of particular
significance, in free ‘inertial’ motion all massive particles follow
timelike straight lines whereas all massless particles follow null
straight lines. Following from such a geometrization, it makes sense to
implement the laws of physics in terms of the 4-tensors corresponding to
Minkowski’s 4-d spacetime.

First, reconsider electromagnetism. Whereas in this special case the
main laws (Maxwell’s equations) are already Lorentz-invariant and thus
require no corrections, they can be cast in an elegant spacetime
notation, and the new conceptual framework greatly facilitates the study
of electrodynamics [ 121 ] . Introducing the electromagnetic field
tensor @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Naïvely @xmath would have 4 d.o.f’s. But there is the
constraint ( 62 ); also (not unrelatedly, it turns out) ( 73 ) is
clearly invariant under the gauge transformations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

for any function @xmath . Thus electromagnetism has 2 d.o.f’s per space
point, corresponding to

light having 2 polarizations. For later use, the energy-momentum tensor
of electromagnetism is ⁹ ⁹ 9 I use @xmath to denote the trace of the
matrix product of @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is symmetric and is conserved. The Lorentz force law ( 66 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the time measured in the particle’s rest-frame (the
proper time ).

Next it was required to change the forms of all the laws of nature. ¹⁰
¹⁰ 10 Since this occurred in 1905, we mean all the other classical laws
of nature known at that time. For Newtonian Mechanics, N2 and the
definition of momentum are still correct, provided that proper time is
employed. The relativistic laws of nature are a great success. Indeed in
many applications an important step toward proposing new laws of physics
is to consider only the Lorentz-invariant possibilities. However,
Einstein found that attempting to accommodate gravity in this scheme
presented significant difficulties.

### 1.5 General relativity

Nearby freely-falling particles in a (non-uniform) gravitational field
experience a relative acceleration. This leads to the need to replace
the inertial frames of Newtonian mechanics (which are supposedly of
infinite extent) by local inertial frames. In order to be able to define
these it is crucial that inertial mass be identically proportional to
gravitational mass for all materials, for else each material would
require its own definition of local inertial frame. This is the
principle of equivalence ( POE ). Einstein [ 122 ] then adopted the
somewhat stronger supposition ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Tests distinguishing between the
various forms of the principle of equivalence have been devised and used
to experimentally confirm each of these forms to high accuracy [ 380 ] .
that gravitation is not locally distinguishable from acceleration by
physical experiments anywhere in the universe, and can thus be
transformed away by passing to the suitable local inertial frame. He
then guessed ¹² ¹² 12 This guess is now experimentally supported [ 347 ]
by Pound–Rebka type experiments [ 380 ] to 2 parts in @xmath . that the
inertial frames of SR were to be identified with the local inertial
frames of freely-falling particles. To Einstein the POE strongly
suggested [ 131 ] that gravitation could be included within relativity
by boldly postulating that spacetime with gravitation would not be flat
Minkowski spacetime but rather a spacetime curved by the sources of
gravitation so that the straight timelike lines followed by free
particles in Minkowski spacetime are bent into the curves followed by
relatively-accelerated freely-falling particles. The straight null lines
constituting the lightcones of Minkowski spacetime would then likewise
be bent by the sources of gravitation.

The mathematics of the connection permits the incorporation of the above
features of the gravitational field. The coordinates in which the
connection may be set to zero at each particular point are to correspond
to the freely-falling frame at that point. The privileged curves
followed by freely falling particles and by light rays are to be the
timelike and null affine geodesics of the geometry; at any point in the
freely-falling frame these reduce to the straight lines of Minkowski
spacetime. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Thus this implementation of the POE tacitly includes
the signature assumption contained in Lorentzian RP2 . The geodesic
equation ( 12 ) is of the form of the combination ( 37 ) of N2 and
Newton’s law of gravitation for a connection whose only nonzero
components are @xmath ; from this it follows that the only nonzero
Riemann tensor components are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

so that one obtains agreement between the Newtonian tidal equation ( 38
) and the corresponding case of the geodesic deviation equation ( 13 ).
In GR the geodesic deviation equation plays an analogous role to that of
the Lorentz force law ( 77 ) in electrodynamics [ 376 ] .

Furthermore, Einstein introduced a semi-Riemannian metric @xmath on
spacetime, both to account for observers in spacetime having the ability
to measure lengths and times if equipped with standard rods and clocks
(paralleling the development of SR), and furthermore to geometrize the
gravitational field. For simplicity, he assumed a symmetric metric and
it turned out that the aforementioned connection was the metric one [
123 ] . As @xmath reduces locally to SR’s @xmath everywhere locally the
laws of physics take their SR form.

This is not yet a gravitational theory: field equations remain to be
found. Einstein [ 124 ] ‘derived’ his field equations (EFE’s) ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14
@xmath is the curved spacetime energy-momentum tensor.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

by demanding

GRP (the General Relativity Principle) that all frames are equivalent
embodied in spacetime general covariance (the field equations are to be
a 4-tensor equation).

GR Newtonian Limit that the correct Newtonian limit be recovered in
situations with low velocities @xmath and weak gravitational fields
@xmath . Note that by ( 78 ) Poisson’s

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is suggestive that some curvature term should be equated to the
energy-momentum causing the gravitation.

GR divergencelessness since @xmath is conserved (divergenceless: @xmath
) and symmetric, this curvature term should also have these properties.

Thus, from the end of 0.3, @xmath is a good choice of curvature term.

It is also helpful that both the EFEs’ Einstein tensor and the metric
which solves them are (0, 2) symmetric tensors, so that the EFE’s are
neither over- nor under-determined. In principle if one attempted other
geometrizations of the gravitational field, one would usually face
mismatches rather than the above coincidences [ 329 ] .

I leave the disputed rôle of Mach’s principle [ 266 ] (about how to
abolish absolute space) both in the above conception of GR and within GR
itself to I.2.7.3 and II.2.

The above considerations are all physical. But in fact the following
mathematical GR Cartan simplicities [ 79 ] are also required to
axiomatize GR: that @xmath contains at most second-order derivatives and
is linear in these. The GR Lovelock simplicities [ 260 ] eliminated the
linearity assumption in dimension @xmath . One should note that
throughout @xmath is an acceptable second term on the left hand side by
all these considerations. Such a @xmath is a cosmological constant which
is thus a theoretically-optional feature, the need for which is rather
an issue of fitting cosmological observations.

The credibility of GR was rapidly established by its precise explanation
of the perihelion shift of Mercury and experimental verification of the
bending of lightrays by the sun. Today such solar system tests (also
including the time-delay effect) show no significant deviation from GR
to 1 part in @xmath [ 380 ] . Binary pulsar data are also in very good
agreement with GR. Note however that all these tests are of the
weak-field regime of GR. There may soon be tests of a more strong-field
regime from gravity wave experiments (see I.2.11).

GR however may be interpreted as having theoretical impasses. It
predicts its own inapplicability in extreme circumstances (in black
holes, and during a tiny time interval after a cosmological Big Bang)
that are moreover likely to occur in our universe (by the
Hawking–Penrose singularity theorems [ 178 , 364 ] ). Perhaps relatedly,
one does not know how to combine GR and QM to form a theory of quantum
gravity necessary for the study of these extreme regimes (see I.3).

### 1.6 Many routes to relativity

There are a number of other routes to obtaining GR. It is important to
have as many routes as possible to a physical theory since a number of
them will allow new insights into how the theory works or be
particularly adapted to the solution of otherwise intractable problems.
Furthermore, different routes may suggest different alternative or more
general theories for the current theory to be tested against.

Wheeler listed 6 such routes to GR in 1973 [ 274 ] . The first is
Einstein’s above. The second is Hilbert’s, from variation of the
Einstein–Hilbert action [ 371 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

A simplicity proof equivalent to Cartan’s but for actions was given by
Weyl [ 371 ] . This derivation of the EFE’s is very straightforward (see
I.2.4), which helped to bring variational principles to the attention of
the physics community.

The third and fourth routes are the two-way workings between ( 81 ) and
the Arnowitt–Deser–Misner (ADM) action, which (in vacuo for simplicity)
takes the form [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
     @xmath      (83)
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

(up to a divergence term), which follow from the ‘ADM’ split of the
spacetime metric with respect to a sequence of spatial slices, according
to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here, @xmath is the metric induced on the spatial slice (see II.2.1 and
fig 4) with determinant @xmath , the lapse @xmath is the change in
proper time as one moves off the spatial surface and the shift @xmath is
is the displacement in identification of the spatial coordinates between
two adjacent slices. The dot is the derivative in the (time) direction
perpendicular to the slice, @xmath . Conventionally, @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are regarded as canonical coordinates, @xmath is the momentum
conjugate to @xmath and there is no momentum associated with @xmath nor
@xmath : these are Lagrange multipliers. Thus the true gravitational
d.o.f’s in GR are contained in

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

on a fixed topology, which I usually take to be compact without boundary
(CWB). But the true d.o.f’s are furthermore subjected to the Hamiltonian
and momentum constraints @xmath and @xmath respectively.

The 3-space approach (TSA) of this thesis is mainly concerned with the
third and fourth routes, particularly the extension of the derivation of
ADM’s system of field equations without starting from any spacetime
formulation of GR. For completeness, the fifth and sixth routes
mentioned are the Fierz–Pauli spin-2 field in an unobservable flat
background [ 136 ] and Sakharov’s idea that gravitation is an effective
elasticity of space that arises from particle physics [ 323 ] .

One could add a number of (mostly) more recent routes to Wheeler’s list.
Three elements are common to many new routes: changes of variables,
splits and discretizations. Changes of variables include the use of
first-order formulations such as those of Cartan [ 80 ] (credited by
Wheeler as a route in his earlier account [ 377 ] ) or Palatini [ 274 ]
, as well as the use of various sorts of spinors, twistors and the
Newman–Penrose formalism [ 347 , 293 ] . Among these the Ashtekar
variable formulations (see I.2.12.3) stand out for allowing new
quantization possibilities. At least some of these formulations can be
cast in terms of spacetime or in terms of a foliation by spatial
hypersurfaces. There are also other interpretations of the standard
split such as the thin sandwich (I.2.9), and indeed other splits (see
I.2.12.4). Discretizations can also be spacetime-based (e.g Regge
calculus [ 274 ] ) or space-based (dynamical triangulation [ 76 ] ).
These might be taken as approximations for numerics, but that logic can
be reversed to suggest that these are the true formulations and that GR
is but a macroscopic limit.

Other elements to new routes are more bizarre – first principles or
apparently–unrelated mathematics from which GR somehow drops out.
Examples include obtaining GR from the algebra of deformations of a
spatial hypersurface (II.1, VI), obtaining GR from relational 3-space
principles in the TSA, and routes obtaining GR as an effective theory
such as Sakharov’s route above, or Jacobson’s [ 208 ] (in which GR is
deduced from black hole thermodynamics). When QM considerations are
included, even more colourful routes emerge: in particular the EFE’s
arise from the closed string spectrum (see I.3.3.4). There are also
as–yet incomplete attempts to recover spacetime (see the reviews [ 77 ,
203 ] ).

Among all these routes, I distinguish those to GR alone, ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
Furthermore, some routes do not quite lead to standard GR (e.g one might
get Euclidean GR or 10-d GR, or a dilatonic rather than minimal coupling
which could be thought of as interfering with the geodesic postulate
part of GR). those to GR with matter fields ‘added on’, and those which
attempt to be more: unifications of GR with other branches of physics. I
emphasize the need to be comprehensive in including a full enough set of
fields to satisfactorily describe all of nature to lend good credibility
to the principles behind the route. Among the unified theories, I
distinguish between total and partial attempts at unification and
between the classical and those which furthermore include QM. For
example, already-unified Rainich–Misner–Wheeler theory (I.2.7.2), Weyl’s
theory (App III.A) and Kaluza–Klein theory (I.3.3.4) are attempted
classical unifications of electromagnetism and gravity. The five
superstring theories [or an as-yet undetermined, all-embracing M-theory]
(I.3.3) are Theories of Everything – attempts at total unification of
all classical and quantum physics. Credible unification should
unexpectedly include extra physics (like light in electromagnetism) and
(or) lead to verified predictions. In the absence of this one should
apply Occam’s razor.

Finally, some attempted routes or the dropping of some simplicity
postulates suggest modifications to GR. This is extra structure for its
own sake rather than geared to wards the inclusion of other branches of
physics. Relevant well–known alternative theories include higher
derivative gravities, Lovelock gravity (see p 65) and
dilatonically-coupled scalar–tensor-type theories such as Brans–Dicke
theory (see III.1.3). One can think of these theories as providing
alternatives against which to test GR in certain regimes. Brans–Dicke
theory provided a theory to test GR against in the solar system. I worry
higher-derivative theories might alter both the physics and the
numerical modelling of compact binaries.

### 1.7 Other classical matter fields

There is much treatment of matter in the thesis so as to upgrade the TSA
route to relativity alone to being a route with matter ‘added on’. So I
wish to couple a full set of matter fields capable of describing nature.
I consider the fundamental fields, ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The fundamental fields are
those it makes sense to quantize and in terms of which all other matter
fields may in principle be described. Of course this is to some extent a
matter of taste: e.g particle physics may change in what is regarded as
fundamental or GR might turn out not to be fundamental. which are
important since their flat spacetime versions account for all accepted
physics bar gravity. Consequently these are valued as theoretical
schemes, so I also hope to learn from the classical and quantum theory
of these flat-spacetime theories so as to better understand the
structure of GR (see below, I.2.3.1, I.3.2, App II.A). For the moment I
present the usual fundamental fields in flat spacetime below,
establishing much notation. The curved versions coupled to GR are
introduced later (in I.2.5-6 for standard formulations, and in IV and VI
for the TSA). Other (in some cases decidedly nastier) fields come into
play to wards the end of the thesis (VI-VII) as theoretical
possibilities to help sharpen the TSA, and to see to which extent its
workings were genuinely selective rather than selective by unwarranted
simplicity assumptions. Here the possibilities that the TSA “hints at
partial unification” or might have some control over the equivalence
principle are investigated. The below treatment includes not just the
usual Lagrangian formulation but also the Hamiltonian formulation
because this thesis is a 3+1 space–time split study, geared toward
canonical quantization.

1.7.1 Scalars and spin- @xmath fermions

The Klein–Gordon theory of a scalar field @xmath with mass @xmath has
the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is a flat-space relativistic (i.e Lorentz-invariant) wave
equation. For @xmath , it is the flat-space wave equation.

For use below, the Klein–Gordon theory for two scalar fields @xmath and
@xmath may be re-expressed as the Klein–Gordon theory for a single
complex scalar field, with Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

for @xmath . There is no reason to believe that Klein–Gordon theory is
realized as a fundamental theory in nature. I use it as a toy (in
I.2.3.1 and I.3), and note that its classical canonical structure is
unaffected if one uses a potential of form @xmath in place of @xmath .
To date, fundamental scalars play only hypothetical roles in physics.
Higgs scalars are postulated to give masses to certain fields, and
inflaton(s) are postulated to explain certain features of the early
universe. More complicated scalars also occur in scalar-tensor theory
(III.1.3).

Dirac investigated whether the Klein--Gordon operator might be the
square of some linear operator. Indeed, he thus arrived at the linear
Dirac equation ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 I use lower-case greek indices running over 1 to
4 for 4-component spinor indices, and typewriter capital indices running
over 1 to 2 for 2-component spinor indices. I often suppress these
spinorial indices.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

are the chiral representation Dirac matrices, and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

are the Pauli matrices.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

Clearly if @xmath , this decouples, into two 2-component Weyl equations
:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Dirac equation gives a highly successful theory of the electron (and
of the predicted and successfully observed positron), whereas the L-Weyl
equation gives a theory of the neutrino. Note that I am treating these
things classically here. They are usually treated quantum-mechanically.

I next provide 2 forms of Dirac theory Lagrangian. Defining @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, Yukawa theory (which may be regarded as a toy, a failed theory
of the nuclear forces or how the electron may have gained its mass from
a Higgs scalar) follows from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the interaction term does not disrupt the classical canonical
structure.

1.7.2 Electromagnetism, U(1) scalar gauge theory and QED

Pure electromagnetism (no sources) follows from the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

up to a total divergence. The last term has the form of an appended
constraint.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

I now consider coupling the theories of the previous section to the
electromagnetic field. The usual treatment is to consider a complex
scalar field, note that its Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

and demand that the symmetry also holds locally i.e for @xmath . Then
one finds that @xmath would contain an extra unwanted term. Just as on p
8, one introduces a new term whose transformation properties compensate
for the unwanted term. This is gauging , a procedure originally due to
Weyl [ 373 ] . Again the introduced term is a connection, whereby one

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then in place of the Lagrangian of complex Klein–Gordon theory, one
arrives instead at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

One then requires @xmath to be a dynamical field. Standardly, this is
taken to be the field uniquely selected by Lorentz-, gauge- and
parity-invariance plus the flat-space QFT restriction on higher-order
interaction terms (explained in I.3). This is of the same form as (and
is furthermore identified with) the electromagnetic potential. So the
resulting U(1) scalar

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

Gauging this, the Dirac Lagrangian may be replaced by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

Adjoining this to the electromagnetic Lagrangian to make @xmath into a
dynamical field, one has the classical theory whose QM counterpart is
quantum electrodynamics (QED) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the classical canonical structure of the free theories does
not significantly differ from that of the coupled, interacting theories.
Also, in the above theories the electromagnetic vacuum laws are replaced
by non-vacuum laws with fundamental source terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the big double arrow indicates the derivative acting to the right
minus the derivative acting to the left.

QED is regarded as a highly successful theory: it predicted the
currently-observed anomalous values of the magnetic moment and charge
radius of the electron, as well as the small Lamb and Uehling shifts in
spectral lines [ 365 ] .

1.7.3 Yang–Mills theory, QCD and Weinberg–Salam theory

There remains the issue of the powerful but apparently short-range
nuclear forces. The Yang–Mills idea was to consider gauging with respect
to a larger gauge group G (they considered

SU(2) [ 388 ] , but it was soon generalized [ 361 ] to a large class ¹⁸
¹⁸ 18 This class was precisely determined by Gell-Mann and Glashow, see
App IV.B. of gauge groups ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 The gauge groups considered are
internal , as opposed to the space(time) groups of I.0.1. All these
groups are Lie groups , i.e simultaneously groups, topological spaces
and analytic manifolds. Near the identity they may be studied via the
corresponding Lie algebra g . This is an algebra with a product @xmath
that is bilinear, antisymmetric and obeys the Jacobi identity @xmath
(115) @xmath @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath g . The @xmath are
generators. I usually use [i]-indices over these, but in the particular
case of internal gauge groups, I use bold Capital indices. The @xmath ’s
are auxiliaries parameterizing the amount of each generator. @xmath ,
where @xmath are the structure constants . From the properties of @xmath
, these obey @xmath @xmath (116) ).

Consider a multiplet of scalar fields @xmath with arbitrary potential
@xmath with a Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

and demand that the symmetry also holds locally i.e for @xmath . Then
one finds that @xmath would contain an extra unwanted term. Thus one
requires to include a compensatory

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus one has passed from the @xmath -Lagrangian to a G-gauged @xmath
-Lagrangian.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

One may similarly pass from the Dirac Lagrangian to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

One then requires @xmath to be a dynamical field. Again, by Lorentz-,
gauge-, parity invariance and the QM argument which cuts down on
higher-order interactions, one arrives at the pure Yang--Mills theory
Lagrangian ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 This is self interacting theory of spin 1 bosons
alone rather than Yang–Mills gauge theory, taken to mean
Yang–Mills–‘scalar and (or) Dirac’ theory.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the Yang–Mills field tensor is @xmath . @xmath is the coupling
constant of the theory.

The pure Yang–Mills field equations are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

so one can see this as a bigger, self-sourcing and hence nonlinear
version of electromagnetism, corresponding to messenger particles which,
unlike the photon, are themselves carriers of the theory’s charge. The 3
+ 1 split is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

In these, additionally to the self-sourcing in ( 123 ), there are source
currents similar to those of the previous subsection.

Yang–Mills gauge theory was originally ridiculed as a theory for the
nuclear forces, for surely such short range forces would be associated
with massive messengers. However, by a distinct argument in each case,
this difficulty has been overcome to form successful theories for the
weak and strong nuclear forces.

For the weak force, the idea is Higgs’ local spontaneous symmetry
breaking [ 184 , 365 ] . The messenger bosons may indeed have mass,
since they may acquire it from as-yet experimentally hypothetical Higgs
scalar fields. This study requires the Yang–Mills–scalar gauge theory.

The weak nuclear force accounts for observations of parity violation.
The accepted theory for this force is contained within the
Weinberg–Salam unified theory of electroweak interactions , which is
based on the spontaneously-broken SU(2) @xmath U(1) Yang–Mills theory.
The theory’s Lagrangian is a complicated combination of Yang–Mills and
appropriately gauge-corrected Dirac and Weyl pieces together with
multiplets of Higgs scalars to break the symmetry, in which the left and
right multiplets are treated differently. This is the theory of 3
messenger bosons ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) @xmath in addition to
the photon, and of electrons, positrons and neutrinos. Weinberg–Salam
theory explained a number of nuclear reactions, and correctly predicted
the existence of (and masses for) @xmath , @xmath and @xmath bosons and
effects due to the neutral currents associated with @xmath .

The strong force is not accounted for by spontaneous symmetry breaking,
but rather by the idea of confinement : that the coupling constant rises
over long distances. There is evidence for the strong force having 3
charge types from scattering cross-sections. This led to postulating an
SU(3) theory, @xmath quantum chromodynamics (QCD) , which in turn led to
the eightfold way ²¹ ²¹ 21 SU(n) has dimension @xmath and @xmath - 1
independent generators. ‘periodic table’ of nuclear physics, a pattern
partly explaining the known spectrum of hadrons and partly correctly
predicting hadrons not yet known at the time. The charge is called
colour , the messengers are the 8 coloured gluons , and the hadrons are
composed of coloured, fractionally-electromagnetically-charged particles
called quarks . Confinement, which follows from a theoretical property
of QCD called asymptotic freedom , accounts for quarks and gluons not
being observed. But jets in high-energy collisions are regarded as
indirect evidence for quarks. QCD also explains some low-energy physics
of pions and nucleons [but this has the U(1) Problem, see IV.1.3.3].

The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics is the SU(3) @xmath SU(2)
@xmath U(1) collection of the above, repeated 3 times over [due to the
known particles of nature curiously and unexplainedly apppearing to
belong to 3 increasingly more massive copies (generations) of an
otherwise identical set of particles].

## 2 On the split formulation of Einstein’s field equations

### 2.1 Geometry of Hypersurfaces

2.1.1 Extrinsic curvature

Consider 2 nearby points @xmath and @xmath lying on a curve in @xmath .
The arclength between these is @xmath . Let the tangents at @xmath and
@xmath be @xmath and @xmath and the angle between them

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this can also be interpreted as the rate of change of the
normal, as used instead in the modern generalized definition below.
Next, if the curve is in @xmath , then near each @xmath the curve lies
within a plane. Then use the above notion of curvature. This notion of
curvature is extrinsic , i.e referring to how the curve is bent relative
to its surrounding @xmath exterior. To generalize this notion of
extrinsic curvature from curves to 2-surfaces within Euclidean 3-space
@xmath , draw each plane through the point @xmath in turn. In each plane
the 2-surface traces a curve. Apply the 2-d notion above to determine
the curvature. The maximum and minimum values thus found are the
principal curvatures @xmath and @xmath . Then one has the following
measures of how the surface is bent within @xmath : ²² ²² 22 The overall
numerical factors in these definitions are unimportant. The mean
curvature is often defined as a true mean i.e one half of the above. The
forms given are the sum and product of the eigenvalues i.e the trace and
determinant of the extrinsic curvature matrix.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

2.1.2 Gauss’ outstanding theorem

Despite being defined in very different ways, it turns out that the
intrinsic and extrinsic notions of curvature of a surface are related.
For a 2-surface embedded in @xmath , the intrinsic curvature is in fact
equal to (in the above convention twice) the Gauss curvature:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is Gauss’ outstanding theorem .

2.1.3 Hypersurface geometry

I now generalize the above result. First, allow the embedding space
itself to also be curved. Then the result is in fact about a projection
of @xmath , the flat-space Riemann tensor. Thus one is to set up a
theory of projections. Although for the above one can get away with less
(the projections of @xmath suffice for 3-d), the second generalization
is to arbitrary-d with the role of the surfaces being played by
hypersurfaces of codimension 1, which generally requires the projections
of the full Riemann tensor. The third generalization is to permit the
embedded and embedding spaces to be of arbitrary signature. I denote a
manifold with @xmath independent spatial directions and @xmath
independent timelike directions as an ( @xmath , @xmath ) space (of
dimension @xmath and ‘signature’ @xmath ) and denote the embedding
itself by ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ) where the ‘added dimension’
@xmath is spacelike for @xmath and timelike for @xmath .

To set up the theory of projections, one takes the @xmath -d metric
@xmath and expands it in terms of a basis consisting of the normal to
the hypersurface @xmath and the @xmath projectors @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the first term is the metric induced by @xmath on the
hypersurface, @xmath . I am interested in the study of projections onto
the hypersurface and onto the normal. I use @xmath to denote projections
onto the ( @xmath , @xmath ) hypersurface @xmath , and

@xmath to denote projections onto the normal. Then for the metric,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

In general, the higher-d metric is split according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a measure in terms of the rate of change of the normals of how
much the hypersurface is bent in the surrounding spacetime. ²³ ²³ 23 The
hypersurface derivative is @xmath . Note that the correction to @xmath
is @xmath for @xmath the Killing form . The second form of ( 137 ) shows
that the extrinsic curvature is manifestly symmetric. Its other notable
property is that it is both a @xmath - and ( @xmath +1)-d tensor since
@xmath .

The three projections of the Riemann tensor (see e.g [ 132 , 231 ] ) are
respectively the Gauss equation , the Codazzi equation and the Ricci
equation :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

From these it follows by one contraction that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Gauss equation can be contracted a second time to give

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

where I exhibit the useful relations to the projections of the Einstein
tensor @xmath .

( 144 ) is indeed Gauss’ outstanding theorem for a 2-surface embedded in
flat 3-space:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following geometrical identities are useful for GR. ( 140 ) and (
141 ) @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

which has the trace [a linear combination of ( 144 ) and ( 143 )]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

which forms the last projection of @xmath .

The above equations ( 138 – 144 ) are the starting point for embedding
theorems with codimension 1. If one sets all the higher-d curvature
tensors to be zero in ( 138 – 140 ) one has the equations determining
embeddability into flat manifolds. If the Ricci curvature is set to zero
in ( 141 – 143 ) one has the equations determining embeddability into
Ricci-flat (vacuum) manifolds. Locally, whereas the former is not
guaranteed, the latter is (assuming analyticity: the Campbell–Magaard
result, see I.2.3 and B.1). The higher codimension generalization
permits all spaces to be locally embeddable in higher-d flat manifolds.
Global results involve much harder mathematics and much larger lower
bounds on the required codimension [ 166 ] .

### 2.2 Split of the EFE’s with respect to nowhere-null hypersurfaces

Consider slicing some region of spacetime into a sequence of
hypersurfaces of codimension 1. The working is for general ( @xmath ,
@xmath ; @xmath ). The hypersurfaces are held to be everywhere of fixed
signature and are not allowed to be null. Whereas my main interest is in
the

(3, 0; –1) case i.e in foliating the usual 4-d spacetime with a sequence
of 3-d spatial slices, I will also investigate the crucial role of these
particular values of @xmath and @xmath (the overall dimension itself is
of little consequence). Also, the application to thin matter sheets
(Part B) has been conventionally studied as the (2, 1; 1) case in the
ordinary GR or as the

(3, 1; 1) case in GR-based braneworld scenarios. The framework of this
section is broad enough to be of use for all these applications. One
should also note that whereas one can perform an infinity of different
slicings ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 By a slicing I mean a sequence of non-intersecting
hypersurfaces that cover some spacetime region. This is also known as a
foliation. GR happens to be a foliation-invariant theory as explained in
(I.2.6). in GR, particular slices and slicings are useful in numerical
relativity (see I.2.9–11) and privileged slices and slicings occur both
in some alternative theories in II.2 and as the thin matter sheets
themselves in Part B.

I use the arbitrary ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ) “ADM–type” split ( 136
) ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 I use unnecessarily doubled quotation marks to cover either
general-signature or specifically nonstandard-signature analogues of
concepts usually associated with a standard signature. of the higher-d
metric @xmath ( 136 ) with respect to the ( @xmath , @xmath ) ‘initial’
hypersurface @xmath . The following restrictions are associated with
such splits. One requires the foliating hypersurfaces to be of a fixed
topology. One may require further restrictions on the spacetime to
ensure good causal behaviour. In the ( @xmath , 0; –1) case, note that
the first of these prevents consideration of topology change, while the
second takes the form that the spacetime is to be globally hyperbolic [
178 , 364 ] ), although sometimes one can get away with working locally
instead.

In the ( @xmath , 0; –1) case, the foliation is to be interpreted in
terms of a choice of time @xmath and associated timeflow @xmath . There
are an infinity of choices of such a @xmath . One usually demands the
spacetime to be time-orientable so that it is always possible to
consistently allocate notions of past and future. For this ( @xmath , 0,
–1) case @xmath is truly temporal. In the other cases, to start off with
one can think of the sequence of hypersurfaces being parameterized by an
“independent dynamical variable” (IDV) @xmath .

In the ( @xmath , 0; –1) case, the lapse may be interpreted as the
change in proper time @xmath , @xmath . The interpretation of the shift
is the displacement in identification of the spatial coordinates between
2 adjacent slices, @xmath . Analogous notions can be defined for the
general case.

Applying an “ADM–type” split of the metric splits the EFE’s into two
systems of equations to be studied as two separate steps. In the (
@xmath , 0; –1) case these steps are the GR Initial Value problem (IVP)
and the GR Cauchy problem (CP). By problem I mean a p.d.e system that
holds in some region @xmath together with prescribed data on (some
portion of) the boundary @xmath .

Here I consider the general ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ) case with
phenomenological matter. One could instead have fundamental matter (see
I.2.3.4). In sufficiently complicated cases, the matter is governed by
separate field equations which should then be adjoined to the EFE’s to
complete a coupled Einstein–Matter system. The “IVP” system consists of
@xmath + 1 constraints (4 for the usual GR): the Gauss and Codazzi
“constraints”

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

These are obtained by use of the EFE’s in ( 144 ) and ( 142 ). They are
“constraints” because they contain none of the highest derivatives with
respect to the IDV @xmath . Their solution involves only the “initial
hypersurface”.

The remaining @xmath equations (6 for the usual GR) are “evolution”
equations with respect to @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

obtained from the EFE’s and ( 145 ). Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
(N.B @xmath ) are general matter terms which are usually prescribed as
functions of matter fields that are governed by usually-separate field
equations. A useful equation is the trace of ( 150 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

the second equality of which follows from the Gauss constraint ( 148 ).

An alternative ‘ @xmath ’ rather than ‘ @xmath ’ form for the evolution
equations follows from the

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note how the form ( 150 ) has simpler gravity terms but more complicated
matter terms whilst the opposite is true for ( 152 ).

I often use the decomposition of symmetric second-rank tensors @xmath
into their trace part

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular if this split is applied to @xmath , ( 148 ) and ( 149 )
take the forms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

whilst the second form of ( 151 ) may be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 2.3 Analytic approach to the GR “CP and IVP”

2.3.1 Cauchy problems

For a given d.e system of order @xmath to be solved in a spacetime
region @xmath for functions @xmath , the Cauchy problem (CP) consists of
the d.e system together with the @xmath and their time derivatives up to
@xmath th order on some initial hypersurface @xmath . It is required
that the initial hypersurface be nowhere-characteristic i.e a genuine
spacelike surface. One could alternatively work with characteristic
hypersurfaces (I.2.12.4).

I consider CP’s for a number of physically well-motivated systems, in
order to isolate in simpler examples a number of features of the GR CP.
These second-order systems recurringly provide a test-bed for GR ideas
and all the field-theoretical examples will furthermore be coupled to
GR. I work from the viewpoint of the analytic method , stressing the
importance of what input to prescribe and what output to expect from the
equations of motion. In other words, which p.d.e problems are meaningful
for the equations that describe nature?

In Newtonian mechanics, if one is prescribed the positions and
velocities of all the particles at a given instant of time (the Cauchy
data) then one can in principle predict ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 Or retrodict – all the
accepted dynamical laws of physics are time-reversal invariant. these at
all future times by solving the second-order o.d.e that is Newton’s
second law ( 33 ). Existence, uniqueness and other important properties
are well-understood for o.d.e’s, although in practice limited knowledge
of real-world initial data may result in the onset of chaotic behaviour.

Most of the laws of physics are however represented by p.d.e’s, which
are harder to treat than o.d.e’s. For example if one is prescribed a
flat spacetime Klein–Gordon scalar @xmath and its velocity everywhere
(the Cauchy data) within a compact region at a given time, one can in
principle predict the wave and its velocity everywhere within certain
future and past regions ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 I will be precise about what is meant
by these regions in the next subsection. This is to do with the
Klein–Gordon equation respecting causality, a feature shared by all the
laws of physics below. by solving the Klein–Gordon equation ( 90 ). As a
first simple case, if the Cauchy data are analytic functions, one can
assert the local existence and uniqueness of an analytic solution to the
wave equation from the following theorem.

Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem: Suppose one has A unknowns @xmath which are
functions of the IDV @xmath and of Z other independent variables @xmath
. Suppose one is prescribed on some domain @xmath the A p.d.e’s of order
@xmath of form @xmath for the @xmath functions of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and of derivatives of @xmath up to ( @xmath – 1)th order with
respect to @xmath , where furthermore in @xmath the @xmath are analytic
functions of their arguments. Suppose one is further prescribed analytic
data @xmath , … , @xmath on some piece @xmath of a
nowhere-characteristic surface . Then this problem locally possesses
precisely one analytic solution.

The meaning and applicability of this theorem are elaborated in I.2.3.2
and B.1.

Complications arise in attempting to repeat the above simple approach
for

electromagnetism. Upon using @xmath in the vacuum version of the
inhomogeneous Maxwell equations ( 62 , 63 ), one finds that one of the
equations contains no time derivatives of E̱ whereas the other three do.
This corresponds to electromagnetism being constrained. The presence of
the linear vacuum Gauss constraint @xmath is associated with the gauge
freedom ( 75 ). Because of the constraint, electromagnetism is strictly
everywhere-characteristic, but one usually forms the problem for the
three evolution equations ( 63 ) subject to already-constrained initial
data and refers to this as the Cauchy problem for electromagnetism. To
set this up one requires

1) the electromagnetic field and its velocity at a given instant
throughout some region.

2) To fix the gauge freedom. In Lorenz gauge ( 106 ) the evolution
equations are of the correct form to invoke the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya
theorem.

Note that for the theory to make sense nothing is special about the
initial time. So one would expect the constraint to hold for all times.
Fortunately, the evolution equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e the evolution equations propagate the constraint.

The above analysis can be repeated for the 4 K vacuum flat-space
Yang–Mills equations, giving rise to K constraints ( 125 ) corresponding
to K gauge freedoms ( 118 ), and 3 K evolution equations ( 126 ). The K
constraints are similarly propagated by the evolution equations. A
Lorenz-type gauge fixing permits use of the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem
as before. The novel feature of these as compared to electromagnetism is
that they are nonlinear equations which vastly complicates their
behaviour and solution (eg superposition is no longer of use).

The EFE’s manifest all the above complications, being a constraint–gauge
system and nonlinear (in fact the EFE’s are quasilinear). They also have
further complications of their own: one is dealing with a theory of
spacetime itself rather than working on a fixed background, which is
considerably more difficult particularly from a global perspective (see
2.3.6). I now consider the simpler results of the (3 ,0; –1) GR CP, most
of which hold irrespective of both @xmath and @xmath .

2.3.2 Simple signature-independent features of the GR CP

First, it was soon realized (e.g by Hilbert [ 341 ] and Birkhoff–Langer
[ 55 ] ) that there are @xmath + 1 restrictions on the system (4 for the
usual GR). Thus there are @xmath + 1 constraints ( 148 – 149 ). These
were explicitly provided by Darmois [ 99 , 100 ] , although it has
escaped attention that Campbell also provided them. ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 Darmois’
EFE split used normal coordinates @xmath , $̱\beta$ = 0 while Campbell
used @xmath arbitrary, $̱\beta$ = 0. The solution of the EFE’s is then to
be a 2-step procedure.

The “initial value” or data construction step is to construct data
@xmath together with coordinate functions @xmath and @xmath all on some
portion @xmath of @xmath by solving the constraints (see I.2.9).

The “Evolution” or embedding step is, given such data, to solve the
evolution equations ( 137 ) and ( 150 ) as a prescription for evaluating
@xmath on some portion @xmath of a nearby @xmath i.e for a small
increment of the dynamical variable @xmath .

This is the logical order of the steps, but historically the second was
tackled before the first.

The issue of what input is to be prescribed and what output is to be
expected has played an important role in developing the above procedure,
through the works of Lichnerowicz [ 254 ] and (Choquet)-Bruhat [ 64 , 65
, 66 ] , and through Wheeler’s questions [ 376 , 377 ] and those works
answering these questions (see I.2.9).

Second, provided that the constraints hold on some “initial” @xmath ,
they are guaranteed to hold throughout the embedding spacetime region.
This is most quickly seen from the contracted Bianchi identity ( 29 ).
Understanding of this is implicit in [ 55 ] and it is made explicit in [
100 ] , and is standard knowledge today: together with conservation of
energy–momentum, and then making use of the Einstein tensor projection
form of the constraints @xmath and the EFE’s:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -- -------

Third, constraints come hand-in-hand with gauge freedoms. Thus @xmath +
1 of the metric components are freely-specifiable: the coordinate
functions painted onto the geometry have nothing to do with the geometry
itself. This is the content of general covariance. I will explain how
many applications are tied to particular, careful gauge choices. For the
moment I just consider either the normal coordinate gauge ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) or the harmonic gauge [ 66 , 364 ] : coordinates @xmath such
that @xmath [ 104 ] or equivalently @xmath [ 245 ] .

Fourth, by a suitable choice of gauge one can ascertain by the
Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem for admissible analytic data that there
locally exists a unique solution to the evolution equations ( 150 ). For
this and further applications in the GR CP, the harmonic gauge is
usually chosen. However, I make the following observations about the use
of this theorem.

1) It is the most basic theorem for p.d.e’s.

2) It is a very general theorem in the sense that it holds for all sorts
of p.d.e’s. This is reflected by the signature (principal
symbol)-independence of the applications and by the irrelevance of what
analytic function @xmath is, in, e.g, extending vacuum proofs to include
fundamental as well as phenomenological sources.

3) Moreover, it is a very restrictive theorem in that it relies entirely
on the functions being analytic, which seriously limits its
applicability. Without the analytic functions, no extremally general
theorems in the sense of 2) are known or plausible.

Furthermore, the analytic functions are inappropriate for any causal
study (i.e in any sort of relativistic physics) since they are rigid (a
change in a small region of an analytic data set induces a
causally-unwanted change of the entire data set).

Thus the application of the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem to GR was never
a serious consideration in the mainstream literature. It would have been
regarded as trivial because of observation 1) and not of serious
interest because of observations 2) and 3). The point of the pre-1938
literature is that no better results than this were available , a
serious lack.

Fifth, whereas it appears to simplify the EFE’s, the use of the normal
coordinate gauge in the GR CP is discouraged because in practice it
typically breaks down quickly. This follows from the normal gauge
Raychaudhuri equation that follows from ( 157 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the inequality follows from the definition of the strong energy
condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -- -------

by picking @xmath . To make ( 160 ) manifestly an energy condition, one
uses the

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integrating the differential inequality in ( 159 ) shows that if @xmath
, then @xmath within a finite amount of parameter @xmath along @xmath .
This blowup is by definition a caustic and signifies a breakdown of the
normal coordinates. However, for the ( @xmath , 1; 1) embedding, @xmath
is spacelike. There is then no good reason for @xmath to be always
positive, so caustics may be less likely to form.

Elsewhere in the literature there is an old and supposedly little-known
embedding result [ 72 , 267 , 313 ] . However, I identified it [ 15 , 17
] as partly following from the above results, and consequently argue
that a number of its supposed modern applications are highly
questionable (see B.1.2–3).

Campbell–Magaard embedding theorem: Any @xmath -space can be ‘locally
surrounded’ ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 By B ‘being surrounded’ by A I mean that there is
an embedding of B into A. What is meant by ‘locally’ here is not
particularly clear in the literature, and will be developed in 2.9.2. by
( @xmath + 1)-d vacuum space (where both spaces in question are non-null
but otherwise of fixed arbitrary signature, and are both analytic).

This followed from Campbell splitting the vacuum ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath ) EFE’s independently of Darmois’ work that blossomed into the GR
CP and IVP. As above, the given proof of the result is subdivided into
an embedding or “evolutionary” step considered here and a data
construction step, “Magaard’s method”, considered in I.2.9.2.3. What
Campbell offered as ‘proof’ for the former was incomplete and indeed
spurious by the Bianchi identity. All of the actual proof is contained
in Magaard’s use of the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem, which is thus just
a version of the fourth result above. Thus it is well-known for the GR
CP, and follows for the other ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ) embedding
cases from the well-known insensitivity of the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya
theorem to ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ). Thus this step is in fact
obvious and well-known. Moreover, as argued above, it is trivial and
inappropriate. Strictly, the Campbell–Magaard result is the vacuum case
i.e @xmath , a fact which has been much vaunted, but its proof may
trivially be extended to any (analytic) functional form of @xmath [ 15 ]
(since the use throughout of the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem is totally
insensitive to changes in such subleading order terms, which merely
contribute to @xmath ). Thus there is a ‘generalized Campbell–Magaard
theorem’. Moreover, the above results for the ( @xmath , 0; 1) GR CP
case are protected and extended by a host of further theorems which, as
argued in the next subsection, do not carry over to other signatures.
There are also difficulties with “Magaard’s method” given in I.2.9.2.3
for @xmath , @xmath and especially in B.1 for @xmath , @xmath , where I
conclude about this issue.

2.3.3 Signature-dependent GR CP results

The vast majority of serious results [ 64 , 252 , 65 , 66 , 178 , 192 ,
85 , 146 , 218 ] for the GR CP turn out to be entirely dependent on the
lower-d signature @xmath . In other words, the choice of methods which
properly respect the difference between space and time is absolutely
crucial. In this subsection I restrict to documenting the standard
results. I explain why these techniques quite simply do not have any
direct counterparts for other signatures in Part B.

To have a sensible problem in mathematical physics, one requires not
just local existence and uniqueness of solutions but rather
well-posedness . Whereas well-posedness always includes local existence
and uniqueness, it also always includes continuous dependence on the
data, without which an arbitrarily small change in the data could cause
an arbitrarily large immediate ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 See e.g page 229 of [ 93 ] : I
do mean immediate , not an issue of chaos or unwanted growing modes
(though well-posedness often also bounds the growth of such modes [ 146
] ). change in the evolution i.e there is no guarantee of physical
predictability from such a problem. For a hyperbolic-type system one
further requires a domain of dependence (DOD) property to enforce a
sensible notion of causality. If the data are known only on a closed
achronal set @xmath (that is, a piece of a spacelike hypersurface), then
the evolution can only be predicted within a region @xmath (the future
DOD), defined as the set of points such that all past-inextendible
causal curves through each point [represented by the @xmath ’s leading
to the point @xmath in fig 5] intersect @xmath . In my opinion
(substantiated in B.1) causality can effectively be studied only in
settings where the IDV is time.

Note that further grounds of insufficiency for the use of the
Cauchy--Kovalevskaya theorem are that it gives no control whatsoever
over these last two properties. The analytic functions are also
undesirable because they are too restrictive a function space ³¹ ³¹ 31
Whereas Hawking and Ellis [ 178 ] argue that the choice of function
space used to model nature does not matter since it is not
experimentally-determinable and in any case is only an approximation due
to QM, I would refine this argument to say that the difference between
the analytic functions and other function spaces is important because of
the rigidity inappropriateness. Beyond that, I do not know if the
particular function spaces used to prove rigorous theorems about the
EFE’s and about the extendibility of spacetime [ 88 ] may be substituted
in these applications by approximations based on other function spaces.
In this case, it may be a mere matter of convenience: one wants to use
whichever sufficiently general function spaces accessibly give rise to
the strongest possible theorems. to cover a number of interesting
studies (e.g involving boundaries, discontinuities or low
differentiability upon approaching some spacetime singularities).
Piecewise, rougher function spaces are required.

Serious theorems for GR were obtained in 1938 by Stellmacher [ 344 ] ,
and more extensively by Choquet-Bruhat in 1952 ( [ 64 ] ) and 1956 ( [
65 ] ). These advances were tied to progress in the
(signature-specific!) general theory of nonlinear hyperbolic p.d.e’s.
For example, Bruhat made use of the ( @xmath , 0; –1) EFE system ( 148 –
150 ) being of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -- -------

when cast in harmonic coordinates (where @xmath is a Lorentzian metric;
both this and the function @xmath are smooth) to enable use of Leray’s
theorem [ 252 , 364 ] , which guarantees local existence and uniqueness,
and furthermore continuous dependence on the initial data and the DOD
property.

The above proofs of the four well-posedness criteria for the GR CP are
now usually done using Sobolev spaces [ 364 , 178 , 192 , 85 , 88 , 218
] . At first these lend themselves to less involved proofs than
Bruhat’s, although if one seeks yet stronger results the functional
analysis becomes extremely unpleasant. That Sobolev spaces are
appropriate follows from simple consideration [ 364 ] of the flat
spacetime Klein–Gordon equation. Given data on a bounded region @xmath
of a spacelike hypersurface @xmath , one can draw the future DOD @xmath
[fig 6)] which is the region affected solely by this data due to the
finite propagation speed of light. One can then consider the values of
@xmath and its first derivatives on @xmath . Then using the construction
in fig 7, Gauss’s (divergence) theorem and energy-momentum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the second term @xmath provided that the matter obeys the dominant
energy condition (DEC):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

and that @xmath is timelike. Then the definition of the energy-momentum
tensor gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because each integrand is the sum of squares (which are necessarily
positive), this means that control over the data on @xmath gives control
of the solution on @xmath . The idea of a Sobolev norm is a
generalization of these last two ‘energy’ integrals [ 88 ] . The Sobolev
class @xmath has a bounded norm of this type including up to @xmath th
order derivatives. There is then the following theorem [ 192 , 88 ] .

Hughes–Kato–Marsden Theorem: Existence is guaranteed for the @xmath -d
EFE’s in harmonic coordinates if the Sobolev class of the induced metric
is no rougher than @xmath and that of the extrinsic curvature is no
rougher than @xmath .

This is the roughest mathematics fully worked out to date. The
limitation on roughness comes from the definition of products, which is
a necessary complication because the EFE’s are nonlinear.

2.3.4 CP’s for GR including fundamental matter

Matter theories on a fixed curved spacetime are built according to
@xmath and the ‘ @xmath ’ rule. This undeniably produces the simplest
field theories, but it is not certain that these are the ones chosen by
nature, since the particle accelerators by which we judge our field
theories are located in a rather flat region. Thus the study of these
theories is subject to our ignorance of nature’s unexplored
high-curvature regime. In particular, the ‘ @xmath ’ rule could in
principle be ambiguous [ 274 ] (but for electromagnetism the order is
dictated by current conservation) or not realized in nature due to
putative further symmetry reasons (e.g instead of minimal coupling for
scalars, one might argue for conformal coupling [ 215 ] ). We note that
some of these theories would violate some form or other of the POE . By
the nature of many such theories (e.g Brans–Dicke theory), this
possibility cannot be overruled by direct tests of the POE .

The curved spacetime version of the equations of Klein–Gordon, Maxwell
and Yang–Mills theory (see I.2.5) remain of the correct form to invoke
Leray’s theorem. The coupled version of these fields with GR may be
built by pairing the corresponding equations with the EFE’s ( 148 , 149
, 150 ) sourced by the corresponding energy–momentum tensor pieces ( 182
). In each of these cases, the total Leray form is blockwise the GR and
matter Leray forms. The GR Leray form is disrupted by some of the
nastier matter fields. This goes hand in hand with some of the
unpleaseantries of VI and VIII. Dirac theory is sufficiently different
that I defer its treatment to VI.4.

2.3.5 Global results

Global results for the Einstein evolution equations are considerably
harder to obtain than local ones. The need for global results stems from
the generic onset of singularities from the evolution of smooth data.
Were naked singularities to arise thus, all the above nice notions of
predictability would break down. Penrose [ 290 ] conjectured that naked
singularities do not arise generically (the cosmic censorship
conjecture). Whereas this has been studied for some simple cases, it is
an open question. Among these simple cases are those with high-symmetry,
particular asymptotics, or a ‘small’ departure from exact data [ 312 ] .

### 2.4 Variational principles for GR

I next consider the ADM split from the point of view of the principles
of dynamics. The applications in this thesis requires this just for the
usual (3, 0; –1) case. Here are some useful results for variation with
respect to the (arbitrary-d) metric @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (169)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the curved spacetime definition of the energy–momentum tensor yields
the EFE’s.

Note that the pure gravity Einstein–Hilbert action may be rewritten in
split form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -- -------

upon discarding a divergence. Variation of this yields the split form of
the EFE’s of I.2.2. It is also used below in further GR principles of
dynamics work.

### 2.5 Inclusion of fundamental matter fields

There is no difficulty in including simple phenomenological matter in
the above. Likewise, there is no difficulty in including fundamental
matter fields at least to start off with. I use

the below in IV, whereas VI–VII discusses difficulties with more
complicated fields.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

The corresponding split field equations are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -- -------

To make coupled Einstein–matter systems, use these together with the
split

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -- -------

of the energy--momentum tensor ³² ³² 32 Note that the 00 components are
field energy expressions, the 0 @xmath components are field momentum
flux expressions (such as the Poynting vector of electromagnetism) and
the @xmath components are field stresses. The Yang–Mills energy-momentum
tensor looks just like the electromagnetic one, with @xmath , @xmath in
place of @xmath , @xmath . in the split EFE’s.

### 2.6 The Dirac–ADM Hamiltonian formulation of GR

In the case of (3, 0; –1) GR where the foliating spatial hypersurfaces
are assumed to be compact without boundary (CWB), @xmath so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then by Legendre transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to the standard interpretation, @xmath and @xmath are Lagrange
multipliers. Variation with respect to these multipliers gives the
constraints @xmath and @xmath . Thus the GR Hamiltonian is zero (for the
CWB case; else there would be surface terms). But this does not mean GR
is trivial, since its Hamiltonian is only weakly zero:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first of these is just a rewrite of ( 184 ).

The constraints indeed propagate. In Poisson bracket language, using the
basic

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the smearing out of the constraints by arbitrary functions @xmath so
as to obtain undensitized scalar functions on the gravitational phase
space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus the momentum constraint’s action is associated with dragging around
within each hypersurface i.e with the 3-diffeomorphisms. From ( 192 ) it
follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

A little extra effort is required to obtain the Poisson bracket of two
Hamiltonian constraints:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because this last bracket involves the metric, this is no true Lie
algebra (for which only structure constants would appear, see footnote
19). So although the 4-diffeomorphisms form a true Lie algebra and the
3-diffeomorphisms also, splitting up the 4-diffeomorphisms into
3-diffeomorphisms and ‘other diffeomorphisms’ becomes messy. Unlike the

3-diffeomorphism Lie-dragging invariance associated with the momentum
constraint, there is no manifest symmetry associated with the
Hamiltonian constraint. There is instead a remarkable hidden symmetry
from the perspective of the split formulation of GR: invariance under
refoliation (or of choices of time function). The symmetry is hidden
because in the split formulation one is working within a particular
foliation, so that what happens under refoliation becomes obscured. It
is not known if or how the time function and the true d.o.f’s of GR may
be disentangled. This is part of the Problem of Time (see I.3.3).

I next consider the passage to the Hamiltonian in the presence of matter
fields [ 20 , 231 , 232 ] @xmath , denoting the Hamiltonian and momentum
constraints obtained in this case by @xmath and @xmath , and the
contributions to these from the matter fields by @xmath and @xmath . For
example, for Einstein–Klein–Gordon theory, Einstein–Maxwell–theory and
Einstein–Yang–Mills theory, the field momenta are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

the Hamiltonians are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (200)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (207)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (208)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the evolution equations are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (210)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (211)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 2.7 Superspace and geometrodynamics

The evolution of a mechanical system may be viewed as a curve
(parameterized by some label @xmath ) traced in the configuration space
Q . For GR, naïvely the configuration space is the space Riem of
3-metrics on a manifold of fixed topology, taken here to be CWB. The
evolution may then be viewed as a curve in Riem, i.e as a curve of
3-metrics. However, GR has constraints, so one would like to pass to a
reduced configuration space in which these are satisfied. This would
correspond to the space of true d.o.f’s of the gravitational field. It
is relatively straightforward to take into account the momentum
constraint since it generates the infinitesimal spatial coordinate
transformations, so that the true d.o.f’s of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the space of 3-geometries, not 3-metrics: how one paints the
coordinates onto the geometries does not affect the physics. Thus GR may
be interpreted as a theory of evolving 3-geometries, or
‘geometrodynamics’, as Wheeler put it [ 275 , 377 ] . It is however not
known how to take the Hamiltonian constraint into consideration in order
to pass to a fully reduced configuration space.

2.7.1 Geometry on Riem and Superspace

One can introduce on Riem the geometry associated with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (214)
  -- -------- -- -------

[ 109 ] where @xmath is an invertible tempered distribution. One usually
talks of the geometry in terms of the general supermetric @xmath which
is related to @xmath by @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

I concentrate on the ultralocal supermetrics [ 107 ] . ³³ ³³ 33 A
function is ultralocal in some variable (here the metric) if it contains
no spatial derivatives of that variable. These generally consist of
three terms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus there is a 2-parameter
family of ultralocal supermetrics up to overall scale. However, as far
as the usual applications are concerned, there is just a 1-parameter
family of these,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (215)
  -- -------- -- -------

because the supermetric appears in these applications in products of the
form @xmath for @xmath symmetric, rendering equivalent the @xmath and
@xmath contributions. The inverse of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -- -------

The inverse supermetric does not exist for @xmath while the supermetric
itself does not exist for @xmath . By use of DeWitt’s 2-index to 1-index
map [ 107 ] , ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 The new indices thus obtained run from 1 to 6 and
are written as hatted capitals in this thesis.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -- -------

one can see that for @xmath the ultralocal supermetric is
positive-definite and for @xmath it is indefinite, having one ‘timelike’
direction. For @xmath it is degenerate. See III.1 and VIII for
implications of these different cases.

Whereas all the above ultralocal supermetrics play a role in this
thesis, the supermetric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -- -------

(the symmetrizations in these expressions may be dropped in the
applications mentioned above).

All the ultralocal supermetrics have the following symmetries

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -- -------

Additionally, the DeWitt supermetric has the further independent
symmetry @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -- -------

As explained below, the above geometries give just pointwise geometries
on Superspace. DeWitt showed that the natural geometry inherited on
Superspace has barriers causing it to be geodesically-incomplete,
although the decomposition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -- -------

of ( 219 ) by use of @xmath and any other five coordinates orthogonal to
it has a geodesically-complete geometry associated with its @xmath
block.

Further study by Fischer [ 137 ] (see also DeWitt’s accompanying
commentary [ 109 ] ) demonstrated that Superspace is no manifold. It is
rather a collection of manifolds called a stratified manifold , in which
the individual strata are manifolds. One must realize that the
quotienting out of 3-diffeomorphisms depends on the particular
properties of each 3-metric. In particular it is easily demonstrated
that different 3-metrics @xmath have isometry groups Isom( @xmath ) of
different dimension: @xmath , @xmath . Thus, in a manner clearly related
to the underlying symmetries, at different ‘points’ (i.e 3-geometries),
Superspace differs in dimension. Thus it is not a manifold, but rather a
collection of manifolds each labelled by the conjugacy classes in the
3-diffeomorphisms of Isom. This type of mathematical structure is to
play an important role in II–VIII.

Two schemes have been proposed to overcome the incompleteness or
non-manifold structure of Superspace. First, DeWitt suggested [ 109 ]
that when one reaches the edge of one of the constituent manifolds
(where the next stratum starts), one could reflect the path in
Superspace that represents the evolution of the 3-geometry. Second,
Fischer later alternatively proposed [ 138 ] to replace Superspace with
a nonsingular extended space built using the theory of fibre bundles.

DeWitt had yet another Problem with interpreting paths on Superspace [
109 ] . Because the lapse is undetermined one is in fact dealing with
whole sheaves of paths rather than with individual paths.

Minisuperspace

It is substantially simpler to consider the finite truncation of
Superspace to the homogeneous geometries: Minisuperspace [ 272 ] . Then
the above geometry is the full geometry rather than just the pointwise
geometry, since the geometry is the same at each point. The restriction
of the DeWitt supermetric to this case [ 273 ] is then just a @xmath
array rather than a @xmath array at each space point. Thus there are 3 –
1 = 2 d.o.f’s rather than 6 – 3 – 1 = 2 per space point. For later use,
Minisuperspace includes nine Bianchi classes labelled with slanted Roman
numerals there are also even more symmetric 1 d.o.f solutions (e.g the
Taub universes) which then simultaneously belong to several Bianchi
types. Minisuperspace is potentially an important testing-ground for
classical and quantum cosmology/gravity, since it is conjectured that
the behaviour of the general GR solution upon approaching the initial
singularity is an independent Kasner universe at each spatial point.
Belinskii, Khalatnikov and Lifshitz (BKL) conjectured mixmaster
behaviour (a sequence of Kasner epochs as occurs in Bianchi XI
spacetimes) at each spatial point (see e.g [ 49 , 272 , 274 ] ) whilst
straightforward Kasner (Bianchi I ) behaviour at each spatial point can
sometimes occur [ 117 , 197 ] . There is growing numerical evidence for
these behaviours [ 50 ] . I mostly consider Minisuperspace as a toy
model to test ideas against (see I.3.3.3, V.1, VI.1.4). Although one
might try to extrapolate ideas about and techniques developed for
Minisuperspace, this is often fruitless because these break down in the
full Superspace.

2.7.2 Geometrodynamics: old RMW interpretation

How is the two-layered body of mathematics in I.2.6 and I.2.7.1 to be
interpreted? Wheeler made a first attempt at this [ 375 ] . He perceived
that GR could be viewed as a theory of evolving 3-geometries:
geometrodynamics. The central object of this scheme is the
still-remaining vacuum Hamiltonian constraint @xmath . Whereas the
momentum constraint is conceptually (if not technically) easy to deal
with, @xmath leads to the Problem of Time which plagues
geometrodynamics. @xmath is also central in the sense that since @xmath
, if this is known in all frames of reference i.e choices of projection
operator, then the EFE’s @xmath are known (assuming general covariance):
‘field equations without field equations’. @xmath is also central in
Gerlach’s formulation [ 153 ] . I will also discuss how @xmath may be
regarded as an integrability of @xmath rather than on an equal footing
to it (II.2.2.4).

Wheeler’s early hope was that vacuum geometrodynamics might turn out to
be a Theory of Everything. This was based on [ 275 ] , in which a number
of other physical features were argued to be incorporable into this
vacuum geometrodynamics. The properties of a distant isolated mass were
argued to be recoverable from geons i.e gravity waves almost completely
trapped in some region (‘mass without mass’). Aspects of charge could be
recovered from the mere topology of empty space (‘charge without
charge’). The electromagnetic field tensor ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 Another difficulty
is that only the non-null case of this was included. was shown to be
expressible in terms of the energy-momentum tensor, from which the
Einstein–Maxwell system could be interpreted as reducible to a theory of
empty space alone. The first part of the latter result was a rediscovery
of a result by Rainich [ 306 ] . The idea was then to investigate
whether all other known forms of fundamental matter could be similarly
incorporated into this Rainich–Misner–Wheeler (RMW) already-unified
theory of gravity and electromagnetism. In those days the
Yang–Mills-type theories of the nuclear forces were not yet known, so
the RMW theory was a unification of all the understood fundamental
forces. But no way to incorporate spin- @xmath fermion fields was found,
the massless neutrino field presenting much difficulty for this
conceptual framework. As a result of this already in 1959 [ 374 ]
Wheeler thought it unlikely that vacuum geometrodynamics would be
sufficient to describe nature. RMW theory also turned out to have a
somewhat defective IVP [ 289 ] and as far as I know, nobody ever
succeeded in writing down an action for it [ 275 ] or in recovering the
superposition principle for electromagnetism.

This interpretation was not a waste of time since it prompted the first
exercises in the construction of 3-geometries as initial data sets,
which underlies much of modern numerical relativity.

2.7.3 Geometrodynamics: modern interpretation

Wheeler asked some important questions about the Superspace
interpretation of geometrodynamics [ 377 ] . ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 The quantum
‘conceptual difficulties’ in I.3.3.3 are also Wheeler’s. The Hamiltonian
constraint remains central but is to be understood to be with matter
‘added on’ [ 377 ] . The first question (quoted at the start of) is why
the closely-related Einstein–Hamilton–Jacobi equation takes the form it
does, to be answered without assuming GR. This thesis chiefly (II–VIII)
consists of an answer to this question along the lines of the recent
proposal by Barbour, Foster and Ó Murchadha. There is also an older
rather different attempt to answer this question by Hojman, Kuchař and
Teitelboim (see II.1.1). One of the issues at stake with these answers
is that they should past the test of natural inclusion of all the known
fundamental matter fields. As in the RMW interpretation of
geometrodynamics, it is the natural inclusion of spin- @xmath fermions
that is troublesome.

Second, what kind of structure does Superspace have? It was reported [
346 ] that Stern proved that Superspace is Hausdorff-separated. There is
also the indefinite DeWitt supermetric naturally defined on Superspace.
There is than the issue of whether spatial topology change is permitted
in classical geometrodynamics. It is not, as shown by Geroch [ 154 ] .
So classically one must consider one separate Superspace per choice of
spatial topology. Finally, is there any classical explanation for the
3-d Riemannian character of space and its ability to accommodate the
known matter fields of nature.

Third, what is two-thirds of Superspace? I.e how can the true d.o.f’s in
GR be represented? This question was almost answered by York (see
I.2.9.4.2) and is also further discussed in III.2.

Note that Wheeler had in mind the case of evolving CWB geometries, which
have the following merits and plausibilities. Einstein’s arguments for a
closed universe are based on its simplicity and on attempting to realize
Mach’s principle [ 128 , 130 ] (it is displeasing for ‘absolutist’
boundary conditions at infinity to interfere with local physics).
Wheeler used the thin sandwich formulation (see below) to attempt to
conceptualize classical and quantum geometrodynamics [ 374 , 376 , 377 ]
, and to implement Mach’s principle [ 376 ] . The conformal IVP (also
see below) was found to provide more adequate protection in the form of
rigorous mathematical theorems than the thin sandwich, causing Wheeler
later [ 200 , 378 ] to shift the interpretation of Mach to be instead in
terms of constant mean curvature and conformal 3-geometry. This led to
the idea of ‘Wheeler–Einstein–Mach universes’ [ 195 ] . A further
simplicity argument for CWB geometries is than that the GR conformal IVP
is simplest for these.

Whether the favoured cosmological model for the universe is open or
closed has shifted around during the history of observational cosmology.
One should note however that observationally-open universes may close on
a larger-than-observed scale e.g along the lines of Lindquist’s gluing
together of many Schwarzchild solution pieces [ 256 ] , or of
topological identification [ 243 ] . Conversely, closed-looking could
actually be open via hitherto unprobeably small holes leading to open
regions. So it looks to be down to a matter of taste.

Finally, the inclusion of simple forms of matter such as Klein-Gordon
scalars, electromagnetism and Yang–Mills theory does not disrupt the
above interpretation of vacuum geometrodynamics (see IV, VI.2). However,
nastier matter fields do disrupt it (VI.2.4).

### 2.8 The Baierlein–Sharp–Wheeler action for GR

I will often use the manifestly reparameterization-invariant
Baierlein–Sharp–Wheeler (BSW) [ 27 ] formulation of GR, which arose by
analogy with QM transition amplitudes during Wheeler’s attempts to
interpret geometrodynamics. This formulation arises from rewriting the
Lagrangian formulation of GR

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (225)
  -- -------- -- -------

to algebraically eliminate @xmath from( 224 ) (notice the analogy with
setting up the homogeneous Jacobi principle). Thus (assuming @xmath
everywhere in the region of interest) one arrives at the BSW action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -- -------

This formulation is the start of the first method we consider below for
the GR IVP.

### 2.9 The GR IVP

GR is constrained. I now explore how the solution of these constraints
has been approached. I include arbitrary dimension and signature to
start off with, although I often then specialize to the usual (3, 0; –1)
case, deferring treatment of the other cases to Part B where they are
required. I include phenomenological matter. Several methods have been
proposed, of which I only consider those which are general (i.e
independent of symmetry restrictions). BSW proposed the thin sandwich
approach (see I.2.9.1). Although largely unexplored, there is evidence
that this approach is of limited success. Two older types of method are
the elimination and conformal methods (in I.2.9.2 and I.2.9.3
respectively). Elimination methods are intuitive in that the prescribed
quantities are all physical, but rely on brute force and have a number
of undesirable mathematical features. In contrast, the conformal method
is counterintuitive in that the prescribed quantities are unphysical,
but this method exploits well the mathematical properties of the
constraint system in order to decouple it. Lichnerowicz proposed and
argued for the conformal method in 1944 [ 254 ] . Bruhat compared
conformal and elimination methods in 1956 [ 65 ] , accumulating good
reasons to favour the conformal method. However, I found that her
arguments by themselves do not suffice to dismiss Magaard’s 1962 method
[ 267 ] and others. I fill in this gap below by extending her arguments.
York and others substantially developed the conformal method in the
1970’s [ 389 , 390 , 391 , 274 , 282 , 337 , 338 ] ; this is commonly
used as a cornerstone of numerical relativity (see I.2.11). Further
methods for the GR IVP are outlined in I.2.9.4–5 including a small work
of mine. Fundamental matter is included in I.2.9.6.

2.9.1 The thin sandwich method and conjecture

The thin sandwich method is a Lagrangian method: freely specify the
metric @xmath and its

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (227)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the energy-momentum tensor component @xmath .
Then treat the @xmath multiplier equation (which replaces the Codazzi
constraint) as a p.d.e for @xmath itself:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -- -------

obtained using the explicit expressions for @xmath and @xmath . The
conjecture is that ( 229 ) has a unique solution under a suitably broad
range of circumstances. If this is true, then it is trivial to find
@xmath using ( 227 ) and then to find @xmath from its definition ( 137
). This last step is ‘filling in the sandwich’.

There are in fact two sandwich methods. The ‘thick sandwich’ involves
prescribing the metric on two nearby slices and constructing the
spacetime between them, whereas the other discussed above is the limit
of this as the two nearby slices become arbitrarily close.

As regards the conjecture, although progress has been made, a regular
method to solve this has not been found and counterexamples exist. This
is all for the @xmath , @xmath case with phenomenological matter.

To avoid the ‘Problem of zeros’ @xmath one assumes @xmath in the region
studied. Then solutions to the thin sandwich equation with Dirichlet
boundary conditions are unique [ 47 , 44 ] . But one has no guarantee of
existence, as shown by counterexamples in [ 47 , 393 ] .

This is however not the end of the thin sandwich idea. See C.3 for the
effect of considering an Einstein–Maxwell thin sandwich, and I.2.9.4.1
for the modern conformal thin sandwich formulation.

2.9.2 Componentwise methods, including traditional elimination methods

2.9.2.1 A systematic treatment of componentwise methods

The Gauss–Codazzi constraint system consists of @xmath equations
relating @xmath functions ( @xmath , @xmath ). A simple idea is to treat
this system componentwise : consider @xmath of the ( @xmath , @xmath )
as knowns and attempt to solve the system for the remaining @xmath
components. Hawking and Ellis [ 178 ] state that in the usual @xmath
case it is possible to solve this system for any such choice of knowns
and unknowns. I investigate this below, but find it profitable to
consider first what the different sorts of componentwise methods are. I
attempt to cast the Gauss–Codazzi constraint system as some “evolution”
system with respect to some auxiliary IDV (without loss of generality
@xmath ). In this subsection, I simply attempt to cast the system in
Cauchy–Kovalevskaya form, which would suffice to establish existence and
uniqueness when the coefficients in the system and the ‘data for the
data’ at the “initial” value of @xmath are all analytic.

Some of the componentwise methods are algebraic elimination methods .
For example when one considers an embedding of a given lower-d metric,
then the Gauss equation is a mere algebraic expression in the unknowns
(which are by default some selection of extrinsic curvature components).
There are two such componentwise procedures.

Method 1. If a diagonal component, without loss of generality @xmath ,
is available among the unknowns, one can choose to interpret the Gauss
constraint as an equation for this which is linear by the antisymmetry (
222 ) of the DeWitt supermetric:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath ). Thus if @xmath has no
zeros in the region of interest, @xmath can be straightforwardly
eliminated in the Codazzi constraint, which one may then attempt to
treat as a p.d.e system for the other unknowns. This method was
criticized by Bruhat [ 65 ] in the usual-dimension-and-signature case.
These criticisms are discussed and extended in I.2.9.2.3.

Method 2. Since there are @xmath unknowns and only @xmath diagonal
components, it is always true that there will be a nondiagonal
component, without loss of generality @xmath , among the unknowns. One
may then interpret the Gauss constraint as a quadratic equation in this:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (231)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath , @xmath @xmath or @xmath . So long as @xmath has no zeros in
the region of interest, the solutions of the Gauss constraint may be
substituted into the Codazzi constraint, and one may then attempt to
treat this as a p.d.e system for the other unknowns.

Method 3. If in contrast with the above two methods, there are metric
components among the unknowns, the Gauss constraint may be treated as a
p.d.e. for one of these. The resulting componentwise methods do not then
involve any algebraic elimination. These are componentwise p.d.e methods
. Note that p.d.e’s rather than a mixture of p.d.e’s and algebraic
equations generally lend themselves to making stronger existence and
uniqueness proofs.

2.9.2.2 The result in Hawking and Ellis

Claim (In 3-d) one can show that one can prescribe 8 of the 12
independent components of ( @xmath , @xmath ) and solve the constraint
equations to find the other 4.

Although Hawking and Ellis [ 178 ] support this merely by citing [ 66 ]
where certain cases for the split into known and unknown components are
considered, I prove this here for all cases in certain small regions ³⁷
³⁷ 37 The domain of applicability of each subcase is subject to one of
the following kinds of ‘Problem of zeros’ of varying severity. First
kind: in setting up the p.d.e system, if division is required by a
function of unknowns (over which one has therefore no control) then the
emergence of zeros of this function invalidates the procedure in regions
to be discovered. Second kind: if the function is rather of knowns, one
at least knows a priori in which regions the system will and will not be
valid in. Third kind: the system is always valid, but the casting of it
into Cauchy–Kovalevskaya form may involve division by a function which
potentially has zeros, or more generally inversion of a matrix whose
determinant may possess zeros. for the analytic functions. Because I
proceed via the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem, my proof is clearly
signature-independent. Moreover, there are additional complications if
the dimension is increased.

Proof It is important first to notice which @xmath terms are present in
the uneliminated Gauss–Codazzi system since I am treating this as an
“evolution” system with respect to @xmath . The Gauss equation is linear
in @xmath , quadratic in @xmath and linear in @xmath . The 1-component
of the Codazzi constraint contains the @xmath derivatives of all the
variables, whereas the @xmath -component (for any @xmath ) contains only
the @xmath derivatives of @xmath and of all the metric components. I
next consider the different possibilities for the unknowns case by case.

Suppose the 4 unknowns are all components of @xmath . Then one may
attempt to use method 1 or method 2, that is one eliminates some
component @xmath from the Codazzi constraint by use of the Gauss
constraint. The 2-component of the Codazzi equation may be solved for a
@xmath component, the 3-component of the Codazzi equation may be solved
for a @xmath component, and the 1-component of the Codazzi equation may
be solved for any other @xmath component, @xmath . This never causes any
trouble since there must always be such components among the 4 unknowns.
The @xmath -eliminated Codazzi system may then be cast into a 3-equation
first-order Cauchy–Kovalevskaya form, and the final unknown @xmath is
then to be read off the Gauss constraint.

If just one of the unknowns is a metric component @xmath and the other
unknowns do not share an absent index (without loss of generality are
not @xmath , @xmath and @xmath which share an absent @xmath -index),
then one can set up a 4- or 5-equation first-order Cauchy–Kovalevskaya
form. The 5-equation form corresponds to when @xmath is some @xmath so
that the Gauss constraint is second-order and can then be decoupled via
@xmath ; the 4-equation form corresponds to the other possible choices
of @xmath . The Codazzi constraint may be solved for the 3 extrinsic
curvature components. If there is a shared absent coordinate without
loss of generality @xmath , then the corresponding 3-component of the
Codazzi constraint contains no partial derivatives with respect to the
dynamical variable of the extrinsic curvature unknowns and so the above
scheme cannot be used. Then for the Gauss constraint, use method 1 or 2,
giving a 3-component Codazzi system.

If precisely two of the unknowns are metric components, then without
loss of generality one of the extrinsic curvature unknowns carries a
2-index. Then one may solve the 2-component of the Codazzi constraint
for this component and the 1-component for whichever other extrinsic
curvature unknown one has declared. Then the 3-component of the Codazzi
constraint and the Gauss constraint are to be solved for the two metric
unknowns. Thus one may obtain a 4 or 5-d first-order Cauchy–Kovalevskaya
form.

If there is just one extrinsic curvature component unknown, then the
1-component of the Codazzi system may be solved for it and all the
remaining equations be solved for the unknown metric components. One
then obtains a 5-equation first-order Cauchy–Kovalevskaya form.

If all the unknowns are metric components there are no difficulties in
writing down a 4- or 5-equation first-order Cauchy–Kovalevskaya form.
For example without loss of generality a metric component @xmath must be
among the unknowns (since there are @xmath unknown metric components and
only @xmath can contain a 1-index). Then the Gauss equation is of the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -- -------

which for @xmath can be combined with the Codazzi equations arranged as
equations for the @xmath -derivatives of any @xmath other unknown metric
components to form a system to which the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem is
applicable [e.g decouple ( 232 ) to form a system of @xmath first-order
equations].

Finally, note that the above simple scheme, in which the Gauss–Codazzi
constraint system is cast as an evolution system with respect to some
auxiliary IDV, does not by itself suffice to investigate whether Hawking
and Ellis’ result holds for higher-d. For, consider the unknowns to be
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then the 4-component of
the Codazzi constraint does not contain any 1-derivatives and so it is a
constraint rather than an “evolution” equation with respect to the
auxiliary IDV @xmath .

2.9.2.3 Bruhat’s criticisms and Magaard’s argument

Bruhat’s first criticism of elimination method 1 [ 65 ] is that it is a
non-covariant procedure. This contributes to it being highly ambiguous,
since the nature of the prescription depends on the choice of
coordinates. It is also ambiguous because there is no unique clear-cut
way of choosing which components are to be regarded as the knowns and
unknowns. This criticism holds for all the componentwise methods above.

Bruhat’s second criticism of elimination method 1 is that the eliminated
system is not valid if the region of interest contains zeros of @xmath .
Some form of this criticism holds for all three methods, although
different kinds of the ‘Problem of zeros’ may occur. In all these cases,
the occurrence of zeros indicates that the proof is not necessarily
valid everywhere within a given region of interest.

Whenever the first kind of Problem of zeros occurs, nevertheless data
construction for small regions is permitted by Magaard’s argument
(originally stated for the particular case below). First, one is
entitled to declare ‘data for the data’ on some @xmath -d (partial)
boundary set @xmath . For, although @xmath is a function of unknowns in
the region of interest away from this set, these unknowns are declared
to be known on the set itself, so one can choose to prescribe them there
so that the resulting @xmath is bounded away from zero. Then by
continuity, there are no zeros of @xmath near the set on which the ‘data
for the data’ is prescribed.

Magaard’s particular method treats all the lower-d metric @xmath ’s
components as knowns because his aim was to prove an embedding theorem
(the Campbell–Magaard theorem). Magaard’s method is the special case of
componentwise algebraic elimination method 1, in which after eliminating
@xmath by use of the Gauss constraint, the Codazzi constraint is treated
as a p.d.e system for unknowns @xmath { @xmath , some other @xmath
component denoted @xmath }. This satisfies the criteria for the
Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem if one treats @xmath {all the components of
@xmath bar @xmath , @xmath and @xmath } as known functions on @xmath and
provided that the p.d.e’s coefficients and the data are analytic. So a
unique solution exists. One can then group [ 267 , 15 ] this method and
the local existence of a unique evolution to form the Campbell–Magaard
statement that a ( @xmath , @xmath ) spacetime with prescribed analytic
metric @xmath may be embedded with an extra space or time dimension for
any analytic functional form of the energy-momentum tensor. This
statement suggests very many embeddings exist, which as argued below and
in Part B, is a disaster for supposed applicability of these embeddings
to build meaningful higher-d worlds in brane cosmology or ‘noncompact KK
theory’.

Magaard’s method leads to two prices to pay later on. Although the ‘data
for the data’ (values of @xmath on @xmath ) can be validly picked so
that @xmath on @xmath , I note that the protecting continuity argument
is only guaranteed to produce a thin strip @xmath before zeros of @xmath
develop. Now, the first price to pay is that one cannot expect to be
able to patch such strips together to make extended patches of data.
For, since the strip construction ends where @xmath picks up a zero for
some @xmath , while restarting the procedure with @xmath in place of
@xmath is valid, the two data strips thus produced will have a
discontinuity across @xmath . So what one produces is a collection of
strips belonging to different possible global data sets. The evolution
of each of these strips would produce pieces of different higher-d
manifolds. So the statement that an empty ( @xmath + 1)-d manifold
‘locally surrounds’ any @xmath -d manifold has a more complicated
meaning than might be naïvely expected. Concretely, what has been proven
is that any @xmath -d manifold can be cut up in an infinite number of
ways (choices of the @xmath coordinate) into many pieces (which are a
priori undetermined), each of which can be separately bent in an
infinite number of ways (corresponding to the freedom in choosing the
components of @xmath in @xmath on each set of ‘data for the data’), and
for each of these bent regions one thicken the region with respect to
the extra dimension @xmath to find a piece of an ( @xmath + 1)-d
manifold. Furthermore, all of this can be done for every possible
analytic function form of @xmath (corresponding to the generalized
Campbell–Magaard result) [ 15 ] . This excess richness compromises
attaching any physical significance to any particular such construction.

I found three other indications that Magaard’s method is not well
thought-out. First it is not considered how far the ‘data for the data’
extends along @xmath . Clearly the topology of the @xmath -d manifold is
an important input, for if it is not CWB, there is a missing boundary or
asymptotics prescription required to make Magaard’s method rigourous.
Also the topology of the @xmath set itself has not been brought into
consideration. For example, the method does not guarantee continuity if
@xmath contains loops. It may also be that the coordinate condition
@xmath breaks down within the region of interest. In the original
Campbell–Magaard theorem statement the word ‘local’ is left to cover
these and yet other aspects! This makes the theorem less powerful in
truth than in superficial appearance.

My second point applies only to the @xmath , @xmath case in Part B, for
which the existence of an evolutionary region after the data
construction step may easily be ruined by an ‘information leak Problem’.
The usual signature case @xmath , @xmath does not suffer from this
thanks to the DOD property. Again this is an implicit limitation, in
this case either the signature-independence of the theorem or of its
physical applicability is found to be untrue (depending on how exactly
the theorem is phrased).

Third, Bruhat’s second criticism still holds: Magaard’s method lacks any
@xmath -d general covariance since it involves the choice of a
coordinate @xmath and the elimination of a @xmath -component of a
tensor.

The small strip Problem and the second point above are badly convoluted
for the Magaard method since the zeros of @xmath are not known until one
has solved very cumbersome p.d.e’s arising from the Codazzi constraint.
This substantially inhibits the construction of specific examples of the
pathologies and the study of how widespread they might be. Because of
this, my proof based on method 2 supercedes Magaard’s. Now, the zeros of
@xmath are known from the start, making this a cleaner procedure, and
also one for which counterexamples can be read off: any @xmath -metric
for which @xmath is 0 within the region of interest will do. However,
for this proof Magaard’s idea of guaranteeing no zeros on the ‘data for
the data’ itself also fails because the zeros are now entirely
controlled by knowns. What one has is a statement about existence in
certain regions known beforehand. A yet more satisfactory method is
provided in I.2.9.5.

2.9.3 The conformal method of Lichnerowicz and York

The arguments of Lichnerowicz [ 254 ] and Bruhat [ 65 ] led to the GR
IVP taking a very different route from the above sort of brute-force
elimination methods. Lichnerowicz’ method, which was much developed and
extended by York [ 389 , 390 , 391 , 274 ] , is instead preferred. Its
treatment below is as far as possible for general ( @xmath , @xmath ;
@xmath ), and then specializes to the

( @xmath , 0; –1) and particularly to the (3, 0; –1) case.

In the conformal method one chooses to treat @xmath as a known metric
which is moreover not the physical metric but rather only
conformally-related to it by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (233)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the conformal factor @xmath is a positive suitably smooth
function. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (235)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (236)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (238)
  -- -------- -- -------

A metric is conformally-flat if there exists a conformal transformation
from it to the corresponding flat metric. Furthermore, when it exists (
@xmath ), the Weyl tensor serves as a conformal curvature tensor because
it has the following properties:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -- -------

Work in terms of the @xmath and @xmath split, ³⁸ ³⁸ 38 One can instead
(and in close parallel with the above) choose to work with momenta in
place of extrinsic curvature. Most of the applications in thesis are
formulated in terms of momenta. and permit @xmath , @xmath and @xmath to
conformally

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -- -------

whilst crucially demanding the constant mean curvature ³⁹ ³⁹ 39 This is
the same notion as in I.2.1. (CMC) condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds and is conformally-invariant. This includes as a subcase
Lichnerowicz’s earlier use of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -- -------

One then demands that the (raised) Codazzi constraint ( 156 ) is to be
conformally-

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (244)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore it is desired that the conformally-transformed Gauss
equation ( 155 ), i.e

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (245)
  -- -------- -- -------

by ( 238 ), where @xmath and @xmath is proportional to @xmath , should
contain no @xmath term. Thus, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath [making use of
( 244 )]. Now, regardless of ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ), provided that
the ( @xmath + 1)-d DEC is to be preserved by the conformal
transformation, @xmath must conformally-transform like @xmath , implying
that @xmath . Then ( 245 ) becomes the ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath )
version of the Lichnerowicz--York equation ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 The main feature due
to @xmath is hidden in @xmath . I use rather @xmath (the Laplacian,
which is an elliptic operator) for @xmath and @xmath (the wave operator,
which is a hyperbolic operator) for @xmath to bring out this important
difference in applications.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the conformal factor @xmath . Lichnerowicz’s original equation had
no @xmath term in it and no phenomenological matter term @xmath ; the
study of these additional features was carried out in the usual (3, 0;
–1) case by York and Ó Murchadha [ 282 ] .

Now the solution of the Codazzi constraint is decoupled from the
solution of the Gauss constraint. The former proceeds by a
traceless-transverse (TT)–traceless-longitudinal (TL) splitting [ 391 ,
392 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (247)
  -- -------- -- -------

(for some vector potential @xmath and for @xmath the conformal Killing
form ), which along with the trace-tracefree split is
conformally-invariant [ 392 ] and thus unaffected by the solution of the
latter, which has become the p.d.e ( 246 ) for the conformal factor. The
simplest case is @xmath which is possible for @xmath . Then all one
needs is any @xmath . The standard case is that @xmath is known and that
one is to solve the Codazzi constraint as a second-order p.d.e for the
potential @xmath out of which @xmath is built. See C.2–3 for such
procedures, along with tricks and simplifications for solving the
Lichnerowicz–York equation.

Once the Codazzi constraint has been solved, @xmath is known so @xmath
is known. Then one can attempt to solve the Lichnerowicz–York equation,
which is well-studied for the (3, 0; –1) CWB and asymptotically-flat
cases. By the artful construction above, this is a quasilinear elliptic
equation, permitting the approaches outlined in C.2.2. It has been
studied including most fundamental matter fields [ 199 ] , and for
Sobolev spaces matching those then used in the GR CP [ 86 , 85 ] .

Note that the choice of using the scale–scalefree decomposition of the
metric and the trace-tracefree and TT–TL decompositions of the extrinsic
curvature are irreducible @xmath -d generally-covariant choices, a
decided advantage over the coordinate-dependent, ambiguous componentwise
methods. This and the decoupling of the constraints in the conformal
method are signature-independent. Some of the methods to solve the
Codazzi equation can be used regardless of signature, but the usual
study of the Lichnerowicz–York equation involves elliptic methods which
are absolutely not generalizable to the @xmath case.

One can attempt to preserve the maximal or CMC conditions away from the
‘initial’ hypersurface @xmath , by solving lapse-fixing equations
(LFE’s, see I.2.10). Such choices of slicings deliberately prevent
unnecessary focussing of geodesics [ 254 , 337 ] , enhancing the
practical longevity of the evolution (the opposite occurs for normal
coordinates!). However, the conformal method is not absolutely general,
for some spacetimes may not have any maximal or CMC slice to identify
with @xmath in the first place, while in others the maximal or CMC
slicing cannot be maintained to cover the whole spacetime (see I.2.10).
Furthermore, results concerning this depend on the asymptotics assumed.
⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 It was these caveats, along with the reliance on @xmath of
York’s method and restrictions on the values @xmath can take for some
subcases of the Lichnerowicz–York equation, that made me suspicious of
the supposed generality of the Magaard method. However, in the usual

(3, 0; –1) case, this method (and its variants) is widely accepted as a
practical method by the numerical relativity community (see I.2.11). The
LFE study to date has relied on them being elliptic, and thus cannot be
simply generalized away from @xmath .

Finally, for @xmath there is the useful property that certain local data
patches can be proven to suffice for the treatment of astrophysical
problems, by building on the notion of DOD. As promised, this sort of
technique is also applicable to protect pieces of local data obtained by
elimination methods such as that of Magaard.

2.9.4 Further approaches and related mathematics used in (3, 0; –1) case

2.9.4.1 The conformal thin sandwich method

This [ 395 , 90 , 87 , 396 ] is a combination of conformal and thin
sandwich ideas. There are 5 unknowns, taken to be @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , whereas @xmath up to scale, @xmath and the hypersurface
constant @xmath are taken to be knowns. As compared with the original
thin sandwich scheme, @xmath is now an equation for @xmath while there
is a new equation for the scaled-up lapse. Then one writes the
definition of @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (248)
  -- -------- -- -------

and one uses this in the Codazzi constraint ( 156 ) to obtain an
equation for @xmath . One additionally has the Lichnerowicz–York
equation ( 246 ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (249)
  -- -------- -- -------

One solves these as coupled equations. One can then finally reconstruct
the physical @xmath and @xmath (and hence @xmath ) from ( 137 ) and (
248 ). The theoretical point of this formulation is that everything then
scales correctly.

2.9.4.2 Conformal Superspace

In the CWB case, York showed that ‘ @xmath of Superspace’ may be taken
to be Conformal

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see [ 139 ] for a more recent mathematical study). This is the
restriction of Riem for which the momentum is transverse ( @xmath ) and
traceless ( @xmath ).

The quotienting out of conformal transformations is based on the
decomposition of arbitrary 3-metrics @xmath into their determinant
@xmath and their scale-free part @xmath . CS is essentially the
geodesically-complete space arising in the split ( 223 ). There is
accumulating evidence that a case can be made for CS almost
corresponding to a representation of the space of true d.o.f’s of GR. It
turns out that to obtain this for GR one must adjoin a solitary

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

which interacts with the infinitely many local shape d.o.f’s represented
by @xmath . I investigate theories on CS and ‘CS+V’ in III.2.

2.9.4.3 3-d Conformal tensors and the York 1971 formulation

For dimension @xmath , the Weyl tensor exists and serves as a conformal
curvature tensor.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a conformal curvature tensor.

This is used first in York’s earliest (1971) formulation of the GR IVP,
which is cast in a form which looks closely-analogous to that of
electromagnetism:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (255)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath the momentum density of weight @xmath . However, instead of
the physical gauge freedom of electromagnetism, what is physical here is
the gauge fixed by solution of the original (vacuum maximal)
Lichnerowicz equation .

2.9.5 A new elimination method in terms of irreducibles

The route to avoid Bruhat’s non-covariance criticism and the ensuing
ambiguities of procedure is to work not with components but with
irreducibles. The conformal method uses the scale–scalefree split of the
metric and the TT–TL splits of the extrinsic curvature. It is then
declared that the @xmath unknowns are the single scale of the metric and
the TL part of the extrinsic curvature encapsulated in the @xmath
-vector potential @xmath .

With this hindsight I constructed an irreducible elimination method .
Write the constraints in terms of the trace-tracefree decomposition. Now
consider the Gauss equation as an

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (256)
  -- -------- -- -------

and substitute this into the Codazzi equation to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (257)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now treat this as an @xmath equations for the @xmath unknowns @xmath
encapsulated in the @xmath -vector potential @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are treated as functions of @xmath , @xmath and
knowns [which may be easily written down using ( 137 ) and ( 247 )]. See
C.3 for more general consideration of this equation. It suffices to say
that it is quite a complicated equation, but then so is the thin
sandwich equation or the conformal thin sandwich system.

Here I note that if @xmath is declared to be an auxiliary IDV, then if
two certain functions do not have any zeros in the region of interest,
the system ( 258 ) may be cast into second-order Cauchy–Kovalevskaya
form. Very quickly, isolating the relevant terms of the @xmath
-component

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (259)
  -- -------- -- -------

provided that division by @xmath is valid. The 1-component gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which upon use of ( 259 ) and provided that division by @xmath is valid
gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

This provides a method of proof of the Campbell result which is less
prone to Bruhat’s two criticisms since its Problem of zeros is of the
third kind so at least the eliminated system is always valid, and the
system is built in an unambiguous generally-covariant manner. It will
still be prone to the information leak Problem if @xmath , but as a
genuine GR IVP method ( @xmath ) it is protected by the DOD property.

So whilst some aspects of the old thin sandwich scheme have resurfaced
again in the modern conformal thin sandwich scheme, the above is an
attempt to have some aspects of old elimination schemes resurface in a
new method with enough of the old faults corrected to be of potential
interest to numerical relativity.

All quantities prescribed in my method are the physical ones. Although
it is an elimination method, it is carefully thought-out: the eliminated
quantity has no prefactor and hence no associated Problem of zeros
invalidating the eliminated system in certain places, and the procedure
is uniquely-defined and coordinate-independent. In my method, one is
faced with a single, more difficult vector p.d.e in place of the simpler
Codazzi vector p.d.e followed by solving the decoupled Lichnerowicz–York
equation.

2.9.6 The IVP with fundamental matter and for alternative theories of
gravity

Minimally-coupled scalars offer no complications. In the
Einstein–Maxwell IVP one has to scale @xmath and @xmath so that the
electromagnetic Gauss constraint ( 205 ) is conformally-invariant [ 199
] . This idea is considerably generalizable, both to more complicated
matter theories and to large classes of alternative theories of gravity
[ 199 , 198 ] . I note however 1) that the preservation of energy
conditions is not always applicable (also mentioned in [ 87 ] ) if
complicated enough matter is included and 2) that higher-derivative
theories remain uninvestigated and may cause significant difficulties if
required for numerical relativity through having a more complicated IVP
than GR.

### 2.10 Maximal and CMC slicings

This section is for the (3, 0; –1) case and in terms of momenta to match
its application in III.2.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (261)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (262)
  -- -------- -- -------

In GR, one regards ( 261 ) and ( 262 ) as maximal and CMC gauge
conditions respectively.

From the scaling of the tracefree extrinsic curvature in I.2.9.3, the
tracefree momentum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (263)
  -- -------- -- -------

since it is a density of weight 1. The original (vacuum maximal)
Lichnerowicz equation now

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (264)
  -- -------- -- -------

whereas the vacuum CMC Lichnerowicz–York equation ( 246 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (265)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is important to distinguish between a single initial use of a slicing
condition in order to find consistent initial data and subsequent use of
the slicing when the obtained initial data are propagated forward. This
is by no means obligatory. The EFE’s are such that once consistent
initial data have been found they can be propagated with freely
specified lapse and shift. This is precisely the content of 4-d general
covariance.

If one wishes to attempt to maintain the maximal gauge condition ( 261
), @xmath must satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (266)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this thesis, I call such equations as LFE’s, because, since GR is not
always be presupposed, I do not always work in a context where the
notion of slicing of GR-like spacetime makes sense. Being homogeneous, (
266 ) does not fix @xmath uniquely but only up to global @xmath
-reparameterization @xmath , where @xmath is an arbitrary monotonic
function of @xmath .

Similarly, to maintain the CMC gauge condition during the evolution, it
is necessary to choose the lapse @xmath in such a way that it satisfies
the CMC LFE

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (267)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above lapse-fixing equations are for vacuum GR, following from the
vacuum version of the first form of ( 151 ). The versions with matter
are likewise easily obtained from the full equation ( 151 ).

Maintenance of CMC slicing yields a foliation that is extremely
convenient in the case of globally hyperbolic spatially-CWB spacetimes.
The foliation is unique [ 61 , 268 ] , and the value of @xmath increases
monotonically, either from @xmath to @xmath in the case of a Big-Bang to
Big-Crunch cosmological solution or from @xmath to zero in the case of
eternally expanding universes. In the first case, the volume of the
universe increases monotonically from zero to a maximum expansion, at
which the maximal condition ( 261 ) is satisfied, after which it
decreases monotonically to zero. In CWB GR, the total spatial volume
cannot be maintained constant except momentarily at maximum expansion,
when @xmath . Thus, in CWB GR the volume is a dynamical variable. This
corresponds to the maximal LFE not being soluble in this case (see C.1).
The above properties of @xmath allow its interpretation as a notion of
time, the extrinsic York time (see e.g [ 202 , 48 ] ).

The maximal and CMC gauges in GR exhibit the following gauge artifact
known as the collapse of the lapse : a blowup in @xmath (for example in
gravitational collapse) tends to drive @xmath to zero. Thus these gauges
are singularity-avoiding . But not all singularities are avoided:
Eardley and Smarr [ 118 ] found an example of Tolman–Bondi model in
which gravitational collapse is too sudden (i.e the curvature profile is
too spiked) so that the LFE does not manage to drive @xmath to zero
before the singularity is reached. Such singularity-avoiding gauges are
not necessarily a good numerical strategy to use [ 46 ] because they
cause other difficulties though stretching the numerical grid. The CMC
gauge is also not always applicable: not all GR spacetimes are CMC
sliceable, nor is a CMC slicing necessarily extendible to cover the
maximal analytic extension of a spacetime [ 337 ] .

Note that the above are only partial gauge fixings. The shift @xmath is
as yet unspecified. One numerically-useful choice for this is to use the
shift given by the minimal distortion condition [ 337 ] . Another choice
(which in fact generalizes this) is to obtain both @xmath and @xmath
from solving the conformal thin sandwich.

Finally, note that one is entirely free to use whatever gauge in GR. In
each case the gauge can be treated as above in terms of equations for
@xmath and @xmath (e.g see II.3.2 for the normal gauge, or [ 337 ] for
the harmonic gauge, which turns out to be closely analogous to the
electromagnetic Lorenz gauge).

### 2.11 Numerical applications

Solving the conformal IVP equations is central to the study of binary
compact object data in numerical relativity. Often simplified versions
of these equations are considered (as explained in App C). The simplest
treatments predate York’s work: the Misner [ 271 ] and Brill–Lindquist [
60 ] multiple black hole data solve just the flat-space Laplace equation
case. Lindquist [ 255 ] also treated Einstein–Maxwell wormholes in the
two flat-space Laplace equation case. The Bowen–York data [ 394 ] solve
another simple case (a system of flat-space Poisson equations). Use of
the conformal thin sandwich formulation in data construction is
currently popular [ 46 ] , partly because of its practical motivation,
since unlike for the simplification @xmath which is trivial because it
implies @xmath and momentum is conserved, @xmath is rather the condition
for (quasi)equilibrium, which need not be maintained at later times.

The motivation to consider more complicated data is physical and is to
be tested by comparison with gravitational wave signals expected to be
observed over the next few years [ 94 ] . The numerical relativity side
of this will require reasonably long-lived simulations (relative to the
orbital period) of evolution of realistic data. The viability of use of
the conformal method alone requires the tractability of gravity wave
emission within this formalism, for which there is recent evidence [ 164
] . Traditional binary black hole evolution simulations have been of
head-on and hence axisymmetric collisions [ 335 , 18 ] . Modern work
attempts to study more likely collisions following from the more general
modern data above. Excision of black hole interiors (see C.2.3) is
currently favoured over use of singularity-avoiding gauges.
Nevertheless, simulations to date have been numerically unstable on
small timescales (see e.g [ 46 ] ). The study of binary neutron star
evolution is currently more fruitful [ 332 ] .

2.12 Further formulations of the EFE’s

The EFE’s have been studied in many guises for a number of different
purposes. The guises may roughly be qualified by what geometrical object
represents the gravitational field (metric or ‘bein’), by how this is
split (a matter of signatures) and how this split is to be interpreted
(a matter of prescriptions), by how the split equations are pieced
together to make systems of particular forms, and by how extra variables
may be introduced. Among the purposes are both practical and theoretical
aspects of numerics, and quantization.

2.12.1 Metric formulations

If one uses the metric, one may then apply the (3, 0; –1) ADM split. The
resulting system ( 83 84 , 188 , 189 ) may then be modified to form the
equivalent but numerically better-behaved BSSN system [ 46 ] by use of
conformal IVP-like variables, adding constraints to the evolution
equations and using @xmath as new variables. One can also form larger
‘Einstein–Ricci’ or ‘Einstein–Christoffel’ [ 5 ] systems, seeking for
particular kinds of hyperbolicity, which give good theorems to protect
the numerics. One could also use an ‘Einstein–Weyl’ system with extra
‘electric’ and ‘magnetic’ Weyl tensor variables. One such formulation is
the threading formulation [ 175 , 133 ] in which the fluid flow
congruence (rather than hypersurfaces perpendicular to it) is treated as
primary, on the grounds that the information available to us as
observers is on incoming geodesics and not on some spatial surface. One
has then a ‘deliberately incomplete’ system if regarded from the
foliation perspective. Weyl variables are also employed in [ 333 ] (used
in Part B).

2.12.2 ‘Bein’ formulations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (268)
  -- -------- -- -------

or spacetime spinors. This is useful to accommodate Dirac fields and in
the study of supergravity. The unsplit spinor formulation is useful in
the study of exact solutions. One can again do a (3, 0; –1) split (see
VI.4). Note that there are then additional ‘frame rotation’ constraints
@xmath . A somewhat different ‘bein’ gives Ashtekar variables (see
below), of importance in quantization attempts.

2.12.3 Ashtekar variables

Pass from ( @xmath , @xmath ) to a SU(2) connection @xmath and its
conjugate momentum @xmath [which is related to the 3-metric by @xmath ].
⁴² ⁴² 42 The capital typewriter indices denote the Ashtekar variable use
of internal spinorial SU(2). @xmath denotes the trace over these. @xmath
is the SU(2) covariant derivative as defined in the first equality of (
269 ). The constraints are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (270)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -- -------

( 269 ) arises because one is using a first-order formalism. Note that
in this Ashtekar formalism [ 25 ] it has the form of an SU(2) Yang–Mills
constraint. ( 270 ) and ( 269 ) are the polynomial forms that the
momentum and Hamiltonian constraints respectively, where @xmath is the
field strength corresponding to @xmath . One can see that ( 270 ) is
indeed associated with momentum since it is the condition for a
vanishing Poynting vector. The Hamiltonian constraint @xmath has no such
clear-cut interpretation.

It is important for the formulation that @xmath is a self-dual
connection, which makes this formulation specific to dimension 4. One
has more or less a map of the GR phase space into the Yang–Mills one,
which is exploited below. ‘More or less’ means that the asymptotics used
are different, and also that the GR phase space has been enlarged to
include the degenerate metrics. Finally, the Ashtekar variables
formulation is of complex GR. But one requires troublesome reality
conditions (see I.3.3.3) in order to recover real GR. Nowadays so as to
avoid reality conditions, one usually prefers to work not with
Ashtekar’s original complex variables but with Barbero’s real variables
[ 28 ] .

2.12.4 Formulations using different splits

Finally, one need not stick to using a (3, 0; -1) or indeed ( @xmath ,
@xmath ; @xmath ) split. One could split with respect to null surfaces:
the characteristic formulation [ 381 ] . This may be useful numerically;
it is well-suited to the study of gravitational waves. One might use a
mixture of Cauchy and characteristic formulations for this purpose. The
difficulty then is in how to match the two regions. One could also split
in the ‘2 + 2’ way [ 103 ] , in which the gravitational d.o.f’s are
isolated as the conformal 2-metric. These are not yet fully explored
options.

## 3 Quantum physics

### 3.1 Finite systems

This might be based on the postulates

QM1 Associated with each physical state s of a system, there exists a
wavefunction @xmath which is a ray in a complex vector space V .

QM2 Classical quantities @xmath have associated hermitian operators
@xmath . The form of @xmath in terms of the fundamental variables @xmath
, @xmath is supposedly reflected by the form of @xmath in terms of
@xmath , @xmath .

QM3 Measurements and probabilities: V has an associated inner product
(i.p)

@xmath so that V is Hilbert. This i.p admits a probabilistic
interpretation:

@xmath is the expectation value of @xmath , and @xmath is the overlap
probability or transition amplitude between states 1 and 2. The i.p is
required to be positive-definite to permit the probabilistic
interpretation, and normalizable. By the ‘Copenhagen’ interpretation,
making measurements supposedly entails collapse of the wavefunction from
a probability distribution of states to a particular state, so that the
measurement yields a single real number (the eigenvalue of that state).

QM4 The wavefunction unitarily evolves in time. For a nonrelativistic
quantum system this evolution is given by a time-dependent Schrödinger
equation (TDSE)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can yield a time-independent Schrödinger equation (TISE) for
stationary systems

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (273)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (274)
  -- -------- -- -------

The canonical procedure is to pass from Poisson brackets to equal-time
commutation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (275)
  -- -------- -- -------

I will always choose to use the position representation in setting up
quantum operators:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -- -------

Obtain the Hamiltonian in terms of these and solve for the eigenspectrum
and eigenfunctions (wavefunctions). To have the standard interpretation
available, one must know which inner product to use.

The semiclassical approximation , tied to Hamilton–Jacobi theory, gives
a sometimes useful approximate view of wavefunctions peaking around
classical trajectories.

### 3.2 Infinite systems: quantum field theory

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (277)
  -- -------- -- -------

in Klein–Gordon theory, the probabilistic interpretation is ruined
because @xmath is now indefinite. Fortunately, if @xmath and @xmath are
promoted to operators, one happens to obtain an acceptable i.p (this is
now a many particle interpretation). Quantize canonically by imposing
the obvious ETCR’s, obtaining @xmath and solving it e.g in close analogy
with an infinite collection of uncoupled harmonic oscillators.

Considering instead Dirac theory adds little: the fields being fermions,
one imposes ET anti CR’s, and being charged, one uses distinct
oscillators for @xmath and @xmath . But the quantum theory of the
electromagnetic field is complicated by its constraint. Although
electromagnetism is tractable, theories with constraints @xmath
generally lend themselves to ambiguity of procedure: should these be
imposed classically (which may complicate the ETCR’s), or
quantum-mechanically as restrictions @xmath on the permissible
wavefunctions? The latter case generally suffers from @xmath unless one
is lucky with the operator ordering. Interacting QFT’s are treated as
perturbative expansions in the coupling constants, leading to the QED,
Weinberg–Salam and QCD successes mentioned in I.1.7.

QFT has well-known technical difficulties. Corrections due to loop
contributions may destroy classical symmetries: anomalies . Integrals
may not be well-defined, requiring regularization . Also, some theories
require renormalization (counterterms in order to get finite answers),
whereas others are unsatisfactory in being nonrenormalizable. More
details of naïve renormalizability are used in IV.

### 3.3 Approaches to quantum gravity

3.3.1 Outline of need for and approaches to quantum gravity

Given quantum physics holds for three of the four fundamental forces and
for matter, it is unseemly for the involvement of gravitation to cheat
quantum physics (see [ 77 ] for references). Without further
development, the EFE’s read

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A fully quantum description would be more satisfactory. Whereas all
everyday physics can be understood by neglecting either GR or QM
(consider the spacetime curvature inside CERN or the Compton wavelength
of Mercury), Planckian regions where neither are negligible are
conceivable. This situation is thought to occur in the very early
universe and in black hole physics (both associated with classical GR
breakdown at singularities), as well as possibly in very fine detail of
space or spacetime structure.

Quantizing gravity is hard; one talks mostly of programs. Some have
failed. Others have serious theoretical difficulties (see below). None
has predicted anything that is testable so as to provide convincing
evidence. Even if some genuinely theoretically-flawless theory is
established, what of inequivalent quantizations of the same scheme? And
one can never dismiss the possibility of entirely different flawless
theories being subsequently discovered. Without confirmatory (and
discriminatory) experiments, physics reverts from Galilean to
Aristotelian, regardless of the blinding usage of modern mathematics. A
lot of research is going into phenomenology!

There are two traditional branching programs for quantizing gravity: the
canonical (3.3.2) and the covariant (3.3.4). Their woes are explained
below. Another classification of attempts is into ‘top-down’ which take
the known laws and attempt to deduce quantum gravitational behaviour,
and ‘bottom-up’ which guess at the constituent structure of nature and
attempt to recover known laws. The former aims at respectful
extrapolation, whereas the latter may benefit from (perhaps new, perhaps
rich) mathematical structure assumed, at the price of present
unjustifiability of such assumptions. Additionally, it may be incomplete
or generalized QM or GR that is involved.

Note that the above remain programs, as is made clear by the critical
nature of many papers in the subject. There are mixed-ontology and
nonstandard versions of these programs, while other practitioners have
had their reasons to consider completely different schemes [ 77 , 203 ]
. With the full theories being hard, toy theories (3.3.3–4) are
frequently used to voice both innovations and criticisms. This thesis
extends or stems from Barbour’s attempt toward quantization, which has
closed-universe, known-law, canonical, traditional variable
connotations. Innovation vies with criticism; old toys are used and new
toys (or just possibly alternative theories) emerge.

3.3.2 The canonical approach and the Problem of time

Note how QM uses external time in QM4 whereas there is no such thing in
GR. ⁴³ ⁴³ 43 QFT in spacetimes such as Minkowski relies on timelike
killing vectors which in turn are only present due to high symmetry,
whereas generic solutions of GR have no symmetry. So what would ETCR’s
now be? Should one seek to identify a time before or after quantization
or not at all? With its Hamiltonian being zero, GR looks rather like a (
E = 0) TISE, so is it frozen rather than unitarily-evolving? These are
some aspects of the Problem of Time . GR is constrained, so should one
quantize it before or after constraining? ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴ 44 A third option is to
take @xmath into account classically and @xmath into account
quantum-mechanically: Superspace quantization . There are also Problems
with finding i.p’s and observables, and operator ordering,
regularization and defining measures, depending on what one attempts. ⁴⁵
⁴⁵ 45 In everyday QM, experiment would settle any such ambiguities and
support the correctness of theoretical technicalities employed. And
these Problems are interlinked. Conceptually, why is nature classical to
good approximation? Semiclassical Hamilton–Jacobi interpretations run
into ‘what is a superposition of geometries?’ Embeddability is surely
lost. Is nature a spacetime foam leading to loss of causality and (or)
permissible topology change [ 377 ] ? Also, the ‘Copenhagen’
connotations in QM3 of the centrality of measurement by classical
observers cleanly external to the observed system make no sense for a
closed quantum universe. One usually gets round this one by using rather
a many-worlds interpretation rather than a wavefunction collapse
interpretation [ 107 , 173 ] .

Choosing to work in traditional variables @xmath , @xmath , one requires
a fixed choice of the 3-space topology. Choosing to quantize before
constraining, I elevate these to operators and choose the configuration
representation (analogue of the position representation) ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 I
always make this choice in this Thesis. I use “ ” to denote heuristic
rather than well defined tractable expressions.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (278)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore one can choose to pass from ( 190 ) to standard ETCR’s

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -- -------

(ordered with @xmath to the left) which signifies that @xmath depends on
the 3-geometry alone. The Hamiltonian constraint @xmath becomes the
Wheeler--DeWitt equation (WDE) ⁴⁷ ⁴⁷ 47 This is written here with the
@xmath to the right of the @xmath ordering, and the heuristics include a
lack of consideration for regularization.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is manifestly timeless (it does not contain any @xmath or @xmath ).
One consequence of this is that there is no conventional Schrödinger or
Klein–Gordon i.p. One could treat ( 281 ) as an equation on Superspace;
the indefiniteness of the DeWitt supermetric then provides a ‘time’.
This cannot permit a Schrödinger i.p due to the indefiniteness of the
metric (as in Klein–Gordon theory). Furthermore for GR the Klein–Gordon
implementation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -- -------

is also blocked by the absence of several convenient features that
Klein–Gordon theory happened to have. GR has a lack of well defined –, +
mode separation tied to nonstationarity and an indefinite potential
@xmath (unlike @xmath ) so that this i.p is not normalizable. Two other
not generally successful [ 237 ] interpretations of the WDE are the
semiclassical interpretation (akin to Hamilton–Jacobi formulation, using
Euclidean path integrals [ 170 ] ) and third quantization (in which the
wavefunction of the universe itself is promoted to an operator).

Suppose instead that one can perform a mythical canonical transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (283)
  -- -------- -- -------

which separates out the embedding variables from the true d.o.f’s. This
is equivalent to finding an internal time (and exemplifies constraining
before quantizing). Then in these new variables one has by construction
constraints which look as if they will form a TDSE once quantized

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can then employ the corresponding well-defined Schrödinger i.p.
However it could be that these variables are nonunique and each choice
leads to a distinct quantum theory. Besides not one such canonical
transformation has been found to date: none of the internal time
candidates considered has been satisfactory. These are intrinsic time
(undeveloped [ 237 ] ), extrinsic time (e.g York time ⁴⁸ ⁴⁸ 48 This is
actually good as a time but its implementation soon turns sour in other
ways – see VIII.3 [ 235 , 202 ] or Einstein–Rosen time [ 226 ] ), and
time associated with matter fields (e.g Gaussian reference fluid [ 106 ,
241 , 204 ] ).

Finally, one could accept the timelessness of GR. One could then try the
naïve Schrödinger

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (285)
  -- -------- -- -------

This permits the use of certain relative probabilities, but is
conventionally regarded as of limited use since it does not permit
answers to questions of evolution. It is further discussed in VIII.1–2.
An attempted refinement of this is the conditional probability
interpretation [ 287 ] ; the sum over histories interpretation [ 173 ]
may be viewed as another such, and has been further developed as the
generally-covariant histories formalism [ 205 , 324 , 223 , 222 ] . An
unrelated timeless approach involves perennials (evolving constants of
the motion) [ 315 ] .

One could approach canonical quantization instead using Ashtekar
variables. For the original complex Ashtekar variables, the form of the
constraints ( 269 – 271 ) makes operator ordering Problems less severe.
One then attempts to use the reality conditions to construct the i.p.
However, Kuchař [ 238 ] argued that unlikely hopes were being placed on
these reality conditions. Real Ashtekar variables have since been
adopted, which have not been comprehensively criticized. The loop
representation [ 318 , 148 , 26 ] (which works for both complex and real
Ashtekar variables) provides a natural regularization, and leads to a
discrete spacetime picture [ 319 ] . Modern approaches include
Thiemann’s construction of a quantum spin dynamics Hamiltonian operator
[ 355 , 356 , 358 ] , and the spin foam approach [ 294 ] . Because
degenerate triads are being allowed and then exploited to obtain these
results, I am not sure whether one is actually still considering GR.
Furthermore, the recovery of semiclassical space or spacetime is turning
out to be difficult.

The canonical approaches are based on the idea that quantizing GR alone
is possible. Then matter can be ‘added on’ [ 25 , 357 ] . This is a
counterpoint to the stringy unification below. Indeed, for all we
experimentally know, nature might hinge on specifically 4-d,
non-unified, non-supersymmetric properties. Gravitation might play a
distinguished role not through unification but as a universal regulator
[ 20 , 357 ] .

3.3.3 Minisuperspace quantum cosmology and other toys

Minisuperspace (I.2.7.1) was conceived in the late 1960’s by Misner [
273 ] as a toy quantum cosmology. It is however a gross truncation,
amounting to entirely suppressing the momentum constraint, leading to
finite-dimensionality, and thus neglecting most of GR’s technical
Problems. It is not even a self-consistent truncation [ 240 ] in that
the Taub model behaves differently from the Bianchi IX model that
contains it! And such truncations are not QM solutions since the
uncertainty principle is disregarded in switching off inhomogeneous
modes. I use Minisuperspace as a preliminary testing ground. If a
supposedly general statement fails to be true even for Minisuperspace…
(see V.1, VI.1.3).

Quantum cosmology was revived in the 1980’s [ 174 , 170 , 362 ] . More
realistic Midisuperspace models (simple infinite-d models) such as with
Einstein–Rosen and Gowdy models (see e.g [ 226 , 163 ] ) have been
studied. Recently, Bojowald [ 56 ] has begun to investigate
Minisuperspace quantum cosmology arising from quantum spin dynamics. As
this is a full quantum theory, such truncations then actually do make
quantum-mechanical sense; a discrete singularity-free picture is
beginning to emerge.

Minisuperspace is but one of many toys used to speculate about the
behaviour of full GR. Other toys include parameterized fields [ 113 ,
231 , 232 ] , relativistic particles in curved spacetime [ 169 ]
anharmonic oscillators [ 327 , 25 ] , perturbations away from
homogeneous models [ 172 ] , 2+1 GR [ 76 ] , 1+1 dilaton-gravity , and
strings instead of 3-geometries [ 242 , 223 ] . See II, III and VIII for
more theories which may be regarded as providing toys (some of which are
new): strong-coupled gravities, Barbour–Bertotti-type particle models,
and privileged-slicing conformal theories. Different toys are required
to uncover different aspects of full quantum GR, whilst it should be
borne in mind that no particular toy works well. Indeed extrapolation
from toys is dangerous since many proposals that are tractable for a toy
are specifically tied to non-generalizable features of that toy.

3.3.4 The covariant approach and unification

The idea is to split the metric into background (usually Minkowski) and
small perturbation pieces: @xmath . This clearly has spacetime and
fixed-background connotations. One then tries to treat this as a QFT for
a ‘spin-2 graviton’ @xmath , which has particle physics scattering
connotations. This suffers from nonrenormalizability. One way around
this is to alter the gravitational theory! For example, in
higher-derivative theory, renormalizability can be obtained but only at
the price of nonunitarity [ 342 ] .

Because the subject has moved on from here to be considered alongside
unification, it is appropriate to first consider the unificatory input.
It has been suggested in particle physics to try to use in place of
SU(3) @xmath SU(2) @xmath U(1) a single Grand Unified Theory (GUT) gauge
group e.g SU(5) or SO(10). One has then less free parameters, e.g just
one fundamental coupling constant, as well as predictiveness through
novel (but to date unverified) particle processes such as proton decay.
Good convergence of the coupling constants, the hierarchy Problem
(explanation of why the GUT scale of convergence is so much greater than
the electroweak scale), and superior renormalization, may be obtained by
supersymmetry . This is the hypothesis that each observed bosonic and
fermionic species has respectively a fermionic or bosonic superpartner
species. Although none of these have ever been seen, if the hierarchy
Problem is to be resolved in this way, the forthcoming generation of
particle accelerators are predicted to see superparticles. Supersymmetry
may be incorporated by passing to a minimally supersymmetric standard
model, or by considering supersymmetric GUT’s.

Now, local supersymmetry is one route ⁴⁹ ⁴⁹ 49 The analogue of the
Fierz–Pauli route to GR. to supergravity [ 144 ] . This includes a
massless spin-2 field identified as gravity, and 11-d is picked out by
uniqueness arguments giving a single set of (super)particle multiplets.
One then has the Problem of accounting for the apparent 4-d world.
However, the old compactification idea of Kaluza--Klein theory ⁵⁰ ⁵⁰ 50
This is a unification of electromagnetism and gravity by means of a 5-d
geometry with one Planckian-radius cylindrical dimension. It is
considered to be a failure at the quantum level because of the particle
mode excitations being of Planck energy and thus not realistic
particles! Witten [ 383 ] suggested a larger Kaluza–Klein theory to
accommodate strong and weak forces also; this can be done in 11-d, with
more complicated compact topology than cylindrical, to reflect the
standard model gauge group. whereby unwanted dimensions are currently
unprobed through being curled up small, was then revived as a possible
reconciliation. For a long time supergravity was believed to be
renormalizable, but unfortunately this fails at higher orders [ 52 ] .

However, the failed string theory of the strong force was investigated
in a new light, and the closed string spectrum was found to include ⁵¹
⁵¹ 51 Alongside this, it contains a non-minimally coupled scalar dilaton
and an antisymmetric form-field. Gauge fields are to be included on the
ends of open strings. a massless spin-2 field, which was then
conjectured to be the graviton, leading to a background-dependent, 26-d
theory free of renormalization, anomaly and unitarity difficulties [ 165
] . Another use of supersymmetry was then found to cure its tachyon
Problem, trading the 26-d for the 10-d of superstring theory. But this
was found to be nonunique (five string theories were found), and
although perturbatively finite order-by-order, the sum of the orders
nevertheless diverged. 11-d M-theory [ 385 , 359 ] comprises relations (
dualities ) between the small and the large, the weakly-coupled and the
strongly coupled, thereby connecting the five string theories and
supergravity. It is intended to be nonperturbative. It does not as yet
exist as a theory. Another aspect of modern string/M theory is the
inclusion of extended objects with more dimensions than strings: (mem)
branes [ 300 ] .

Here are some simple stringy regimes. Lovelock gravity (p 65) arises as
a correction to GR, a Born--Infeld theory ⁵² ⁵² 52 The general
Born–Infeld Lagrangian density is @xmath , whereas the stringy case is
the specific form @xmath . arises as a correction to Einstein–Maxwell
theory. To attempt particle phenomenology, traditionally the extra
dimensions are compactified, typically into a Calabi–Yau space. The
Hořava–Witten model [ 188 ] has large extra dimensions of AdS (anti de
Sitter) form; there are analogous braneworld toy models of this form
discussed in Part B.

One concern is that string theoretic phenomenology suffers from severe
nonuniqueness -- there are very many ways of hiding the extra dimensions
⁵³ ⁵³ 53 Although neglected, one way out would be to have alternative
4-d string theories (e.g [ 141 ] or maybe using Liouville strings). (e.g
types of Calabi–Yau space, or of embeddings with large extra
dimensions), and the corresponding split-up of matter fields (including
gauge group breaking) can also be done in many ways. Thus one obtains
actions with many scalar fields, along with @xmath -form fields. Another
concern is whether some of the model actions are unlikely to reflect
truly string-theoretic properties (also discussed in Part B).

A The 3-space approach

II Answering Wheeler’s question

“If one did not know the Einstein–Hamilton–Jacobi equation, how might
one hope to derive it straight off from plausible first principles
without ever going through the formulation of the Einstein field
equations themselves?” John Archibald Wheeler [ 377 ]

The GR Einstein–Hamilton–Jacobi equation is made by substituting @xmath
into the Hamiltonian constraint @xmath . This is a supplementary
constraint equation ( 56 ) rather than a Hamilton–Jacobi equation ( 55 )
per se. ⁵⁴ ⁵⁴ 54 It would become a Hamilton–Jacobi equation however were
it reformulated in terms of an internal time.

Thus the first stage of answering the question above involves finding a
derivation of the GR form of the Hamiltonian constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the DeWitt supermetric. ADM got this form precisely by
starting off with the 4-d EFE’s and performing their 3 + 1 split
followed by the passage to the Hamiltonian (third route). Wheeler’s
question is about not only the reverse of ADM’s work (fourth route), but
also about whether first principles can be found upon which this is to
rest. Because Wheeler listed six routes, Hojman, Kuchař and Teitelboim
(HKT) called their derivation from deformation algebra first principles
the seventh route . I take “seventh route” to mean any route which leads
to geometrodynamics regained from first principles.

In addition to the HKT approach (II.1), there is now also a different
3-space approach (TSA) started by Barbour, Foster and Ó Murchadha (BFÓ)
(II.2), ⁵⁵ ⁵⁵ 55 N.B I distinguish between TSA the program name and BFÓ
the first attempt. HKT is a consolidation; I hope to extract and publish
a consolidation of the TSA from this thesis [ 10 ] . which entails a
distinct ontology (see II.3). In brief, HKT presuppose spacetime whereas
BFÓ presuppose space alone.

1 Hojman, Kuchař and Teitelboim’s answer

The constraints @xmath and @xmath of GR close as the Dirac Algebra ⁵⁶ ⁵⁶
56 This was already presented in a smeared way as ( 193 – 195 ).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (287)
  -- -------- -- -------

This was originally derived by Dirac for slices in Minkowski spacetime [
110 ] and then DeWitt [ 107 ] established by brute force that it holds
for general spacetimes. Then Teitelboim [ 350 ] showed that the Dirac
Algebra may be geometrically interpreted as the embeddability condition.
⁵⁷ ⁵⁷ 57 Equivalently one can talk of the evolution of the 3-geometry
being path-independent (in Superspace), also known as foliation
invariance.

The HKT idea [ 187 ] is to consider the algebra of deformations of a
spacelike hypersurface,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (288)
     @xmath      (289)
     @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -- -------

as primary i.e as their plausible first principles. @xmath is a pure
deformation (see fig 8), whereas @xmath is a stretching within the
hypersurface itself. In doing so, HKT are following Wheeler’s advice of
presupposing embeddability into spacetime in order to answer his
question, since HKT’s first principles encapsulate embeddability. HKT
next demand the ‘representation postulate’: that the @xmath , @xmath for
a prospective gravitational theory close as the @xmath , @xmath do (i.e
as the mathematical structure commonly known as the Dirac Algebra, but
now regarded as emerging as the deformation algebra).

Their derivation spanned several years and a number of half-way-stage
papers [ 185 , 229 , 186 ] , in which various other assumptions were
removed. The further time-reversal assumption of [ 187 ] was removed in
[ 228 ] .

The form of @xmath essentially follows from it being a tangential
deformation within each hypersurface, so one is quickly down to
Wheeler’s question about @xmath alone. From deformational first
principles,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (291)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which it follows that any representation of @xmath must be
ultralocal in @xmath . From deformational first principles, (289) holds
which implies @xmath is a scalar density of weight 1. One can also
deduce the form of ( 290 ) from deformational first principles. From
this it follows by use of induction that @xmath is quadratic in @xmath
and also, in addition using Lovelock’s theorem ⁵⁸ ⁵⁸ 58 Thus the result
is dimension-dependent. Just as the Einstein–Hilbert action is a
topological invariant in dimension @xmath but leads to nontrivial
theories for @xmath , the Gauss–Bonnet topological invariant in
dimension @xmath may be used as a nontrivial action for @xmath , and
this sequence continues for all higher odd dimensions. The gravity
resulting from any linear combination of these actions obeys the same
simplicities as GR. Thus for @xmath there are Lovelock gravities other
than GR. Teitelboim and Zanelli have shown that Lovelock gravity’s
constraints also close as the Dirac Algebra [ 354 ] . , that the
potential is @xmath for @xmath (it works equally well for @xmath but one
is then presupposing embeddability into a Euclidean signature geometry).
I emphasize that these proofs follow from the elements of spacetime
structure present in the mathematics of the deformation algebra. I
discuss an unsatisfactory residual assumption associated with these
proofs in VI.1.5.

Recollect that since the hope of pure geometrodynamics being by itself a
total unified theory along the lines of RMW theory has largely been
abandoned, asking about the form of @xmath translates to asking about
the form of @xmath which includes all the known fundamental matter
fields, @xmath . So given any seventh route to relativity from some
first principles, one can assess whether these first principles are
truly plausible by seeing if some form of them naturally extends to
permit a route to relativity with all the known fundamental matter
fields ‘added on’. For HKT, the representation postulate idea extends
additively (at least naïvely) to matter contributions to @xmath and
@xmath . In this way Teitelboim [ 352 ] included electromagnetism and
Yang–Mills theory. One must note however the absence of spin- @xmath
fields from this list [ 375 ] , without which the HKT seventh route is
not yet satisfactory by our criterion.

Kouletsis [ 222 ] has recently worked on a variation on HKT’s work
(related to the generally-covariant histories formalism) which makes
additional explicit use of spacetime structure so as to clarify the
spacetime origin of HKT’s postulates. In this thesis, I do the opposite:
rather than introducing yet more spacetime structure than HKT, I attempt
to use less, along the lines of the next section.

2 Barbour, Foster and Ó Murchadha’s answer:

the 3-Space approach (TSA)

Barbour, Foster and Ó Murchadha (BFÓ) [ 39 ] require mere closure in
place of closure as the Dirac Algebra. Whereas HKT’s requirement that
the Dirac Algebra be reproduced imports the embeddability into 4-d
spacetime, BFÓ have been able to show that this is largely unnecessary.
⁵⁹ ⁵⁹ 59 In this section, this means unnecessary for the purpose of
retrieving vacuum GR. Matter is considered in later chapters. For they
were able to derive GR from @xmath -d principles alone, by use of
Dirac’s generalized Hamiltonian dynamics to exhaustively provide a
highly restrictive scheme (see [ 11 ] or I.1.2.3). Thus the two answers
advocate distinct ontologies: HKT assume the structure of 4-d spacetime
(implicitly within the embeddability assumption rather than explicitly),
whereas BFÓ adopt a TSA i.e they assume the structure of space alone.

I begin by considering the ‘Relativity without Relativity’ (RWR) paper
in which BFÓ, starting from their 3-space point of view, obtained new
insights into the origin of both special and general relativity.
Furthermore, when matter is ‘added on’, the null cone structure and the
Abelian gauge theory of electromagnetism are enforced and share a common
origin. The TSA also gives rise to new theories of evolving
3-geometries: strong gravity theories, and conformal gravity theories.

My first four contributions to this TSA program are: first the
tightening of RWR in this section based on [ 11 , 6 , 7 ] and additional
original work, thus making the pure gravity TSA more complete and
correct. Second, the discovery and investigation of alternative strong
and conformal theories of evolving 3-geometries (III and V). Third, the
inclusion of fundamental physical fields (IV), extending RWR to the case
of many interacting 1-form fields in which case Yang–Mills theory is
recovered, observing how matter couples to strong gravity, and
demonstrating that the viability of conformal gravity is not threatened
by preclusion of well-established fundamental bosonic fields. I adopt a
systematic approach in which it suffices to treat the matter terms
piecemeal and independently of the gravitational working, thanks to
working at the level of the general matter ELE. All cases of interest
can then be quickly retrieved from this working. Fourth, I criticize the
TSA as conceived in RWR (VI). This is necessary for practical reasons
and for including spin- @xmath fermion fields. Then I provide a new
interpretation of the TSA which may be viewed from within Kuchař’s
‘split spacetime framework’ (SSF) (or hypersurface framework) [ 230 ,
231 , 232 , 233 ] , which furthermore permits a quick diagnostic for
what can be easily put into a sufficiently broad-minded TSA formulation
to replace RWR. Thus it is demonstrated that there is a TSA formulation
which permits the inclusion of spin- @xmath fermions and indeed of a set
of fundamental matter fields rich enough to contain the Standard Model,
i.e the simplest collection of matter fields that suffices to agree with
observations, at a classical level.

More recent contributions of mine to the TSA program, on the relation to
the relativity principle and to the equivalence principle and the
accommodation of massive 1-form fields, appear in V and VII. III is
partly driven by preliminaries to quantization, which are revisited in
the quantum TSA chapter VIII.

2.1 The Barbour–Bertotti 1982 theory and best matching

2.1.1 Machian point-particle theories

I discuss here the origin of the ideas behind the TSA. As these date
back to the inception of Newtonian physics, it is appropriate to begin
by considering them in the context of particle mechanics. The ideas are
relational as opposed to absolute. They are rooted in Leibniz’ [ 250 ]
‘identity of indiscernibles’ and were subsequently considered by Bishop
Berkeley [ 51 ] and Mach [ 266 ] . Whereas the ideas are sound, it
counted heavily against them that nobody was able to construct any
theories which implemented them. However, Barbour and Bertotti found two
such point particle theories [ 37 , 38 ] (BB77 and BB82). Whereas BB77
has experimental problems, BB82 does not, and its best matching
framework may furthermore be used to formulate gauge theories and
theories of 3-geometries (i.e of gravitation from a geometrodynamical
viewpoint). As Kuchař pointed out [ 234 ] , the 3-geometry case of the
BB82 model pretty much gives GR in what is more or less identifiable
with the BSW formulation and with a close analogue of the Jacobi
principle. So it gives a means of showing from a certain perspective
that the direct implementation of Machian principles leads to the
entirely orthodox gravitational physics of GR! However, Barbour and
Bertotti perceived this as a disappointment, causing the program to
stall for many years. But in fact they had stopped just short of a large
set of interesting results in traditional-variable geometrodynamics.

The Machian ideas for point-particle theories are

R1 In particle dynamics, only the relative distances between the
particles are physically-relevant.

R2 Time is nothing but an arbitrary monotonic parameter @xmath used to
label the sequence of relative configurations that the universe passes
through.

Note that some relationalists only consider the first demand. Temporal
relationalism was emphasized alongside spatial relationalism by Mach [
266 ] . As we shall see below, the common supposition that distant
masses govern local inertia (c.f the motivation behind Brans–Dicke
theory [ 59 ] , or arguments that in some sense GR possesses non-Machian
solutions) only sometimes arises from our adopted starting point: for
particles it happens in the BB77 implementation, but not in the BB82
one.

Thus mathematically, given @xmath particles indexed by @xmath whose
positions are described by @xmath , spatiotemporal relationalists should
demand actions that are invariant under the

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (292)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -- -------

The transformations ( 292 ), which would suffice for purely spatial
relationalists, form the Euclidean group Eucl i.e the kinematic group of
Euclidean space [ 120 ] . To be more precise, I take Eucl to comprise
the group of small isometries of Euclidean space. Note that it is from
Eucl that the notions of distance and angle derive, which are the
building-blocks for the relations.

Invariance under these transformations is termed the kinematical
principle of relativity [ 372 ] , which is notably different from the
dynamical principle of relativity [invariance under the transformations
( 34 ) of the Galileo group]. Newton’s point of view on the mismatch
between the invariances ( 292 ) of the interactions and ( 34 ) of the
inertial forces was that it proves the existence of the absolute
structures that he postulated [ 281 ] . However, Mach conjectured that a
completely relational physics of the whole universe could give effective
local physics that is invariant under ( 34 ) alone. Ehlers [ 120 ]
claimed that Leibnizian spacetime has insufficient structure ⁶⁰ ⁶⁰ 60
Lange [ 248 ] and Cartan [ 81 ] spacetimes have more structure. The
former was not constructive in that no specific physical laws fitting
the description of such a spacetime were postulated. The latter has
Newtonian mechanics merged with Newtonian gravity: as in GR, the
gravitation provides the inertial frames. . However this is not correct
according to one interpretation, since Barbour and Bertotti then
provided a satisfactory Leibnizian theory.

The transformation ( 293 ) adjoined to ( 292 ) expresses the
reparameterization invariance (RI) of the time label, in other words the
absence of a meaningful absolute time. The origin of Barbour’s claim [
31 , 35 ] that the laws of physics are timeless is that they appear to
be expressible in terms of only relative times, the content of which is
nothing but relative

distances. This may be illustrated as follows. The RI Jacobi principle
of Newtonian mechanics gives the shape of the dynamical orbit of the
whole system, but if one is considering the universe as a whole, then
none of the physically-relevant observers (i.e those internal to the
system since by definition there is nothing external to the system)
could notice any difference at all if the rates of all motions in the
universe were to simultaneously double. For example, if one considers
the solar system (neglecting for the moment planet-planet perturbations)
as a simple whole universe model, the answer to Jacobi’s principle is
then several confocal ellipses when represented in @xmath . Now, an
internal observer may indeed allot a rate at which one of these ellipses
is traversed, and use it to calibrate the rate at which the other
ellipses are traversed. Thus the relative rate at which planets orbit
the sun remains a meaningful concept. This amounts to using the motion
of one planet as an internal clock with respect to which the motions of
the other planets are measured. However, because we are interpreting
this as a whole universe model, by definition there exists no clock
external to the system with respect to which the motion of the
planet-clock itself can be calibrated. So it would make no difference to
the study of the system if another internal observer chose to study the
system by allotting a different rate to the planet-clock. Note also how
such use of a part of the motion as an internal clock is of limited
accuracy. Planet-planet perturbations are not negligible, so one must
consider increasingly more extended configurations of planets in the
quest for accuracy, until all the planets are included. The only
arbitrarily precise clock in the universe is the universe itself.

The meaninglessness of performing translations and rotations on the
whole @xmath -particle universe is captured by working not on the (3
@xmath )-d configuration space @xmath of the @xmath but rather on the (3
@xmath – 6)-d ( @xmath ) quotient space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (294)
  -- -------- -- -------

The BB77 model [ 37 ] is an attempt to work directly on this space,
using the following implementations.

RI[R2] A Jacobi-type action is considered (to have manifest RI), and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (295)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is in fact an often-rediscovered theory, first found by Reissner [
311 ] and then by Schrödinger [ 328 ] , albeit BB77 obtained it on
slightly different premises (spatiotemporal rather than purely spatial
relationalism). This theory is interesting e.g Schrödinger showed how it
explains the perihelion precession of Mercury as well as GR does, and
Barbour–Bertotti showed that it yields a new cosmology. And it relates
local inertia to distant masses; however mass anisotropy arises thus,
which is experimentally unacceptable to very high precision (5 parts in
@xmath ) [ 191 , 115 ] .

In the BB82 model, they use

BM[R1] work indirectly on the RCS by considering the correction of the
‘bare’ velocities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (296)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the ḵ and $̱\Omega$ are auxiliary variables associated with the
action on @xmath of the generators of the translations and the
rotations. This corresponds to keeping one configuration fixed and
shuffling a second other one around by means of translations and
rotations as a means of casting the second configuration into as similar
a form as possible to the first configuration. This procedure is called
best matching (BM) . The corrections are Lie derivatives

corresponding to draggings in the unphysical directions. Thus indeed no
additional structure is used in this construction.

They furthermore use the implementation RI[R2] , thus considering
actions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (297)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (298)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, the presence of a square root means that the Lagrangian is
homogeneous of degree @xmath in the velocities. It is this homogeneity
property that guarantees the RI and furthermore implies that the theory
must satisfy at least one primary constraint as an identity by the
following argument of Dirac’s [ 113 ] . The canonical momenta must be
homogeneous of degree @xmath . Thus they are functions of ratios of
velocities alone, but there are only @xmath of these, so that there is
at least one relation between the @xmath momenta. I now show how this
occurs in the above type of action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the square root form gives rise to one primary constraint by
“Pythagoras’ theorem”:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -- -------

Varying with respect to the auxiliaries ḵ and $̱\Omega$ respectively, one
obtains that the total momentum and angular momentum of the whole @xmath
-particle universe must be zero,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (300)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (301)
  -- -------- -- -------

so, by coupling ( 298 ) and ( 301 ), if one picks the unique
distinguished choice of label time such that @xmath , one recovers
Newton’s second Law ( 33 ). This choice corresponds to the total energy
of the universe also being zero. So both the BM[R1] and RI[R2]
implementations lead to constraints. These happen to be preserved by the
evolution equations provided that the potential is a function of the
relative separations alone.

I consider it useful to view the above in other ways. I show here that
the above auxiliaries are in fact not Lagrange multipliers but
velocities associated with cyclic coordinates. This necessitates a more
careful account of how the variation is to be done. It also means then
the kinetic term truly remains homogeneous of degree 2 in its velocities
upon Eucl-BM, thus indeed not compromising the RI of the action.

I start with the implementation AF[R1] : I write down my actions in the
appropriate

arbitrary frame. ⁶¹ ⁶¹ 61 I have since seen that Lynden-Bell also
thought along these lines [ 262 ] . This in my opinion ought to underly
BM: the BM auxiliaries are velocities associated with the transformation
between the stacked and arbitrary frames . Variation with respect to
these auxiliaries then ensures that this choice of frame does not affect
the physics (this is again an indirect implementation of R1 ).

For particle mechanics, writing down the action in an arbitrary frame
requires use of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (302)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath the frame basis and @xmath the components of the @xmath th
particle with respect to it, and for @xmath the coordinate
transformations of Eucl and where the arrow indicates group action
(which happens to be on the underline since the action on the basis
@xmath index and the component @xmath -index are opposite and cancel
out).

The potential should then be built to be Eucl-invariant from the start.
Dealing with the kinetic term is trickier since @xmath is not even
Eucl-covariant, due to the involvement of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (303)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus use of an arbitrary frame in building the action amounts to passing
from the bare stacked velocity to the unstacked, BM velocity @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath . This amounts to bringing in Eucl-generators which
infinitesimally drag in all unphysical directions (corresponding here to
the translationary and rotationary status of the whole universe).

That one is treating each auxiliary not as a Lagrange multiplier @xmath
but as velocity @xmath corresponding to a cyclic coordinate @xmath is a
justifiable choice, by use of the following equivalent free endpoint
variation with respect to @xmath . Starting from the standard expression
( 40 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first step uses ( 43 ) since @xmath is cyclic, and noting that
@xmath no longer vanishes at the endpoints @xmath and @xmath , and the
second step uses the endpoint condition to fix the value of the constant
@xmath .

I also note that RI Lagrangian Eucl-BM correction corresponds precisely
to the Hamiltonian Dirac-appending of constraints according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (304)
  -- -------- -- -------

(presented in the T homogeneous quadratic in the @xmath case), where the
first three steps form a Legendre transform and the fourth step is the
passage to the Jacobi form.

2.1.2 General best-matched reparameterization-invariant schemes

Consider a collection Q of objects @xmath which are functions of
position on some manifold and of label time @xmath . Suppose there is a
continuous group @xmath of small motions that have been

declared to be irrelevant to the physics of the objects. This could
include both the isometry (or kinematic) group of space and internal
symmetries of the objects themselves. Then the extension of the above
Machian scheme is to demand

general R1 that the action be invariant under @xmath -transformations,
and

R2 be unaffected by any overall choice of time for the whole universe.

The first of these is implemented as follows.

BM[general R1] would involve working not on the configuration space
@xmath but rather

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (305)
  -- -------- -- -------

by the indirect means of correcting the bare velocities with auxiliaries
corresponding to the freedom of moving in the G-directions. Thus one
passes to the ‘doubly degenerate’ @xmath but then the constraints
corresponding to variation with respect to the auxiliaries ensures that
@xmath is physically irrelevant.

I take this implementation to be built on an underlying implementation

AF[general R1] : the action is to be written in an arbitrary @xmath
-frame and so in terms of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (306)
  -- -------- -- -------

where greeks are manifold-multi-indices, Greeks are internal or
field-type multi-indices, @xmath is the obvious product of frame bases
with respect to which the A -th object has components @xmath , and
@xmath are the coordinate transformations of @xmath corresponding to
generators associated with the auxiliary variables @xmath , From this it
follows that the auxiliaries involved are @xmath -frame velocities.

The second is implemented as

RI[R2] : the use of manifestly RI actions (of the usual Jacobi type or
some suitable generalization homogeneously linear in the velocities).

According to AF[general R1] , the potential should then be built to be
@xmath -invariant, to which end it is useful if a collection of @xmath
-invariant or @xmath -covariant objects are known. Such @xmath
-concomitants are available for all the examples in this chapter (but
not in III.2). The kinetic term is trickier since @xmath is not even
@xmath -covariant due to the involvement of the frame

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (307)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus use of an arbitrary @xmath -frame in building the action amounts to
passing from the bare stacked velocity to the unstacked, BM velocity
@xmath Thus one has brought in generators which infinitesimally drag in
all unphysical directions. This corresponds to keeping one configuration
fixed and shuffling a second one around by means of the
physically-irrelevant symmetries of the collection of objects as a means
of casting the second configuration into as similar a form as possible
to the first configuration.

Variation with respect to each @xmath gives one secondary constraint.
For homogeneous quadratic actions, these are linear in the momenta. If
these are satisfied, one has successfully passed from @xmath to @xmath .
By Dirac’s argument there still remains at least 1 primary constraint
due to R2 . There may also be additional secondary constraints from
applying the Dirac procedure to the constraints.

This procedure may be interpreted as in the previous section with the
@xmath as auxiliary velocities corresponding to cyclic coordinates, T
indeed remains RI. The interconversion with Hamiltonian Dirac-appending
continues to hold, at least while the appended terms are linear in the
appending Lagrange multipliers.

Whereas mechanics is not usually considered in the above RCS fashion
(which reconciles Newtonian mechanics with Leibniz’s ideas at a small
global cost), it so happens that conventional electromagnetism and GR
can be thought of as working along these lines. I discuss these in
greater depth in App II.B (generalized to the Yang–Mills case) and in
II.2.2 respectively.

2.2 Relativity without relativity

2.2.1 Local square roots

The configuration space is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (308)
  -- -------- -- -------

though this is only part of the way to wards isolating a representation
of the true dynamical d.o.f’s of GR (the Hamiltonian constraint remains
and is problematic).

This is to be implemented indirectly by BM with respect to the
3-diffeomorphisms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (309)
  -- -------- -- -------

So for any two 3-metrics on 3-geometries @xmath , @xmath , this
corresponds to keeping the coordinates of @xmath fixed whilst shuffling
around those of @xmath until they are as ‘close’ as possible to those of
@xmath .

The new ingredient in the RWR paper is to implement the lack of external
time by using a RI action with a local square root ordering . For
particle mechanics, this would mean using @xmath rather than the global
square root ordering @xmath . If one has a field theory in place of a
finite number of particles, the sums are replaced by integrals. For
gravitation, BFÓ thus consider BSW-type actions , taken to be of form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (310)
  -- -------- -- -------

as opposed to BB82’s global square root actions. ⁶² ⁶² 62 Following [
234 ] , mention of BSW was included in BB82 but such local square roots
were not studied until BFÓ’s paper. Although the square root is local in
that it sits inside the integral over all space, there is also a ‘little
sum’ over the indices hidden within the kinetic term T in ( 310 ).

The global analogue of GR (the original BB82 geometrodynamics), has the
action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (311)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose global square root then gives one constraint only rather than the
one constraint per space point of GR. Note that this global alternative
would arise from the ADM Lagrangian by the BSW procedure were one to
assume @xmath is independent of @xmath .

Note that the suggestion in II.2.1.1 about treating auxiliaries may be
applied in GR to @xmath : to have an action that is homogeneous of
degree 1 in the velocities and hence reparameterization invariant, we
can treat it as an auxiliary velocity to which free end-point variation
is applied.

One of Barbour’s conceptual ideas behind the TSA is that such RI actions
could be considered as geodesic principles on configuration space: the
reduction of the physical problem of motion to the geometrical problem
of finding the geodesics of the configuration space geometry. This
followed from the insight of homogeneous-quadratic Newtonian mechanics,
for which use of Jacobi’s principle reduces the problem of motion to a
problem (conformal to) the well-defined, well-studied problem of finding
the geodesics of the Riemannian configuration space geometry. But I dash
his original hope that something similar would happen in GR in VI.1.

The BSW formulation of GR and the Jacobi formulation of mechanics are
similar in that in each case the presence of a square root means that
the Lagrangian is homogeneous of degree @xmath in the velocities. Thus
primary constraints exist by Dirac’s argument; specifically here the
square roots give rise to primary constraints by ‘some version or other
of Pythagoras’.

The standard (global square root) Jacobi case is just the usual bare
version of the previous section. The global square root gives 1
constraint @xmath in total and then ELE’s imply that @xmath . Also for
the choice of @xmath such that T = E – V holds, the bare version of (
301 ) reduces to the form of Newton’s Second Law. This special @xmath
has the same properties as Newton’s absolute time. If there is no
external time, then E = T + V is to be interpreted not as energy
conservation but as an emergent definition of Newtonian time.

In contrast, local square roots give many primary constraints: one per
object summed over (1 per space point in the continuum case). Typically
applying the Dirac procedure to many primary constraints will give many
more secondary constraints which use up all the d.o.f’s. This
overconstraining due to the local square root led BFÓ to call it the
‘bad’ ordering and the global square root the ‘good’ ordering.

The local square root homogeneous quadratic mechanics in which each
particle has its

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (312)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (313)
  -- -------- -- -------

per particle, which then gives a tower of constraints rendering the
theory inconsistent by using up all the d.o.f’s. A simple special case
avoiding this can however be found by inspection of the primary
constraint ( 313 ): the noninteracting case in which each particle moves
in its own potential alone.

In the case of the BSW Lagrangian one obtains an infinity of primary
constraints: 1 per space point. As we show below however, despite GR
having the bad ordering, it turns out not to be overconstrained.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (315)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (316)
  -- -------- -- -------

the inverse of the DeWitt supermetric, and where I am now regarding it
as an action constructed to meet appropriate relational demands general
R1 and R2 , as emphasized by making use of @xmath for the relational
auxiliary, and @xmath for the emergent lapse to distinguish these from
the presupposed spacetime notions of shift and lapse, @xmath and @xmath
. I will also regard @xmath as some @xmath , where @xmath are the
coordinates and I am building an @xmath -invariant action; care

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (317)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (318)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . At each space point

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (319)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -- -------

In addition, @xmath -variation (treated as a Lagrange multiplier) of the
BSW action leads to the momentum constraint @xmath as a secondary
constraint. It is unsurprising that we get this since in starting with a
3-space ontology we are allowed to provide the BM correction with
respect to 3-diffeomorphisms. Thus we get the momentum constraint quite
on purpose. Note also that ( 320 ) may be identified as the Hamiltonian
constraint of GR, @xmath . Whereas the action ( 314 ) is associated with
curves on the space Riem @xmath @xmath , where @xmath is the space of
the @xmath , if the momentum constraint can be solved as a p.d.e for
@xmath (the thin sandwich conjecture of I.2.9.1), the action will depend
only on the curve in Superspace. This follows from the constraints being
free of @xmath , and the three components of the momentum constraint
reducing the number of d.o.f’s from the 6 of Riem to the @xmath per
space point in a @xmath -geometry.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (321)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is indeed GR, for which it is well-known by the contracted Bianchi
identity ( 29 ) that both constraints propagate without further
secondary constraints arising. Furthermore, in this thesis, the momentum
constraints are automatically propagated as a further consequence of the
action being deliberately constructed to be invariant under @xmath
-dependent @xmath -diffeomorphisms .

In the present case this momentum constraint propagation takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (322)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Hamiltonian constraint propagation takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (323)
  -- -------- -- -------

(c.f I.2.6, II.1). Thus, unlike in mechanics, this system is not
over-constrained. From the 3 + 1 perspective, the reason that GR is not
over-constrained is that it possesses a hidden foliation invariance.
Whereas at first glance, one would expect the BSW action to be invariant
only with respect to the global reparameterization @xmath for @xmath a
monotonic arbitrary function of @xmath (in accord with Noether’s
theorem), in fact the action is invariant under the far more general
local transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (324)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the foliation invariance of the 3 + 1 split of GR – the hidden
symmetry associated with the Hamiltonian constraint @xmath . In contrast
mechanics has just the global @xmath invariance unless the
aforementioned restriction is applied.

2.2.2 Uniqueness of consistent BSW-type actions

We know [by virtue of the contracted Bianchi identity ( 29 )] that GR
will work as a constraint algebra. The question then is does anything
else work?

BFÓ’s idea was to postulate

BM[general R1] : the best matching rule is used to implement the 3-d
diffeomorphism invariance by correcting the bare metric velocities
@xmath . This rule will be applied in IV to the velocities corresponding
to all the matter fields @xmath as well:

@xmath so it is a universal rule. For everything in this chapter, this
can be taken to arise from the corresponding AF[general R1] .

RI[R2] : a local square root reparameterization-invariant implementation
is used. The pure gravity actions considered are of
Baierlein–Sharp–Wheeler (BSW) type with T homogeneously quadratic in the
velocities and ultralocal in the metric.

My analysis below however differs from BFÓ’s since they missed out a
number of possibilities (as explained below). My trial BSW-type action
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (326)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the inverse of the most general (invertible) ultralocal supermetric (
215 ), and without loss of generality @xmath . More general potentials
are discussed in II.2.2.5.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (327)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (328)
  -- -------- -- -------

then follows merely from the local square-root form of the Lagrangian.
In addition, @xmath -variation leads to a secondary constraint which is
the usual momentum constraint ( 84 ).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (329)
  -- -------- -- -------

The propagation of @xmath then gives [ 6 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (330)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first three terms of this are related to existing constraints and
thus vanish weakly in the sense of Dirac. However note that the last
term is not related to the existing constraints.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (331)
  -- -------- -- -------

Any of the first three factors being zero would be strong equations
restricting the form of the ansatz. The fourth factor might however lead
to new constraints and thus vanish weakly.

2.2.3 Interpretation of the consistency condition

The question posed in RWR – and answered in the affirmative – is whether
GR can be derived solely from @xmath -d arguments, that is, without any
use of arguments involving @xmath -d general covariance (spacetime
structure). The approach succeeds because of the need to propagate
@xmath acts as a powerful filter of viable theories, which are already
strongly restricted by @xmath being tied to 3-diffeomorphism invariance.
This means that one has only 2 d.o.f’s per space point to play with. The
remarkable invariance at the end of I.2.2.1 does not usually hold for
the generalization ( 325 ) of the BSW action.

We require the term ( 331 ) to vanish in order to have a consistent
theory. Unless one wishes to have a theory with a privileged slicing,
constraints must be independent of @xmath . In this case the fourth
factor requires @xmath . But this new constraint must also propagate.
This leads to a nontrivial lapse-fixing equation (LFE) which (if
soluble) gives a constant mean curvature (CMC) foliation. The LFE is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (332)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a spatial constant. Note that for @xmath this is a
nontrivial equation for the lapse @xmath . It is the standard CMC LFE (
267 ) in the GR case ( @xmath ).

So if neither @xmath nor @xmath , the DeWitt ( @xmath ) supermetric of
relativity is enforced, which is BFÓ’s ‘Relativity Without Relativity’
result. Note that the Lorentzian signature ( @xmath ) of GR does not
drop out of this working; one can just as well obtain Euclidean GR (
@xmath ) in this way. Earlier work of Giulini already noted that the
@xmath supermetric is mathematically special [ 157 ] .

But there are alternatives arising from the second, third and fourth
factors. The study of any new alternatives arising this way is motivated
by how these arise from an exhaustive route to GR. Can we overrule them
and thus arrive uniquely at GR, or do serious alternative theories
arise? In addition, these alternative theories have interesting
properties which we use to motivate their study in their own right.
These motivations are presented at the start of the treatment of each
theory in III and V.

The @xmath branch works for any @xmath . This is a generalization of
strong gravity [ 201 , 181 , 353 , 298 , 299 , 143 ] which is
strong-coupled limit of GR in the @xmath case. The other theories are
not related to GR, but are related to scalar–tensor theories; strong
gravity theories are argued to be relevant near singularities (see III.1
for all of this). The HKT program would discard the strong gravity
theories since they are not a representation of the Dirac Algebra
(although Kuchař [ 236 ] and Teitelboim [ 353 ] did elsewhere study
strong gravity). However, the strong gravity theories meet the TSA’s
immediate criteria in being dynamically consistent theories of
3-geometries.

The fourth factor of ( 331 ) leads to conformal theories [ 41 , 12 , 212
, 213 , 13 ] . These theories now have privileged slicings, which happen
to correspond to those most commonly used in the GR IVP: maximal and CMC
slices.

For example, our conformal gravity [ 41 , 12 ] has the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (333)
     @xmath      (334)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is consistent for @xmath because it circumvents the above argument
about the fourth factor by independently guaranteeing a new slicing
equation for the lapse. Despite its lack of 4-d general covariance,
conformal gravity is very similar to CWB GR in that CWB GR’s dynamical
d.o.f’s may be taken to be represented by [ 390 , 391 , 392 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (335)
  -- -------- -- -------

and conformal gravity arises by considering instead

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (336)
  -- -------- -- -------

This has an infinite number of ‘shape’ d.o.f’s whereas there is only one
volume d.o.f. Yet removing this single d.o.f changes one’s usual concept
of cosmology (see V.2), and ought to change the Problems associated with
the quantization of the theory (by permitting the use of a
positive-definite inner product and a new interpretation for @xmath ) [
12 ] . One arrives at further 3-space CS+V theories if one chooses to
work on ( 335 ) instead of ( 336 ) [ 12 , 13 ] whilst still retaining a
fundamental slicing. There are yet other conformal theories (III.2.6,
V.2.2).

I included the @xmath , rather than scaling it to 1 like BFÓ, to make
clear my recent insight into how a ‘Galilean’ branch arises for @xmath
i.e when the gravitational momenta completely vanish in the Hamiltonian
constraint. From this as well as the Lorentzian branch arising, it
becomes clear that the condition that ( 331 ) vanishes is closely
related to the choice of postulates that Einstein faced in setting up
special and general relativity. This point is best further developed in
V once matter has been introduced.

To mathematically distinguish GR from these other theories, I use

TSA GR postulate 3 : the theory does not admit privileged foliations and
has signature @xmath .

My future strategy will involve seeking to overrule the conformal
alternatives on fundamental grounds, by thought experiments or by use of
current astronomical data, which would tighten the uniqueness of GR as a
viable 3-space theory on physical grounds . If such attempts
persistently fail, these theories will become established as serious
alternatives to GR (see V.2).

2.2.4 Deducing BM from BSW alone

Ó Murchadha [ 283 ] and I [ 6 ] separately considered the possibility of
starting off with ‘bare velocities’ @xmath rather than BM ones @xmath ,
to provide a variation on the 3-space theme in which the spatial
relationalism is emergent rather than assumed. My generalized version
(including @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) works as follows. I
obtain a bare momentum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (337)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the usual Hamiltonian-type constraint ( 328 ) arises as a primary
constraint from the local square root. The temporary ELE’s read

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (338)
  -- -------- -- -------

which permit the evaluation of the propagation of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (339)
  -- -------- -- -------

For neither @xmath nor @xmath , I then obtain the secondary constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (340)
  -- -------- -- -------

But propagating this gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (341)
  -- -------- -- -------

so if constraints alone arise (rather than conditions on @xmath imposing
preferred foliations), I require @xmath and recover relativity since the
secondary constraint @xmath becomes the momentum constraint ⁶³ ⁶³ 63
That @xmath is an integrability of @xmath was already known to
Teitelboim and Moncrief [ 276 , 349 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (342)
  -- -------- -- -------

One then argues that this ‘discovered’ constraint may be ‘encoded’ into
the bare action by the introduction of an auxiliary variable @xmath . It
is then this encoding that may be thought of as the content of BM. This
is similar to how the emergent gauge-theoretic Gauss constraints are
treated in IV.1. One then re-evaluates the momenta and ELE’s, obtaining
the GR ones ( 318 ) and ( 321 ) in place of the above temporary bare
ones ( 337 ) and ( 338 ).

For @xmath or @xmath no additional constraints arise. Thus it is
possible to ‘miss out’ rather than ‘discover’ constraints by this
integrability method above (further discussed in III.1.2). Thus although
the ‘bare’ and BM schemes are equivalent for pure GR [ 283 ] , they are
not in general equivalent [ 6 ] . Another example of this is ‘bare
Barbour–Bertotti theory’ in which $̱{\calM}$ = $̱{\calL}$ = 0 are not
recovered, and hence is just Newtonian mechanics.

2.2.5 Higher derivative potentials

Using the potential P @xmath assumed in 1.2.3 amounts to applying a
temporary

TSA gravity simplicity 4 : the pure gravity action is constructed with
at most second-order derivatives in the potential, and with a
homogeneously quadratic BM kinetic term.

Furthermore, BFÓ considered potentials that are more complicated scalar
concomitants of the 3-metric @xmath than the above: P @xmath and P
@xmath (the most general fourth-order curvature correction in 3-d
because of the Gauss–Bonnet theorem). Among these the potential of GR
alone permits the Hamiltonian constraint to propagate. Also, recently, Ó
Murchadha [ 284 ] considered actions based on matrices @xmath and their
conjugates @xmath which contain all terms in the former with the use of
up to two derivatives and are ultralocal in the latter. In this bare
approach, he recovers the combination @xmath for the form of the
potential (along with the strong and conformal options), as singled out
by the propagation of the local square root constraint.

The first difficulty with the above methods is that they are not as yet
systematic order-by-order, whereas HKT were able to use induction to
dismiss all alternative potentials to all orders. Furthermore, HKT’s
proofs rest on the extra structure assumed, so similar proofs cannot be
easily envisaged for the TSA. The second difficulty is that other known
theories are in fact implicitly excluded both in BFÓ’s and in HKT’s work
(further discussed in VI.1.5 along with other difficulties). Finally,
HKT’s result is known to be dimension-dependent since Lovelock gravity
also reproduces the Dirac Algebra [ 354 ] .

2.2.6 The inclusion of matter

Just as Teitelboim [ 349 , 352 ] ‘added on’ matter so as to strengthen
HKT’s answer (see App IV.C), we have strengthened BFÓ’s answer so. Our
first works [ 39 , 11 ] appear to give some striking derivations of the
classical laws of bosonic physics. Rather than being presupposed, both
the null cone structure shared between gravitation and classical bosonic
matter theories, and gauge theory, are enforced and share a common
origin in the propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint. Thus
electromagnetism and Yang–Mills theory are picked out. Gauge theory
arises in this picture because one discovers the gauge-theoretic Gauss
constraint as a secondary constraint from the propagation of the
Hamiltonian constraint. This is then encoded by an auxiliary field which
occurs as gauge-theoretic BM corrections to the velocities.

The matter considered was subject to the

TSA matter simplicity 5 : the matter potential has at most first-order
derivatives and the kinetic term is ultralocal and homogeneous quadratic
in the velocities. Apart from the homogeneity, this parallels
Teitelboim’s main matter assumptions.

As explained in VI.2–3 there is a further tacit simplicity hidden in the
‘adding on’ of matter. This is linked to how including general matter
can alter the gravitational part of the theory. This issue is tied both
to the relationship between the TSA and the POE (see VII.2), and in my
contesting BFÓ’s speculation that the matter results “hint at partial
unification” (see VI, VII).

3 Spacetime or space?

Having built up a theoretical 3-space scheme working in turn with point
particles, gauge fields and 3-geometries, I now argue for its merit and
compare it with Einstein’s route, ADM’s formulation and HKT’s route.

I begin by elaborating on Einstein’s motivations for his route to GR and
then explain how his route neither directly implements these nor is in
accord with the dynamics-centred development of the rest of physics. The
first of these points is a relationalist’s complaint for which RWR
offers a peaceful reconciliation: the direct implementation also gives
rise to GR. The second point has become quite a tension, as explained
below.

Einstein had several goals [ 129 ] during the years that he created
special and general relativity. The first, realized in special
relativity, was to reconcile electromagnetism with the universal
validity of the restricted relativity principle RP1 . In contrast to
Lorentz [ 258 ] , who explicitly sought a constructive theory [ 125 ] to
explain the Michelson–Morley experiment and the relativity principle,
Einstein was convinced that the quantum effects discovered by Planck
invalidated such an approach [ 129 ] , p. 45. He “despaired of the
possibility of discovering the true laws by means of constructive
efforts” [ 129 ] , p. 53, and instead adopted RP1 as an axiomatic
principle [ 125 ] . Notably this reconciliation involves adopting the
physically-motivated Lorentzian RP2 in place of the
absolute-time-motivated Galilean RP2 . But whereas one has a new set of
privileged frames (SR inertial rather than Newton inertial),

1) one is still giving distinct status to configurations which are
relationally identical;

2) there is still distinct unaccounted-for status being given to a
privileged class of frames.

Einstein’s further goals were to free physics of absolute space
(‘implement Mach’s principle’, see below), and to construct a field
theory of gravitation analogous to Maxwell’s electromagnetism.
Encouraged by his treatment of RP1 as a principle to be adopted rather
than a result to be derived, Einstein generalized it to the general
relativity principle GRP , according to which the laws of nature must
take an identical form in all frames of reference. The GRP was
eventually implemented as the 4-d general covariance of a
pseudo-Riemannian dynamical spacetime.

Whereas Einstein’s route addresses 2) via the equivalence principle and
the local vanishing of the connection which is in turn influenced by
dynamical geometry that is itself influenceable, 1) is apparently
disregarded. Also, in making spacetime the arena of dynamics, Einstein
broke radically with the historical development of dynamics, in which
the configuration space and phase space had come to play ever more
dominant roles. Both of these played decisive roles in the discovery of
quantum mechanics, especially the symplectic invariance of Hamiltonian
dynamics on phase space. Since then, Hamiltonian dynamics has also
played a vital role in the emergence of modern gauge theory [ 113 ] . In
fact, spacetime and the canonical dynamical approach have now coexisted
for almost a century, often creatively but also not without tension.
This tension became especially acute when Dirac and Arnowitt, Deser and
Misner (ADM) [ 113 , 20 ] reformulated the Einstein field equations as
the constrained Hamiltonian dynamical system ( 83 , 84 , 188 , 189 )
describing the evolution of Riemannian 3-metrics @xmath Dirac was so
impressed by the simplicity of the Hamiltonian formulation that he
questioned the status of spacetime, remarking “I am inclined to believe
…that 4-d symmetry is not a fundamental property of the physical world”
[ 111 ] . Wheeler too was struck by this development [ 377 ] , and
contributed the thoughts and terminology of I.2.7.

However, the hitherto unresolved status of the one remaining redundancy
due to the Hamiltonian constraint, which can only be eliminated at the
price of breaking the spacetime covariance of GR, is probably the reason
why neither Dirac nor Wheeler subsequently made any serious attempt to
free themselves of spacetime. In particular, Wheeler rather formulated
the idea of embeddability, i.e, that Riemmanian 3-geometries always
evolve in such a way that they can be embedded in a 4-d
pseudo-Riemannian spacetime [ 377 ] , which led Hojman, Kucha @xmath and
Teitelboim [ 187 ] to their seventh route to general relativity.

Contrast this, and Einstein’s indirect approach through generalization
of RP1 to GRP , with the TSA first principles, which constructively
implement Mach’s idea of a relational dynamics! Whereas Einstein tried
to incorporate his interpretation ⁶⁴ ⁶⁴ 64 Mach’s principle was left
open to diverse and misunderstood interpretations [ 30 , 42 ] . of
Mach’s principle into GR, that interpretation and GR were found not to
be satisfactorily compatible. But CWB GR is Machian in Barbour’s (or
Wheeler’s) sense, in addition to being a spacetime theory.

The primality of spacetime or space constitute two different ontological
viewpoints. In presupposing embeddability, HKT assume the habitual
spacetime viewpoint of relativists, whereas Barbour defends the space
viewpoint. In the former, there are two presuppositions about how
3-geometries stack: spatial stacking and foliation invariance. These
presuppositions become manifest in Kuchař’s general decompositions of
spacetime objects with respect to spatial hypersurfaces (see VI.2). In
the latter, spatial stacking and RI are presupposed. One then sees that
there are alternatives to the spacetime foliation invariance
presupposition in the form of the alternative theories of III (even if
these are distasteful), and it becomes interesting to see if these can
realistically describe the universe. Not all Machian theories are
spacetime theories!

Supportive arguments for BM theories have recently been put forward by
Brown and Pooley [ 302 ] for mechanics and by Pooley [ 301 ] for
relativity. An argument against it (in mechanics) is that relationalists
have it easy when @xmath [ 119 ] . But @xmath may be argued to be a
prediction of BB82 theory: a restricted subset of Newtonian mechanics
emerges, so the BB82 theory is good in the sense of being more
restrictive and thus in principle more readily falsifiable than
Newtonian mechanics. I emphasize that within geometrodynamics the debate
ends up being “spacetime versus space” and not the full “physical
objects plus container versus objects alone” of the absolutist versus
relationalist debate. Reality is ascribed to structure, but this is to
the 3-geometry and not to space(time) points.

Before the discussion of spacetime versus space, I require the
introduction of matter (IV, VI). I then show how the space scheme works
in V.1 (including the emergence of the Relativity Principle), and how
split space-time works in VI.2. These are contrasted in VI.3. The status
of the POE in these schemes is explored in VII.2.

The two viewpoints are suggestive of how one approaches quantum gravity
and its Problem of Time (in VIII). Internal time is based on belief in
spacetime (as are formulations in terms of sum over histories,
generally-covariant histories, spin foams and causal sets), whereas not
specifically (spacetime) generally covariant canonical approaches and
Barbour’s hope in the naïve Schrödinger interpretation are space-based.
The question is then: was spacetime a historical accident in that,
because of being a very fruitful approach in classical GR and in quantum
particle physics in a Minkowskian background, we have been overly
bedazzled by spacetime and consequently misled by it in our attempts to
quantize gravity?

Barbour also put forward his classical and quantum ideas in [ 31 , 32 ]
and the popular book [ 35 ] . These have been critically discussed by
Butterfield [ 71 ] and Smolin [ 339 ] largely from a quantum mechanical,
philosophical perspective. In contrast, my criticisms in V, VI and VII
concentrate on the later technical papers, from a classical,
mathematical perspective.

App II.A : Deriving the relativity without relativity result

For the arbitrary ultralocal supermetric, one can build up the following
@xmath -free parts of results:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (343)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (344)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (345)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (346)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (347)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (348)
  -- -------- -- -------

These (along with the metric ELE) can be composed by the chain-rule to
form the propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint, and hence weakly
obtain the consistency condition 331 (which includes the RWR result),
from the last term of ( 348 ). One can similarly obtain the working for
the propagation of the momentum constraint.

The @xmath part of the Hamiltonian constraint propagation is simple once
one realizes that @xmath is simply @xmath [which could also be derived
longhand using the symmetry of @xmath , the Ricci lemma ( 11 ) and the
contracted Bianchi identity ( 29 )]. By similar techniques, the @xmath
-part of the propagation of the momentum constraint is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (349)
  -- -------- -- -------

App II.B 3-space approach and gauge theory

I go beyond BB82’s treatment in including an arbitrary gauge group G
rather than U(1), and in considering a local as well as a global
ordering. Given a configuration space that is a collection of 1-forms
@xmath (where I running over 1 to K are internal indices) which are
functions of position on @xmath and of label time @xmath , and which are
invariant under small

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (350)
  -- -------- -- -------

N.B I could also (more standardly) proceed without involving Eucl.

R2 The choice of time label is not to affect the system.

I use the indirect implementation BM[general R1] by passing to @xmath
Eucl by best matching each velocity. The electromagnetic BM is with
respect to the U(1) gauge transformations @xmath So for any two 3-d
1-form fields on a flat space, one without loss of generality keeps one
in a fixed gauge and changes the gauge of the other until the two 1-form
fields are as close as possible. Thus overall @xmath where @xmath is K
copies of a̱, and both @xmath and ḇ are independent of position on @xmath
.

I first use the global square root reparameterization-invariant
implementation RI[R2]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (351)
  -- -------- -- -------

Defining @xmath , the field momenta are @xmath Variation with respect to
the auxiliaries @xmath , @xmath and ḇ respectively yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (352)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (353)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (354)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is additionally a primary constraint from the global square root:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (355)
  -- -------- -- -------

The ELE’s are @xmath These guarantee the propagation of the constraints.
Now, it is required for the time-label

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (356)
  -- -------- -- -------

in order to recover the Yang–Mills field equations. One further does not
usually correct with respect to Eucl, but the standard form of gauge
theory precisely corresponds to G-BM .

I next consider the local square root ordering.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (357)
  -- -------- -- -------

Defining @xmath , the field momenta are now @xmath As above, variation
with respect to the auxiliary variables yields ( 352 ), ( 353 ) and (
354 ), whereas there

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (358)
  -- -------- -- -------

due to the local square root. The ELE’s are now @xmath These propagate
by standard energy–momentum conservation: @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (359)
  -- -------- -- -------

as a secondary, whose propagation involves no new constraints. It is
true that now this is locally rather than globally restrictive and thus
only gives a small fragment of conventional electromagnetism or
Yang–Mills theory. Similar thoughts play a corrective role in the
universal null cone result (see V.1). This difficulty goes away in GR
coupled to these matter fields because of the role of the momentum
constraint. Thus, GR permits more complete Machian matter field
theories. Finally, I note that the Hamiltonian constraints arise in
place of labelling conditions that ensure the recovery of the standard
form of the equations of physics. There are to be no such privileged
labellings in GR!

III: Alternative TSA theories

1 Strong gravity alternatives

“ ‘ Well, in our country’ said Alice … ‘you’d generally get to somewhere
else if you run very fast for a long time’ ” Lewis Carroll [ 78 ]

1.1 Introduction

If one adopts Einstein’s RP1 , there is then actually a third choice ⁶⁵
⁶⁵ 65 Another source of choices might be to introduce somewhat more
complicated structures such as in noncommutative geometry approaches.
(in addition to the Galilean @xmath and the Lorentzian @xmath finite):
the Carrollian RP2 [ 353 ] @xmath . Whereas in the Galilean limit the
Lorentzian light-cone becomes squashed into a plane of simultaneity due
to the infinite speed of physical signals, in the Carrollian limit the
Lorentzian light-cone becomes squeezed into a line as points become
entirely isolated due to the zero speed of physical signals (see fig 9).
Thus the Carrollian universe consists of entirely isolated worldlines.
The most common interpretation of this is as ultralocal physics (no
spatial derivatives). Klauder [ 219 , 220 ] has studied ultralocal
scalar field theory as a non-renormalizable but nevertheless
controllable quantum field theory.

Strong gravity is the regime of GR in which @xmath which may be
considered to be letting @xmath , or alternatively letting @xmath [ 353
] . This was first considered by Isham [ 201 ] so as to be a starting
point for a nonstandard perturbative theory of quantum gravity along the
lines of Klauder’s method above. There are actually two forms of strong
gravity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (360)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (361)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are thus 5 d.o.f and 2 d.o.f theories of gravity respectively. I
retain a ‘cosmological constant’ @xmath to ensure the theory is
nontrivial. Strictly, one is taking the @xmath limit while keeping
@xmath constant to arrive at these theories. Strong gravity is locally
Carroll invariant just like GR is locally Lorentz invariant.

Note how these are written in ‘split’ form. Now, strong gravity has a
degenerate metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (362)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gives an unusual geometry, as studied by Henneaux [ 181 ] . One
needs to use a weaker notion of inverse than usual, leading to only a
very limited notion of parallel transport. The extrinsic curvature
@xmath becomes merely the @xmath components of a 4-tensor @xmath rather
than being the whole of @xmath , and ( 361 ) cease to be the @xmath
components of a 4-tensor equation (the EFE’s). There does not appear to
be a clean interpretation of strong gravity as a 4-tensor theory –
spacetime structure does not appear here as it does in GR.

What use is strong gravity? It approximates GR near the cosmological
singularity, since it gives an independent Kasner universe at each
spatial point, which is the conjectured behaviour of the general
solution of GR (see I.2.7.1). Thus it is a worthwhile regime to quantize
[ 298 , 299 , 143 ] . The notion of strong gravity is related to the two
most popular approaches to quantum gravity as follows. It is analogous
to the tensionless string [ 325 , 167 , 257 , 331 , 384 ] , and it
admits an Ashtekar variable formulation [ 24 , 194 ] (see III.1.5).

In the TSA, we consider strong gravity as a dynamically-consistent
theory of evolving 3-geometries on its own merit, obtained as an
alternative to GR. My more careful analysis revealed that the 3-space
approach gives rather a 1-parameter family of strong gravity theories.
Their discovery provides a different answer to Wheeler’s question from
the uniqueness of BFÓ, in the case of the strong-coupled limit @xmath :
there is a consistent theory not only for the @xmath DeWitt supermetric
of the usual strong gravity, but also for any ultralocal invertible (
@xmath ) supermetric. Whereas the use of initially bare or initially BM
velocities in the GR case of the TSA does not affect the final form of
the emergent theory, in the strong gravity case the outcome is affected.
I furthermore discuss how they can be related (as limits relevant to the
very early universe) to the well-known scalar-tensor theories of gravity
(III.1.3), and used as toy models toward the study of conformal gravity
(III.1.4).

Like Minisuperspace, strong gravity is a GR regime amenable to
quantization. My theories provide an enlargement of this second arena,
in which different permitted ranges of values of @xmath permits
considerable mathematical differences [ 157 ] . In particular, for
@xmath one has theories with positive-definite i.p’s. The study of these
could broaden the understanding of the i.p Problem of quantum gravity
(see VIII). I furthermore discuss the possibility of the very early
universe actually having a positive-definite i.p. I then show (III.1.5)
that the Ashtekar variable formulation, of potentially great use in
quantization, is not readily available for @xmath . The strong gravities
are studied as systems of equations in III.1.6.

I also return to strong gravity in IV.1.4, where I investigate the
coupling to it of fundamental matter. This enables fruitful comparison
with matter coupling in the GR case, leading to better understanding of
some of the GR TSA results.

1.2 Strong gravity and the TSA: X is arbitrary

We are interested in finding consistent theories of evolving
3-geometries; we use the TSA

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (363)
  -- -------- -- -------

The canonical gravitational momenta are given by ( 327 ) with @xmath .

The strong gravity Hamiltonian constraint follows as a primary
constraint from the local

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (364)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath -variation yields the usual secondary momentum constraint ( 84 ).

The ELE’s are the obvious subcase of the ELE’s ( 329 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (365)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (366)
  -- -------- -- -------

which vanishes weakly in the sense of Dirac.

This corresponds to the @xmath possibility of ( 330 ), for which any
ultralocal supermetric is allowed. The theory traditionally called
strong gravity has @xmath because it is obtained as a truncation of GR.
But I have now shown that there is a family of such theories as far as
dynamical consistency is concerned. Because @xmath is badly behaved, the
family of dynamically-consistent theories naturally splits into @xmath
and @xmath subfamilies. Such @xmath theories should be simpler to
quantize than more habitual @xmath theories (including GR), because the
former have a positive-definite supermetric, removing difficulties in
defining a suitable quantum i.p. A particularly simple example of such a
dynamically-consistent theory is the @xmath theory, for which the
constraints are @xmath

@xmath may be of particular relevance, in part because conformal gravity
has been formulated in terms of the @xmath supermetric, and in part from
string-theoretic considerations (see III.1.3). Conformal gravity arises
because, in a conformal generalization of the above working, the
equivalent of the slicing equation ( 332 ) is independently guaranteed
to hold. There is also a separate strong conformal theory [ 12 ] (see
III.2.6).

Since for @xmath ( 330 ) reduces to ( 366 ), the momentum constraint may
no longer be seen to arise as an integrability condition. This fact was
already noted by Henneaux [ 181 ] . Strong gravity thus provides a
counterexample to the suggestion that all additional constraints need
arise from the propagation of @xmath . However, all the other
constraints can be interpreted as arising in this way in the standard
approach to GR (see VI.3–4): @xmath , the electromagnetic Gauss
constraint @xmath , the Yang–Mills Gauss constraint @xmath and the
‘locally Lorentz’ constraint @xmath from working in some first order
formalism.

So strong gravity without a momentum constraint is also dynamically
consistent [ 314 ] , and the new @xmath strong gravities may be treated
in this way too. In fact, it is this treatment that corresponds to
strictly taking the @xmath limit of GR (as opposed to Pilati’s approach
[ 297 ] in which the momentum constraint is kept). This is because the
GR momenta are proportional to @xmath [ 24 ] . One could also start off
with a @xmath , but use Ashtekar variables in place of the traditional
ones. In this case, the analogues of @xmath and @xmath cease to be
independent [ 24 ] .

If one starts off with ‘bare velocities’ rather than BM ones, for @xmath
one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (367)
  -- -------- -- -------

which vanishes weakly, and so no further, secondary constraints emerge,
and one has the 5-d.o.f ‘metrodynamical’ strong gravity theories.

1.3 On the meaning of the theories: application to scalar-tensor
theories

The @xmath departure from the DeWitt supermetric does not appear to
affect Henneaux’s study of the geometry. Whereas these theories are no
longer interpretable as truncations of GR, they do correspond to
truncations of scalar-tensor theories (such as Brans–Dicke theory), in a
region where the scalar field is a large constant. The relations between
the Brans–Dicke parameter @xmath and our coefficients @xmath and @xmath
are shown in fig 10. I now discuss the possibility that a
positive-definite ( @xmath i.e @xmath ) inner product can occur in our
universe. There is no point in considering Brans–Dicke theory, an action
for which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (368)
  -- -------- -- -------

since this has @xmath constant in space and time and we know from the
recent analysis of Cassini data [ 53 ] that today @xmath [ 380 ] ,
corresponding to @xmath being very slightly larger than the GR value 1.
However, general scalar-tensor theory permits @xmath so @xmath varies
with space and in particular with time. So it could be that the very
early universe had a very different value of @xmath from that around us
today, since the bounds on @xmath from nucleosynthesis [ 98 ] permit
@xmath . The bounds from [ 216 ] are less strict but presumably
applicable to a wider range of theories since the origin of the
departure from @xmath (i.e @xmath ) is there unspecified. Furthermore,
@xmath is attracted to the GR value at late times in scalar-tensor
theories [ 96 , 97 ] , so it need not have started off large. One would
expect @xmath of order unity in any fundamental scalar-tensor theory [
96 ] . For example @xmath arises in low-energy string theory [ 43 ] .

It is thus an open question whether @xmath at early times could have
passed through the value 0. This question is interesting for the
quantum-mechanical reasons given in the next paragraph. I first wish to
clarify the role of my strong gravities in such a study. They do not
permit @xmath (and hence @xmath ) to change with time, so I am not
suggesting to use these to investigate whether such a transition through
@xmath is possible. But if such transitions are found to be possible,
the very early universe could then be described by scalar-tensor
theories which have @xmath . Then one of my strong gravity theories
which behaves qualitatively differently from the usual @xmath strong
gravity corresponding to GR would be relevant as an approximation near
the initial singularity. I propose to study the possibility of having
such a transition using the full scalar-tensor theories. Unlike their
strong gravity limits discussed above, for which this transition
involves passing through a noninvertible supermetric, ⁶⁶ ⁶⁶ 66 In fact,
this @xmath supermetric is of the same form as the degenerate strong
gravity 4-metric, so the pointwise geometry of Superspace for @xmath
should be taken to be akin to Henneaux’s geometry [ 181 ] of strong
gravity spacetimes. the full scalar-tensor theories are not
badly-behaved as @xmath . This is because despite the degeneracy of the
tensor (‘gravity’) supermetric for @xmath , what counts for the full
theory is the larger scalar-tensor supermetric. Just like the GR
supermetric may be represented by a @xmath matrix, the scalar-tensor
supermetric may be represented by a @xmath matrix where the new seventh
index is due to the scalar field [ 217 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (369)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, this is well-behaved at @xmath because of its scalar-tensor
cross-terms, due to which the degeneracy of the @xmath block is not
sufficient to cause the whole @xmath scalar-tensor supermetric to be
degenerate. But in the approximation by which the theories of this
subsection arise from scalar-tensor theories the scalar momentum is
negligible, so one is then left with only the ‘gravity’ supermetric.

Thus in principle there could be different possible early universe
behaviours which admit 3 different sorts of strong gravity limits,
corresponding to indefinite, degenerate and positive-definite i.p’s.
Each of these cases has a correspondingly different kind of natural
candidate for the early-universe WDE i.p.

1.4 Application to conformal gravity

Another application of the @xmath theories follows from conformal
gravity (see III.2) being @xmath -insensitive and thus expressible in
terms of a @xmath supermetric. I will additionally show that a sequence
of theories can be formed: @xmath strong gravity, conformal strong
gravity, conformal gravity, which could permit the isolated study of
some of the novel features of classical and quantum conformal gravity
(see V.2.1.3)

In answer to whether arguments from the II.1.3 are applicable to
conformal gravity, begin by noting that there is no ‘expansion term’
@xmath in conformal gravity. Because this absence is due to @xmath being
separately variationally imposed (rather than due to @xmath occurring
for the vacuum theory), the presence of non-minimally-coupled-scalars or
the related use of conformal transformations are unable to reintroduce a
@xmath into conformal gravity. Consequently, conformal gravity cannot be
included among the ‘wider range of theories’ for which the less
stringent bounds on @xmath mentioned in 1.3 are applicable. Conformal
gravity is a theory in which @xmath plays no role at all. Presumably the
classical and quantum study of conformal gravity on Superspace with
@xmath and @xmath are equivalent once projected down to conformal
Superspace. Working out how this happens may be interesting and
instructive, at least from a theoretical point of view.

1.5 Difficulty with implementation of Ashtekar variables

This section includes theories for which the i.p Problem of quantum GR
is altered (if not ameliorated). In the case of conformal gravity, its
preferred foliation additionally represents an attempt to circumvent the
Problem of time of quantum GR. One must however recall that these
Problems of quantum gravity are always intertwined with other formidable
Problems, which include operator ordering and regularization. At least
in GR, Ashtekar variables have nice properties as regards these Problems
(I.3.3.3). scalar-tensor theories or conformal gravity admit an analogue
of Ashtekar variables. Indeed, how special is GR in admitting Ashtekar
variables with their nice properties?

In the strong-coupled limit of GR, the constraints ( 269 ), ( 270 ) and
( 271 ) become [ 57 , 194 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (370)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (371)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (372)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the cyclic property of the trace and use of ( 370 ), that ( 371 ) is
redundant as claimed in III.1.1. Furthermore, there is an equivalent
form for the remaining constraints ( 370 ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (373)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (374)
  -- -------- -- -------

(for @xmath ), which manifestly displays the dependence on the (now
overall undensitized inverse) DeWitt supermetric @xmath . I then
investigate what happens when @xmath is replaced by @xmath . Notice how
then the Hamiltonian constraint no longer contains a truncation of the
natural object @xmath of SU(2) Yang–Mills theory, in correspondence with
@xmath strong gravity not being a natural truncation of the GR
Hamiltonian constraint. The constraint algebra closes.

For full scalar-tensor theory, I do not think Ashtekar variable with
@xmath will work. One has there the option of making conformal
transformations to put scalar-tensor theory into a @xmath form, but the
conformal factor required then causes the constraints to be
non-polynomial [ 75 ] . As for conformal gravity, one could as well
write the theory with @xmath , but I see no way that conformal gravity’s
lapse-fixing equation ( 409 ) can be expressed polynomially. All these
theories’ lacks could be viewed as a ‘second RWR result’: the form of
the supermetric in @xmath is fixed to be DeWitt’s GR one if one requires
passage to Ashtekar variables with their quantization-geared neatness.

1.6 PDE problems for strong gravity theories

The 5 d.o.f version of the theories has a trivial thin sandwich
formulation, as a consequence of having no thin sandwich equation.
Beware this simple state of affairs since it is reminiscent of
Minisuperspace models. Also, it only works for the @xmath case by the
Problem of zeros corresponding to the thin sandwich approach. But within
this case there are globally no zeros, a decided improvement on the
situation in GR. The condition @xmath has the knock-on effect of forcing
@xmath from the Gauss constraint.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (375)
  -- -------- -- -------

No scalings are fixed in the ‘York IVP method’ corresponding to these
theories, because there is no Codazzi constraint to keep
conformally-invariant and the conformally-transformed Gauss equation can
contain no @xmath terms because it has no @xmath in the first place.
This latter point means that the IVP now involves no differential
equations at all: the ‘York IVP method’ is now an algebraic method. If
one declares everything to be known except the scale of the metric, one
can scale the various objects in the Gauss constraint as one pleases and
explicitly solve it algebraically for the scale. The reason for the GR
study’s restriction to CMC slicings is also absent because there is no
Codazzi constraint.

The 2 d.o.f version of the theories has a nontrivial thin sandwich
formulation. As above, the Problem of zeros becomes the mere requirement
that @xmath which is a global rather than local condition. Although many
of the counterexamples hold irrespective of @xmath and of the fixed sign
of the potential, I have reasons to suspect the proofs will turn out to
be @xmath -dependent.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (376)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, one scaling is fixed in the ‘York IVP method’, because there is a
Codazzi equation to keep conformally-invariant, but again the
conformally-transformed Gauss equation can contain no @xmath terms
because it has no @xmath . So for @xmath and @xmath scaling as in ( 233
) and ( 241 ), @xmath . According to one interpretation there should be
no @xmath and @xmath as these terms become negligible in the
strong-coupled gravity limit (this is distinct from the ‘Pilati limit’
interpretation used in IV.1.4 to illustrate other points). In this case
the full constraints have less terms in them than in GR. The resulting
IVP is not trivial: one starts off by solving a @xmath momentum
constraint. But then, in place of a Lichnerowicz–York p.d.e, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (377)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have demanded that @xmath does not scale so that it remains a
cosmological constant in the physical frame. Then for example, using the
usual but now unforced @xmath , this has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (378)
  -- -------- -- -------

The maximal case is never sustainable, since the corresponding
lapse-fixing equation is trivially only solved by frozen dynamics (
@xmath ), independently of what asymptotics the spaces have: @xmath The
CMC case is sustainable, trivially soluble and trivial in evolutionary
character:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (379)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, note thus that the conformal thin sandwich approach to strong
gravity just reduces to solving the Codazzi equation, now for the shift
@xmath rather than the vector potential @xmath .

What of the Cauchy problem for these equations? The indefinite signature
means that only derivatives with respect to label time are contained in
the evolution equations. Thus the Cauchy problem is merely that for an
o.d.e, and may be cast into the form @xmath away from the bad value
@xmath .

2 Conformal alternatives

2.1 Introduction

Recollect from II.3 that there is a tension between the spacetime and
split spacetime geometrodynamical interpretations of GR. The TSA would
add to this tension if it leads to realistic geometrodynamical theories
in which the GR structure of spacetime is not emergent. III.1 contains
toy examples of this, appropriate for extreme regimes. This section is
about attempts to build such theories which are realistic in everyday as
well as extreme regimes.

In the usual geometrodynamical interpretation of GR, the configuration
space is the extension of Riem to Riem @xmath , where @xmath is the
space of shifts @xmath and @xmath is the space of lapses @xmath (which
are positive functions). However, since @xmath and @xmath have no
conjugate momenta, the true gravitational d.o.f’s of GR are contained in
Riem. They are furthermore subjected to @xmath and @xmath . If, in the
thin-sandwich problem for geometrodynamics, one could solve @xmath in
terms of the Lagrangian variables for @xmath , then the theory would be
defined on the quotient, Superspace. However, because of @xmath ,
Superspace still contains one redundant d.o.f per space point. Then GR
is a BM RI theory whose true configuration space is contained within
Superspace. As part of this interpretation it is natural and equivalent
to regard @xmath and @xmath (which become identified with @xmath ,
@xmath ) as velocities associated with cyclic coordinates rather than as
Lagrange multiplier coordinates. Also (I.2.9.4.2), one may take the true
configuration space of CWB GR as close to being Conformal Superspace
(CS). In this section the TSA to geometrodynamics is tentatively
extended to include scale invariance. The resulting conformal gravity
theory is a BM RI theory on CS; the role of the auxiliaries being
velocities and not coordinates plays a role in deriving this from first
principles. Whereas conformal gravity, has an additional linear
constraint @xmath , the theory still has 2 d.o.f’s per space point. To
form a configuration space of CWB GR, one requires to adjoin the single
global volume of the universe to CS, thus forming a space ‘CS+V’.
Theories on CS+V will also be developed.

In III.2.2, I somewhat rework Barbour’s scale-invariant particle
dynamics model, to be used to help test out a number of conceptual and
technical issues for scale-invariant geometrodynamics. This model
requires E – V to be homogeneous of degree – 2 in the particles’
relative positions, which does not disrupt usual physics by the trick of
division by suitable powers of the moment of inertia. I begin by
treating the auxiliary @xmath responsible for scale invariance as a
coordinate. ⁶⁷ ⁶⁷ 67 Whereas for conformal gravity the first principles
derivation is conceptually helpful, it is not clear how to do this for
alternative theories considered later. This is why I also provide the
auxiliary coordinate interpretation. @xmath -variation yields a new
constraint @xmath , analogous to @xmath . I next treat the auxiliaries
as velocities and give a derivation of the scale-invariant particle
dynamics theory from BM first principles. This involves the compensatory
auxiliary field giving the action an overall ‘banal’ scale invariance,
and the use of a free-endpoint variational principle.

In III.2.3, I give a 2-auxiliary Lagrange multiplier coordinate ( @xmath
and @xmath ) formulation of conformal gravity. @xmath -variation yields
the @xmath constraint. The maintenance of this is guaranteed by the
lapse-fixing equation (LFE) arising from @xmath -variation. For this LFE
to be workable, one requires division by a suitable power of the volume
of the universe, @xmath . For this to be workable, one must choose
between e.g CWB or asymptotically flat before the theory of gravity is
declared.

In III.2.4, we arrive at conformal gravity instead from the 3-space
principles of demanding a consistent RI BM action where there is now
both Diff-BM and Conf-BM. The conformal gravity action is required to be
homogeneous of degree zero in the auxiliary variable @xmath , which is
implemented by division by the suitable power of V. We find that what
was previously considered to be a second auxiliary coordinate @xmath is
in fact closely related to the velocity corresponding to @xmath .
However, there are still 2 separate equations arising from the
auxiliaries by the free-endpoint variational principle. In III.2.5 we
include a cosmological constant as a precursor of the inclusion of
matter in IV.2.

In III.2.6 we work in the Hamiltonian formulation treating whichever
auxiliaries arise as Lagrange multiplier coordinates. We provide a range
of CS and CS+V theories. The idea is to explore the whether CWB GR in
York’s formulation is closely analogous to some BM theory in CS+V, in
which given an initial point and an initial direction in CS+V, a unique
dynamical curve is determined. In both GR and CS+V theory , there is a
unique definition of simultaneity given by CMC slicings (corresponding
to York time). CS+V schemes may be the more promising ones as regards
both reformulating GR and establishing less radical but more secure
departures from GR. Further theories which share some features with GR
and conformal gravity are also presented, including the
asymptotically-flat counterparts of conformal gravity and the CS+V
theory. Material supporting III.2.2–6 drawn from the GR conformal IVP
method is provided in App III.2.A. A comparison of conformal gravity
with other conformally-invariant theories is provided in App III.2.B.

Here is a summary of which aspects of these theories are considered
further on in the thesis. Matter is included in IV.2: it turns out, as
in RWR, that a universal null cone, electromagnetism and Yang–Mills
theory are picked out. There is a discussion in V.2: conformal gravity
should be in agreement with the standard tests of GR, and strong
differences will emerge in cosmology and in the quantum theory; these
differences will be less pronounced for CS+V theories. In V.2.2 I
improve on the CS+V theory, and extend the list of conformal theories.
In V.2.3 I provide and an account of how conformal gravity and the CS+V
theory work as p.d.e systems, from both the IVP–CP and thin sandwich
perspectives, update the cosmology and provide a comparison of CS+V
theories with GR. The quantum treatment is updated in VIII.

2.2 Scale-invariant particle dynamics model

Here I rerun the Machian program for an @xmath -particle mechanics with
the additional supposition that scale should be relative. Then one
should demand invariance under the

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (380)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (381)
  -- -------- -- -------

The group of the first of the above two transformations is now not the
Euclidean group Eucl, but the similarity group Sim = {translations,
rotations and dilations}, which does not preserve lengths but does
preserve angles and hence shapes.

The relative configuration space is then the quotient with respect to
this similarity group

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (382)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is trivial for @xmath = 1, 2 and has dimension @xmath for @xmath .
For @xmath = 3, SS is Barbour’s toy space Triangle Land [ 35 ] , the
space of all triangular shapes.

Barbour then works indirectly on SS by BM: replace bare velocities
according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (383)
  -- -------- -- -------

This involves a new dilational correction to the particle velocities;
for the moment I consider bringing in this and the usual translational
and rotational corrections by use of auxiliary coordinates. A RI action
is as ever used to implement the invariance under the second

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (384)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (385)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (386)
  -- -------- -- -------

Variation with respect to the auxiliaries then yields as multiplier
equations the usual 2 BB82 conditions @xmath and furthermore the
vanishing of the dilational momentum :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (387)
  -- -------- -- -------

This means that the moment of inertia of island universes described are
thus conserved, which would not generally be true in Newtonian
mechanics.

The ELE’s from variation with respect to @xmath are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (388)
  -- -------- -- -------

These maintain the constraints @xmath as before, and also maintain
@xmath provided that V – E is homogeneous of degree @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (389)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the second equality makes use of the primary constraint ( 386 ).

At first sight, this homogeneity requirement is inconvenient because
Coulomb’s law ( 57 ) and Newton’s law of gravitation ( 36 ) involve
@xmath and not @xmath potentials. But there are actually reasonable ways
of making @xmath potentials give effective physics similar to that for
@xmath potentials. Barbour’s favoured method to achieve this is by use
of appropriate powers of the moment of inertia, which depends on @xmath
but seldom changes much. Barbour’s proposed action built along these
lines is ( 384 ) with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (390)
  -- -------- -- -------

To aid the development of conformal gravity, I now discuss two further
possible schemes for the above working. First, to make proper sense of
the action as a RI action, the auxiliaries associated with scaling,
translation and rotation should all be regarded as the velocities
associated with cyclic coordinates to which free-endpoint variation is
applied. Let the scaling auxiliary hitherto used be @xmath . I also set
@xmath , whereupon the action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (391)
  -- -------- -- -------

which corresponds to constructing the action in an arbitrarily-scaled
frame (by passing to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (392)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (393)
  -- -------- -- -------

The action then has the following ‘banal invariance’ under scalings:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (394)
  -- -------- -- -------

To get the same field equations as before, consider @xmath and @xmath as
separate variations. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (395)
  -- -------- -- -------

variation with respect to @xmath gives @xmath , and free-endpoint
variation yields @xmath , so @xmath .

This second procedure may not be very general. While it works for
translations, dilations and indeed conformal transformations, it is at
least obscured for the non-commuting rotations.

2.3 Two auxiliary coordinate formulation of conformal gravity

I now present conformal gravity much as it was originally conceived by Ó
Murchadha [ 41 , 12 ] , using two auxiliary coordinates to give and
maintain the scale-invariance. Conformal gravity has subsequently been
explored from the single auxiliary corrected-coordinate perspective
(III.2.4). The style below is available further alternative theories in
III.2.6, while it is not clear whether these possess a corrected
coordinate formulation.

We desire a theory on CS, i.e on Riem with restrictions due to @xmath
and @xmath . The first restriction is familiar: it means that we are
within Superspace. Thus one is to use corrections to the metric
velocities that are Lie derivative with respect to an auxiliary @xmath ,
variation with respect to which encodes @xmath The second restriction is
dealt with analogously: introduce a suitable correction to the metric
velocities associated with some auxiliary @xmath , variation with
respect to which encodes @xmath . On inspection, this requires the
additional correction

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (396)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath can be interpreted as some @xmath in conjunction with
free-endpoint variation so that the action is truly homogeneous of
degree 1. Thus one might consider an action (in analogy with the

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (397)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (398)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (399)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (400)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (401)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (402)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the analogue of the vanishing of the dilational momentum @xmath
. Note however that @xmath is one constraint per space point,
corresponding to the local conformal transformations, in contrast to the
global scale transformations. Just as @xmath ensures moment of inertia
conservation for island universes, @xmath ensures the conservation of
the volume for spatially compact universes.

When it comes to propagating this new condition, we know that in GR this
is achieved where possible by solving the maximal LFE. Now, this can be
successfully encoded by bringing in another auxiliary @xmath into the
action as follows: use

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (403)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath variation gives the maximal LFE, in the distinguished
representation (the one in which @xmath ). This distinguished
representation is the one in which the theory being developed most
closely resemble the ADM split of GR. In III.2.6 the ELE’s, the LFE and
the working that the constraints propagate is all checked to be
independent of this choice.

However the maximal LFE @xmath is well-known to be insoluble in CWB GR
(see C.1). This shortcoming of GR maximal slicing was bypassed by York’s
generalization to GR CMC slicing, which has a nicer CWB LFE (see C.1).
We bypass it here in a different way envisaged by Ó Murchadha: consider
instead of ( 403 ) an action in which division by some power of the
volume of the universe occurs. This was inspired by the Sobolev quotient
used in the proof of the Yamabe result [( 469 ) of App III.2.A], and is
analogous to the division by the moment of inertia in the particle
model. There is then the issue of what power of the volume should appear
in the new action. The answer is @xmath . One can arrive at this by
arguing as in the next subsection that the action should be homogeneous
of degree 0 in @xmath so as not to include volume among the d.o.f’s
(since otherwise the action would not be invariant under the constant
scaling).

Alternatively, one can argue that this particular power is necessary for
consistency. Suppose the action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (404)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some @xmath . Then variation with respect to @xmath yields the LFE,
which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (405)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation. Then integrating this over space
yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (406)
  -- -------- -- -------

because of CWB, Gauss’ theorem, the LFE, and that spatial integrals are
spatial constants and can therefore be pulled outside further spatial
integrals. Then the same integral inconsistency argument as for the
maximal LFE holds unless @xmath (see App C).

Thus the desired action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (407)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (408)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (409)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation. Whereas in the TSA to GR @xmath and
@xmath are treated as freely specifiable gauge velocities, in this
conformal gravity @xmath is fixed, and its role as gauge variable is
taken over by @xmath . Since @xmath plays the same role in both
theories, conformal gravity, like GR, has two d.o.f’s per space point.
However, in contrast to GR, they are unambiguously identified as the two
conformal shape d.o.f’s of the 3-metric @xmath . Conceptually, this is a
pleasing result, but it has a far-reaching consequence – conformal
gravity cannot be cast into the form of a 4-d generally covariant
spacetime theory. Because the lapse is fixed, absolute simultaneity and
a preferred frame of reference are introduced. The reader may feel that
this is too high a price to pay for a scale-invariant theory. Of course,
experiment will have the final word. However, one of the aims of
pursuing this option is to show that conformal invariance already has
the potential to undermine the spacetime covariance of GR.

2.4 Single auxiliary Lagrangian formulation of conformal gravity

My 3-space first principles treatment of conformal gravity is to
consider an arbitrary-frame RI action. The notion of ‘frame’ now
includes both Diff and Conf (all @xmath -dependent). This will lead to
Diff-BM and Conf-BM, i.e beginning with the highly redundant
configuration space Riem, we add to that degeneracy by forming a Diff-
and Conf-BM action on

@xmath , where @xmath is the space of Diff-BM-encoding auxiliaries
@xmath and @xmath is the space of suitably smooth positive
Conf-BM-encoding auxiliaries @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (410)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the scalar @xmath is an arbitrary smooth positive function of the
label @xmath and of the position on the 3-space. The fourth power of
@xmath is the traditional one used for computational convenience, for
the same reasons as in I.2.9.3. Then one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (411)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (412)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (413)
  -- -------- -- -------

To work in the arbitrary conformal frame, one is to use the
Foster–Barbour corrected coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (414)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that there is then invariance under the pair of compensating
transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (415)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (416)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the geometrodynamical generalization of the invariance under
the banal transformation ( 394 ) of the particle model.

Now, paralleling the derivation of ( 411 – 413 ), ( 414 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (417)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (418)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (419)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (420)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives the Conf-BM metric velocity.

From ( 417 ) and ( 420 ) we can make a T that is Conf-invariant:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (421)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that we begin with an arbitrary @xmath in the inverse supermetric

@xmath . However, whereas @xmath was found in RWR [ 39 ] to be crucial
for the consistency of GR, we will see that this apparent freedom does
not play any role in conformal gravity.

One could likewise make a Conf-invariant potential density using the
metric alone, from available conformally-invariant Bach tensor and the
Cotton–York tensor of I.2.9.4.3, but the suitable combinations they give
rise to are cumbersome, e.g

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (422)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for any tensor @xmath , where @xmath are a priori free
coefficients and @xmath is the permutation group of 6 objects.

We instead resorted to using the auxiliary variable @xmath , in addition
to the metric, in order

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (423)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now in contrast to ( 421 ) and the situation in relativity [ 39 ] , each
term in the potential density part of a generalized BSW action changes
under ( 415 ). This has the consequence that the action of conformal
gravity must, as a ‘conformalization’ of the BSW action, depend not only
on the velocity @xmath of the auxiliary variable @xmath but also on
@xmath itself. This parallels what was found for the gauge variable
@xmath of the dilation-invariant particle action.

So our action for pure (matter-free) conformal gravity is, upon
additionally dividing by the homogenizing power of the volume as
explained below:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (424)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (425)
  -- -------- -- -------

This division by the volume implements homogeneity of degree zero in
@xmath . We next explain this homogeneity requirement and comment on
this means of ours of implementing it.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Provided we ensure that is a functional of the corrected coordinates and
velocities, it is bound to be invariant under the conformal
transformations ( 416 ). This would be the case if we omitted the volume
@xmath in ( 424 ). But by the rules of BM suggested in III.2.2 the
Lagrangian must also be invariant separately under all possible
variations of the auxiliary variable. Now in this case the auxiliary
@xmath is a function of position, so one condition that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (426)
  -- -------- -- -------

A glance at ( 424 ) shows that if @xmath were removed, ( 426 ) could not
be satisfied. The action must be homogeneous of degree zero in @xmath .
⁶⁸ ⁶⁸ 68 This is the single symmetry property that distinguishes
conformal gravity from GR, which for this reason just fails to be fully
conformally invariant. We exhibit this in the first expression in ( 424
), in which the two expressions ( 418 , 419 ) that derive from @xmath
and @xmath in the BSW action have been multiplied by appropriate powers
of @xmath . (The second expression is more convenient for calculations.)

A separate issue is the means of achieving homogeneity. Barbour and Ó
Murchadha originally attempted to achieve homogeneity by using not
@xmath but @xmath , since @xmath will satisfy ( 426 ). However, this
already leads to an inconsistent theory even before one attempts
‘conformalization’ (see II.2.2.3). Since an ultralocal kinetic term has
no conformal weight, another possibility would be, as mentioned above,
to construct a conformally-invariant action by multiplying such a T by a
3-d conformal concomitant scalar density. Much hard work would be
required to investigate whether any such possibilities yield consistent
theories. Even if they do, they will certainly be far more complicated
than conformal gravity.

We have therefore simply used powers of the volume @xmath in the style
of the Yamabe work. This gives us conformal gravity . The use of the
volume has the added advantage that @xmath is conserved. This ensures
that conformal gravity shares with the particle model the attractive
properties it acquires from conservation of the moment of inertia. We
extend this method (of using powers of @xmath to achieve homogeneity) in
IV.2 to include matter coupled to conformal gravity. It is the use of
@xmath that necessitates our CWB assumption. It is a physical
assumption, not a mere mathematical convenience. It would not be
necessary in the case of theories of the type considered in the previous
paragraph.

We must now find and check the consistency of the equations of conformal
gravity. The treatment of BM in the particle model in III.2.2 tells us
that we must calculate the canonical momenta of @xmath and @xmath , find
the conditions that ensure vanishing of the variation of the Lagrangian
separately with respect to possible independent variations of the
auxiliary @xmath and its velocity @xmath , and then show that these
conditions, which involve the canonical momenta, together with the ELE’s
for @xmath form a consistent set. This implements BM by the
free-endpoint method.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (427)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (428)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (429)
  -- -------- -- -------

The primary constraint ( 429 ) is a direct consequence of the invariance
of the action ( 424 ) under the banal transformations ( 416 ).

Independent variations @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and its velocity in
the instantaneous Lagrangian that can be considered are:

1) @xmath is a spatial constant and @xmath .

2) @xmath is a general function of position and @xmath .

3) @xmath and @xmath in an infinitesimal spatial region.

The possibility 1) has already been used to fix the homogeneity of . Let
us next consider 3). This tells us that @xmath . But @xmath , so we see
that the canonical momentum of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (430)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a result of this, without loss of generality we can set @xmath , the
coefficient of the trace, equal to zero, @xmath , in the generalization
of the DeWitt supermetric used in ( 424 ). If conformal gravity proves
to be a viable theory, this result could be significant, especially for
the quantization programme (see II.6), since it ensures that conformal
gravity, in contrast to GR, has a

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the rate of change of @xmath (which defines the volume element @xmath )
is measured by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (431)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, in conformal gravity the volume element – and with it the
volume of 3-space – does not change and cannot make a contribution to
the kinetic energy of the opposite sign to the contribution of the shape
d.o.f’s. Finally, we consider 2) and (including the use of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (432)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (433)
  -- -------- -- -------

The lapse-fixing equation (LFE) ( 432 ) has a status different from the
constraints and it has no analogue in the scale-invariant particle
model, or in any other gauge theory of which we are aware. We get this
LFE and not a further homogeneity requirement such as in the particle
model, because although the action is homogeneous in @xmath we are now
dealing with a field theory in which there are spatial derivatives of
@xmath . It is, however, a direct consequence of Conf-BM, and as
explained below, it plays an important role in the mathematical
structure of conformal gravity.

Besides the trace constraint ( 430 ), @xmath must satisfy the primary
constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (434)
  -- -------- -- -------

due to the local square-root form of the Lagrangian, and the secondary
constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (435)
  -- -------- -- -------

from @xmath -variation. Of course, ( 435 ) is identical to the GR
momentum constraint ( 84 ), while ( 434 ) is very similar to the GR
Hamiltonian constraint ( 83 ).

The ELE’s for @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (436)
  -- -------- -- -------

They can be used to check the consistency of the full set of equations,
constraints and LFE of conformal gravity. To simplify these calculations
and simultaneously establish the connection with GR, we go over to the
distinguished representation in which @xmath and @xmath . The three
constraints that must be satisfied by the gravitational canonical
momenta

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (437)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (438)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the ELE’s are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (439)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the volume @xmath is conserved, and its numerical value depends on
a nominal lengthscale, for the purpose of comparison with the equations
of GR we can set @xmath . (This cannot, of course, be done before the
variation that leads to the above equations, since the variation of
@xmath generates forces. It is important not to confuse quantities
on-shell and off-shell.) We see, setting @xmath , that the similarity
with GR in York’s CMC slicing is strong. In fact, the constraints ( 408
) are identical to the GR constraints and the CMC slicing condition at
maximal expansion, and the ELE’s differ only by the absence of the GR
term proportional to @xmath and by the presence of the final force term.
Finally, there is the LFE ( 438 ), which is an eigenvalue equation of
essentially the same kind as the LFE ( 267 ) required to maintain York’s
CMC slicing condition ( 262 ).

In our view, one of the most interesting results of this work is the
derivation of such LFE’s directly from a fundamental symmetry
requirement rather than as an equation which could be interpreted as
maintaining a gauge fixing. We now develop this point.

This is part of the confirmation that we do have a consistent set of
equations, constraints and LFE. We show this in III.2.2.6, which amounts
to demonstrating that if the constraints ( 408 ) hold initially, then
they will propagate due to the ELE’s ( 439 ) and the LFE ( 432 ). The
propagation of the vector momentum constraint is always unproblematic,
being guaranteed by the 3-diffeomorphism invariance of the theory. The
two constraints that could give difficulty are the quadratic and linear
scalar constraints. In RWR [ 39 ] , the propagation of the quadratic
constraint proved to be a delicate matter and generated the new results
of that paper. However, in this section we are merely ‘conformalizing’
the results of [ 39 ] , and we shall see that the consistency achieved
for the quadratic constraint in [ 39 ] carries forward to conformal
gravity. The only issue is therefore whether the new constraint @xmath
is propagated. Now, we find that the form of @xmath evaluated from the
ELE’s is automatically guaranteed to be zero by virtue of the LFE. Thus
the propagation of @xmath is guaranteed rather than separately imposed.
It is in this sense that conformal gravity is not maintaining a gauge
fixing.

The same conformal gravity theory can also be reached using the ‘bare
principles’ of II.2.2.4, provided that one takes the @xmath branch of
possibilities to propagate the Hamiltonian constraint. Notice how one
gets two conditions to encode, and the encoding of the second of these
(the LFE) does not look like any encodements we have seen before. We
will also see how conformal gravity can be formulated in a lapse
uneliminated fashion in VI.

Finally, we briefly mention two sources of variety. First, we find that
there is analogously a Euclidean conformal gravity and a strong
conformal gravity (which unlike in III.1 has without loss of generality
@xmath ), with action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (440)
  -- -------- -- -------

which may be of use in understanding quantum conformal gravity. Note
that the power of the volume @xmath needed to make the action
homogeneous of degree zero is here one, since now it has to balance only
@xmath and not the product @xmath . This theory is simpler than
conformal gravity in two ways: @xmath is less intricate than @xmath ,
and the LFE for strong conformal gravity is @xmath so since @xmath is a
spatial constant, @xmath is a spatial constant.

Second, instead of constructing an action with a local square root, one
could use instead a global square root and thus obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (441)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives rise to a single global quadratic constraint. The above
alternatives are cumulative: for both conformal gravity above and each
theory below, we could consider 6 variants by picking Euclidean, strong,
or Lorentzian signature and a local or global square root. The
Lorentzian, local choices expanded throughout are the most obviously
physical choice.

2.5 Integral conditions and the cosmological constant

The coupling of matter originally left BFÓ at a loss through Foster’s
demonstration of the appearance of integral inconsistencies in the
actions they were considering. The idea I used to resolve this problem
comes from the analogous attempt to combine the actions of strong
conformal gravity and conformal gravity in order to consider conformal
gravity with a cosmological constant, @xmath . We give the combined
action obtained by applying homogeneity of degree zero in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (442)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have also included a signature @xmath to show how ( 442 )
reduces to the strong conformal gravity action ( 440 ) in the limit
@xmath . That this is a correct way to proceed is emphasized below by
the lack in this case of an integral inconsistency.

The conjugate momenta @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 427 ) and ( 428 )
as before, but now with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (443)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the primary constraint ( 429 ) holds. Again, the end-point part of
the @xmath variation yields @xmath , so @xmath , so without loss of
generality @xmath , but now the rest of the @xmath -variation gives a
new LFE,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (444)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation. For this choice of the action,
there is indeed no integral inconsistency:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (445)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath -variation yields the usual momentum constraint ( 84 ), and
the local square root gives the primary Hamiltonian-type constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (446)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation. The ELE’s are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (447)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have split the working up into pure conformal gravity and
@xmath parts (the @xmath here can also be split into the pure conformal
gravity integrand and a @xmath part). The @xmath part of the working for
the constraint propagation presents no extra difficulties.

Note that in conformal gravity the cosmological constant @xmath (just
like its particle model analogue, the Newtonian energy E ) contributes
to a conformally-induced cosmological-constant type force. The
penultimate term in ( 447 ) is the final term of pure conformal gravity
in ( 439 ), and the final term is induced by @xmath . We will see in
IV.2 that matter also gives analogous contributions. The significance of
this is discussed in V.2.

2.6 Hamiltonian formulation and alternative theories

In this section, we examine the Hamiltonian formulation. We exercise two
options in constructing theories such as GR and conformal gravity, so
that this section is more general than IV.2.5. First, while we have
hitherto only considered the CWB case, we now also touch on the
asymptotically-flat case. Second, we also attempt to incorporate both
maximal and CMC conditions.

Our methods of doing so necessitate a discussion of whether the
corresponding LFE’s are fundamental or a gauge-fixing. When we
conformally-correct only the @xmath , I think that one can interpret the
slicing condition as pertaining to a particular slice and then either
adopt the LFE which propagates it, or not, as a continued gauge choice.
When we conformally-correct both @xmath and @xmath , we find that the
corresponding LFE is variationally guaranteed. This is the case in
conformal gravity. I think such fully-conformally-corrected theories are
the more complete ones. Below I build up the Hamiltonian structure
toward this completeness.

We begin with the case that corresponds to working on Superspace.
Recollect how ADM and Dirac showed that the Hamiltonian for GR can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (448)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are regarded as arbitrary auxiliary Lagrange
multiplier coordinates. Now we wish to parallel this work on the space
CS+V by working with CMC slices. There is then little difference between
the compact and asymptotically-flat cases. Our treatment simply involves
adding another constraint to the Dirac–ADM Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (449)
  -- -------- -- -------

and treating @xmath as another Lagrange multiplier. The Laplacian is
introduced here to obtain the CMC condition as the new constraint
arising from @xmath -variation: @xmath . In addition we get the standard
GR Hamiltonian and momentum constraints from @xmath - and @xmath
-variation. Now, we can choose to impose @xmath which gives the CMC LFE.
Whereas one could reinterpret this as the study in the CMC gauge of the
subset of (pieces of) GR solutions which are CMC foliable, we can also
consider this to be a new theory with a preferred fundamental CMC
slicing. ⁶⁹ ⁶⁹ 69 By a preferred fundamental slicing, we mean a single
stack of Riemannian 3-spaces. This is not to be confused with GR, where
there are an infinity of stacks between any two given spacelike
hypersurfaces (the foliations), each of which is unprivileged. The
latter interpretation is our first CS+V theory.

This CS+V theory’s evolution equations are ( 188 ) and ( 189 ) but
picking up the extra terms @xmath and @xmath respectively. We have
already dealt with the CMC constraint; it turns out that we need to set
@xmath to preserve the other constraints. Therefore the CMC Hamiltonian
is well-defined when one uses the distinguished representation @xmath
and that @xmath satisfies the CMC LFE.

It is more satisfactory however to introduce a second auxiliary variable
to conformally-correct the objects associated with the metric. We used
@xmath in place of @xmath since this implements the volume-preserving
conformal transformations VPConf:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (450)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the case where the 3-space is CWB. Applying these corrections to the
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (451)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (452)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(in the distinguished representation @xmath ) to maintain the @xmath
given by @xmath -variation, we require that @xmath and @xmath . This
corresponds to @xmath and @xmath scalings, i.e a relative scaling by
@xmath , between the trace and tracefree terms. Thus, ( 452 ) happens to
be the Lichnerowicz–York equation in @xmath , subject to its solutions
only being admitted if they are in VPConf, @xmath . At this stage, we do
not know why we are obtaining the same scalings as in York’s work.

We next try to extend the above workings to the case of the maximal
condition. This

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (453)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath -variation gives us the maximal condition @xmath . In the
asymptotically-flat case, it makes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (454)
  -- -------- -- -------

since this is an extremely well-behaved equation when taken in
conjunction with the boundary condition @xmath at infinity. Again,
@xmath - and @xmath -variation yield the standard GR Hamiltonian and
momentum constraints respectively. Now if we choose @xmath in the
evolution we preserve the Hamiltonian and momentum constraints.
Therefore @xmath can be interpreted as yielding standard GR with a
choice of maximal gauge, or alternatively that this represents a new
theory with a preferred fundamental maximal slicing: our first
asymptotically-flat theory.

This does not work in the CWB case, since then now the only solution of
( 454 ) is @xmath : frozen dynamics. But if we use the volume of the
universe (which amounts to moving away from GR), we are led to new
theories. First, consider

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (455)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath variations yield the constraints
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Imposing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (456)
  -- -------- -- -------

Whereas this could be regarded as a gauge fixing, the underlying theory
is no longer GR. The other interpretation is that of a new theory with a
preferred fundamental maximal slicing – a poor man’s version of
conformal gravity.

Second, consider the use of two auxiliary conformal variables:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (457)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the @xmath -, @xmath - and @xmath -variations yield the constraints
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Hamilton’s equations are now the evolution
equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (458)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation @xmath . Whilst @xmath -variation
yields ( 456 ), Hamilton’s

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (459)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is thus automatically zero due to ( 456 ). This theory is (full)
conformal gravity, as can be confirmed by Legendre transformation and
BSW elimination [ 27 ] to recover the Lagrangian of III.2.5. Because the
LFE that maintains the condition is also guaranteed, conformal gravity
is definitely not interpretable as a gauge fixing.

Before turning to these, we mention that there is a further (full rather
than poor man’s) maximal theory which arises from considering two
conformal auxiliary variables in the asymptotically-flat case:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (460)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath variation yield the constraints @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Now, @xmath variation gives the maximal LFE ( 454 ),
and so automatically guarantees the propagation of the condition @xmath
. Note that @xmath is the original Lichnerowicz equation ( 264 ). Again,
the Lichnerowicz equation carries the auxiliary variable which encode
the LFE. In contrast, in conformal gravity, one must modify the
corresponding Lichnerowicz equation by the introduction of volume terms
to get an analogous scheme.

Like conformal gravity, our full asymptotically-flat theory has no role
for @xmath in its dynamics, but, unlike conformal gravity, it does not
possess global terms. We are less interested in this theory than in
conformal gravity because it would not be immediately applicable to
cosmology, on account of being asymptotically flat. These two theories
should be contrasted with our full CS+V theory, in which @xmath does
play a role, which means that the standard GR explanation of cosmology
is available. We believe CS+V theory merits a full treatment elsewhere
(started in V.2.2) as another potential rival to GR.

We now consider the preservation of the other conformal gravity
constraints @xmath and @xmath . We find that we need to set @xmath .
Therefore (by comparison with GR) the only term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (461)
  -- -------- -- -------

term in the @xmath equation. Since it is of the form @xmath it clearly
will not disturb the momentum constraint. Therefore we need only worry
about conserving the Hamiltonian constraint.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (462)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (463)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (464)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (465)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore the constraints are preserved under evolution.

We now show that we can just as easily treat the Hamiltonian dynamics of
conformal gravity in the general representation. The LFE from @xmath
variation is now

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (466)
  -- -------- -- -------

whilst Hamilton’s evolution equations are now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (467)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can compare these expressions to their Lagrangian analogues ( 428 ),
( 436 ) and we see they coincide if @xmath . This will guarantee that
the constraints are preserved by the evolution. Alternatively, we could
evolve the constraints using the Hamiltonian evolution equations ( 467 )
and discover that the constraints propagate if and only if the lapse
function, @xmath , satisfies ( 466 ), the shift, @xmath , is arbitrary,
and @xmath satisfies @xmath . The @xmath -variation gives the LFE ( 432
). We emphasize that @xmath is arbitrary in the full theories, unlike in
the poor man’s versions, where one ends up having to set the auxiliary (
@xmath or @xmath ) to zero.

It is not obvious then that @xmath is guaranteed from Hamilton’s
equations, since what one immediately obtains is, weakly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (468)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now require use of @xmath to see that ( 432 ) indeed guarantees
@xmath .

App III.2.A: Supporting material on conformal IVP method

Links between our alternative theories and York’s work

With their preferred maximal and CMC slicings, our theories are written
naturally in the conformal IVP language, and are best compared to GR via
the York formulation of GR. York’s work thus contains many useful
concepts and tricks (see I.2.9.3, I.2.10, which were largely given as an
early section in ABFÓ). Rather than being exactly the same, I will show
that some of our tricks share a common origin with York’s in V.2. The
notion of @xmath and @xmath themselves follow from York’s work in
I.2.9.4.2. York’s work also offers as-yet unexplored options to some
things, such as the style of treatment of matter in I.2.9.6 and the
possible alternative use of actions based on the 3-d metric concomitants
of I.2.9.4.3. I furthermore study the closeness of both CS+V theory and
conformal gravity to GR in both the traditional IVP and the thin
sandwich formulation in V.2.3. I next outline the additional piece of
conformal mathematics that inspired the division by the volume that led
to conformal gravity.

The Yamabe conjecture

Yamabe’s [ 387 ] manifestly-global conjecture is that all @xmath
-metrics are conformally equivalent

to metrics of constant scalar curvature. The proof for for @xmath was
relatively simple, but to prove the @xmath case Schoen [ 326 ] required
a new global idea: the Sobolev quotient

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (469)
  -- -------- -- -------

(presented here in 3-d). Note that the ELE corresponding to interpreting
this as an action is the @xmath , @xmath vacuum Lichnerowicz–York
equation. We are not concerned with what Schoen did with this quotient
to prove the theorem, but rather with the idea of the quotient itself.

The Yamabe conjecture is well-known in the GR IVP since the choice of
constant curvature unphysical metrics simplifies the Lichnerowicz–York
equation [ 196 , 87 ] .

Some Open Issues

In GR, the CMC condition is a gauge fixing without fundamental physical
significance. The solutions of conformal gravity will strongly resemble
solutions of GR in the CMC foliation at maximum expansion. Some CS+V
theories will resemble CMC-sliced GR even more closely. However, there
are interpretational differences between those conformal theories that
have a privileged slicing and reslicing-invariant GR. First, there is a
restriction in the solution space of GR since not all GR spacetimes are
CMC sliceable, nor is a CMC slicing necessarily extendible to cover the
maximal analytic extension of a given spacetime [ 337 ] . Second,
effects regarded as gauge artifacts in GR, such as the ‘collapse of the
lapse’ @xmath in gravitational collapse (I.2.10) can have corresponding
physical effects in privileged-CMC slicing theories.

Can CS+V theory be formulated in terms of one auxiliary alone, like
conformal gravity? Does our CS+V shed new light supporting York’s
contention that the two conformal shape d.o.f’s of CS are, together with
@xmath , a representation of the true dynamical d.o.f’s in CWB GR?
Finally why does the Lichnerowicz–York equation arise from demanding the
conformalized GR action to encode the LFE? Some of these issues are
further pursued in V.2.

App III.2.B Other scale-invariant theories

There are two important differences between the manner in which
conformal covariance is achieved in conformal gravity and the two best
known earlier attempts to create conformally covariant theories: Weyl’s
1917 theory [ 369 ] and Dirac’s simplified modification of it [ 114 ] .
First, both of these earlier theories are spacetime theories, and their
conformal covariance leaves 4-d general covariance intact. In conformal
gravity and in York’s representation of GR, there is an element of the
absolute. Second, the conformal covariance is achieved in the theories
of Weyl and Dirac through a compensating field that is conformally
transformed with the gravitational field. In Weyl’s theory, the
compensating field is a 4-vector field that Weyl identified as the
electromagnetic field until Einstein [ 126 ] pointed out that atomic
spectra would then be path-dependent, in contradiction with astronomical
observations. Weyl later reinterpreted the idea of a compensating field
in his effective creation of gauge theory [ 373 ] , but he never
salvaged his original theory. In Dirac’s simplification, the
compensating field is the additional scalar field in Brans–Dicke theory
[ 59 ] . This possibility has been exploited more recently in theories
with a dilatonic field [ 368 , 69 ] . In contrast, conformal gravity has
no physical compensating field; the variable @xmath ( 414 ) is a purely
auxiliary gauge variable used to implement Conf-BM. This is therefore a
more radical approach, in which full scale and conformal invariance of
the gravitational field by itself is achieved. In checking the
literature on Weyl’s theory, we came across Einstein’s 1921 paper [ 127
] , in which he attempts to implement an idea similar to ours, albeit
the implementation itself is very different. Einstein follows Weyl in
employing only ratios of the 4-metric components, but drops the idea of
a compensating field. Thus he is also aiming for a gravitational field
that is scale invariant by itself. The implementation Einstein proposed
was very tentative, and we are not aware of anyone attempting to further
develop it.

IV TSA: coupling of bosonic matter

We now seek to convert the TSA to a route to relativity with matter
‘added on’. In IV.1.1 we consider the analysis of BFÓ concerning scalars
and the apparent selection of electromagnetism among the possible single
1-form theories. In IV.1.2 we consider the theorem that underlaid my
calculation with Barbour [ 11 ] about the apparent selection of
Yang–Mills theory among the possible many interacting 1-form theories.
Consider this as a derivation of the standard material provided for
comparison in I.1.7.

A tidier version of all the calculations for minimally coupled scalars
and many interacting 1-forms is presented in IV.1.3 as following from
the theorem. The strong gravity counterpart of these calculations [ 6 ]
is presented in IV.1.4, and compared with the GR results.

The theorem is modified in IV.2.1 for use in conformal gravity, and a
further theorem is built guaranteeing there is no integral inconsistency
arising from the LFE that propagates the new @xmath constraint, for the
broad class of homogeneous actions considered. In IV.2.2 we show all the
matter fields above can be coupled to conformal gravity. It is
interesting that locally Lorentz-invariant physics drops out of a
non-generally covariant theory. I include two technical appendices IV.A
on naïve renormalizability and IV.B on the Gell-Mann–Glashow theorem
(which is used in both the TSA and the standard derivations of
Yang–Mills theory). App IV.C provides for comparison Teitelboim’s
derivation of Yang–Mills theory by the HKT route.

For future reference of related material, the existence of suitable
bosonic matter fields in the TSA is much strengthened in VI by an
indirect method. This however does not have the constructive status of
the method of this chapter. Following the criticism in VI and suitable
reshaping of the whole program, I succeed in including also spin- @xmath
fermions, in fact I include a full set of matter fields that suffice to
describe nature as we know it. There are more matter issues in VII.
Overall, these later works show that the TSA is certainly not a
unification and that the matter fields are picked out a great deal less
uniquely than originally thought, although the TSA still does appear to
be selective.

1 Matter in TSA formulation of GR

1.1 Original BFÓ work

1.1.1 Scalar fields

Barbour, Foster and Ó Murchadha included a scalar field @xmath by
considering the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (470)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the gravitationally BM scalar kinetic term ⁷⁰ ⁷⁰ 70 NB the U ’s and
T ’s in this chapter differ by constants from the standard spacetime
forms. This has no effect on results. I leave them as they are to
reflect the emergent character of the standard physics from the TSA
point of view. @xmath and the potential ansatz @xmath .

Defining @xmath , the conjugate momenta are given by ( 318 ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (471)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the local square root gives as a primary constraint a
Hamiltonian-type constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (472)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath -variation gives as a secondary constraint the momentum
constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (473)
  -- -------- -- -------

The ELE’s are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (474)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (475)
  -- -------- -- -------

The constraint @xmath contains the canonical propagation speed @xmath of
the scalar field. This can be read off the coupled form of ( 471 ) and (
475 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (476)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the TSA, a priori, @xmath , which means there is no reason for the
scalar field to obey the same null cone as gravity. However, propagating
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (477)
  -- -------- -- -------

The theory has just one scalar d.o.f, so if the cofactor of @xmath in
the last term were zero, the scalar dynamics would be trivial. ⁷¹ ⁷¹ 71
This argument requires further elaboration, which is provided in V.1.
Thus @xmath : scalar fields must obey the null cone dictated by gravity.
The counterpart in the standard approach is that @xmath due to RP1 . The
point is that BFÓ deduce this as enforced by gravitation.

Notice also that this scheme gives minimal coupling of the scalar field
to gravity. However, there is one other possibility because the most
general ultralocal kinetic term includes also a metric–scalar
cross-term. This gives Brans–Dicke theory. This was considered in the
revised version of RWR, but I am not satisfied with that treatment since
it is based on a conformal transformation (which does not preserve
geodesics). I present a satisfactory and in fact more illuminating
treatment in VI.1.4.

1.1.2 A single 1-form field

To include a single @xmath -form field @xmath , BFÓ considered the
action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (478)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath the quadratic gravitationally best-matched kinetic term of
@xmath , and the potential ansatz @xmath . The first part of this can be
expressed more conveniently for some purposes by using a generalized
supermetric @xmath .

Defining @xmath , the conjugate momenta are given by ( 318 ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (479)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the local square root gives as a primary constraint a
Hamiltonian-type constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (480)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath -variation gives as a secondary constraint the momentum
constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (481)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, propagating @xmath gives ⁷² ⁷² 72 I do not provide the cumbersome
ELE’s since I am to build a method in the next section which does not
require their explicit use.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (482)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, the system has a priori 5 d.o.f’s per space point, that is 2
geometric d.o.f’s and the 3 d.o.f’s of the 1-form field itself. The
constraints cannot include @xmath , so the penultimate line includes a
3-vector of constraints multiplied by @xmath , which would take away all
the 1-form d.o.f’s, thus rendering a trivial theory, unless the cofactor
of @xmath vanishes strongly. This gives a nontrivial theory only for
@xmath , @xmath and if there is a secondary constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (483)
  -- -------- -- -------

The conditions on the @xmath ’s mean that the 1-form field obeys the
null cone dictated by gravity, and furthermore that the derivative terms
in @xmath are @xmath . We identify the new constraint ( 483 ) as the
Gauss constraint of electromagnetism ( 62 , 205 ).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath is a @xmath density. Thus,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (484)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used @xmath and mixed partial equality to eliminate a
further term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (485)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, one can argue that constraints cannot depend on @xmath , and then
that the only way of avoiding triviality of the 1-form field due to the
terms in @xmath is to have all the @xmath be zero. In particular, @xmath
means that the 1-form field must be massless.

Now, the allowed form @xmath [c.f ( 177 )], is invariant under the

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (486)
  -- -------- -- -------

so we are dealing with a gauge theory. Note first how the gauge theory
and the fixing of the light-cone to be equal to the gravity-cone arise
together in the same part of the above calculation. These are two
aspects of the same consistency condition arising from the role of the
momentum constraint in the propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint.
Second, because we have a gauge symmetry, if we introduce an auxiliary
variable @xmath into @xmath such that variation with respect to it
encodes @xmath , then we should do so according to U(1)-BM.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (487)
  -- -------- -- -------

[c.f ( 177 )]. Thus, if one identifies @xmath as @xmath , this
derivation forces Ǎ @xmath to obey Maxwell’s equations minimally-coupled
to gravity. Moreover, as pointed out by Giulini [ 159 ] and reported in
[ 40 ] , the massive (Proca) 1-form field does not fit into this TSA
formulation despite being a perfectly good generally covariant theory.
BFÓ originally took this to be evidence that the TSA does not yield all
generally covariant theories. This is further explored in later sections
and chapters. My main aim in this chapter is to show that the TSA does
at least permit standard fundamental bosonic field theories.

Finally, we mention that on attempting to couple @xmath to scalar fields
by the inclusion of interaction terms, BFÓ showed similarly that
demanding the propagation of @xmath , and of any secondary constraints
arising from it, leads to U(1) gauge theory minimally-coupled to GR [ 40
] . We have thus a chain of successively more sophisticated theories,
each arising from its predecessor by iteration of constraint propagation
consistency. This provides a different means of deriving classical
physics: Dirac’s work, applied to BM RI actions, leads to a striking
alternative to Einstein and Minkowski’s @xmath -d foundation of physics.
I will next build the above outline of Relativity without Relativity
into an almost algorithmic formality, from which Yang–Mills gauge theory
will emerge from allowing a general collection of @xmath -form fields to
interact with each other.

1.2 Matter workings from the perspective of a general theorem

We next find that Yang–Mills theory minimally coupled to GR emerges as
one of a few possibilities allowed for quite a general ansatz for the
1-form fields’ potential. More precisely, the 1-form fields are again
found to respect the gravitational null cone, to be fundamentally
massless, and to have a Yang–Mills type mutual interaction. The
calculation if done in the above style is much messier than that for a
single 1-form field. We present it rather by use of a theorem that uses
the general ELE’s and permits a clear term-by-term computation of the
propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint. This theorem-based approach
is good in being more systematic than the original RWR-type treatment.

We conclude that, within the bosonic sector, the TSA yields the key
features of the observed world. Gravity, the universal null cone, and
gauge theory all arise in essentially the same manner through the single
mechanism of consistent Dirac-type constraint propagation applied to the
interplay of BM with the local square root. Some field-theoretic issues
are addressed in the conclusion.

I consider @xmath and @xmath to consist of contributions from each of
the matter fields @xmath present. I then obtain the following formulae
for the propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint.

Theorem 1

i) For nonderivative coupled matter fields @xmath with @xmath
homogeneously quadratic in @xmath and @xmath containing at most
first-order derivatives,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (488)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in this chapter and the next [ ] denotes the extent of
applicability of the functional derivative within, @xmath is an
invertible ultralocal kinetic metric and @xmath is the momentum
conjugate to @xmath .

ii) If, additionally, the potential contains covariant derivatives, then
there is an extra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (489)
  -- -------- -- -------

The proof offered here includes both GR ( @xmath , @xmath ) and strong
gravity ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath but otherwise arbitrary). Result i)
in the GR case is related to a result of Teitelboim [ 349 , 352 ] that
the contributions of nonderivatively-coupled fields to the Hamiltonian
and momentum constraints independently satisfy the Dirac Algebra (see
App IV.C). In the working below, this is reflected by our ability to
split the working into pure gravity and matter parts.

Use of formulae i), ii) permits the @xmath calculations to be done
without explicitly computing each case’s ELE’s. This is because our
derivation uses once and for all the general ELE’s.

Proof The working can be split into its @xmath -free and @xmath parts
(the latter is not exhibited).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (490)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (491)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath -variation gives as a secondary constraint the momentum
constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (492)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the local square root gives as a primary constraint a
Hamiltonian-type constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (493)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (494)
  -- -------- -- -------

using the chain-rule on ( 493 ). Now use the chain-rule on @xmath , the
ELE’s @xmath and @xmath , to obtain the first step below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (495)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the second step above, I regroup the terms into pure gravity terms
and matter terms, expand the matter variational derivatives and use the
definitions of the momenta to eliminate the velocities in the first
three matter terms. I now observe that the first and sixth matter terms
cancel, as do the third and fourth. In the third step I discard a term
proportional to @xmath , use the momentum constraint ( 492 ), and the
pure gravity working (N.B we assume that either @xmath or @xmath , so
the pure gravity working does work!), and the definitions of the momenta
to cancel the fifth and eight terms of step 2. Factorization of step 3
gives the result.

ii) Now @xmath has 2 additional contributions in step 2 due to the
presence of the connections:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (496)
  -- -------- -- -------

which, using ( 168 ), ( 346 ), integration by parts on the second term
of ( 496 ) and factorization yields ii). @xmath

1.3 Examples

1.3.1 Minimally-coupled scalar fields

Application of formula i) to the minimally-coupled scalar field action (
470 ) immediately

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (497)
  -- -------- -- -------

1.3.2 K Interacting 1-form Fields

We consider a BSW-type action containing the a priori unrestricted
1-form fields @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (498)
  -- -------- -- -------

We use the most general homogeneous quadratic BM kinetic term @xmath ,
and a general ansatz for the potential term @xmath . We constructed
these using both the inverse @xmath -metric @xmath and the antisymmetric
tensor density @xmath .

We note that no kinetic cross-term @xmath is possible within this
ansatz. This is because the only way to contract 3 spatial indices is to
use @xmath , and @xmath is symmetric. Then @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (499)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath without loss of generality a symmetric constant matrix. We
will assume that @xmath is positive-definite so that the local
flat-space limit quantum theory of @xmath has a well-behaved inner
product. In this case, we can take @xmath by rescaling the 1-form
fields.

We consider the most general @xmath up to first derivatives of @xmath ,
and up to four spatial index contractions. This is equivalent to the
necessary naïve power-counting requirement for the renormalizability of
any emergent 4-d quantum field theory for @xmath (see App IV.A). Then
@xmath has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (500)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are general ultralocal supermetrics,
each with distinct coefficients. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are constant arbitrary arrays. W.l.o.g,
@xmath and @xmath are symmetric, and @xmath is totally antisymmetric.

Defining @xmath , the conjugate momenta are given by ( ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (501)
  -- -------- -- -------

The local square root gives as a primary constraint the Hamiltonian
constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (502)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath -variation gives as a secondary constraint the momentum
constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (503)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the theorem, the propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (504)
  -- -------- -- -------

We demand that @xmath vanishes weakly. Supposing that this does not
automatically vanish, then we would require new constraints. However, we
have at most 2 + 3 K d.o.f’s, so if we had 3 K or more new constraints,
the 1-form field theory would be trivial. Furthermore, all constraints
must be independent of @xmath . Thus, terms in @xmath must be of the
form @xmath for the theory to be nontrivial [and we cannot have more
than 3 K independent (spatial) scalar constraint factors @xmath in
total]. Most of these scalars will vanish strongly, which means they
will fix coefficients in the potential ansatz. Finally, ( 504 ) is such
that all the non-automatically vanishing terms in @xmath are partnered
by terms in @xmath . So the above big restriction on the terms in @xmath
affects all the terms.

1) The first, second, third, sixth and seventh extra terms have no
nontrivial scalar factors, thus forcing @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .

2) This automatically implies that the eighth and tenth terms also
vanish. The conditions on the @xmath ’s correspond to the 1-form fields
obeying the null cone dictated by gravity. The only nontrivial
possibilities for the vanishing of the ninth term are @xmath and either
@xmath or @xmath , say. In fact, these are equivalent, by the following
lemma.

  -- -- -- -------
           (505)
  -- -- -- -------

Proof : Since @xmath , the potential term in question has a factor of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (506)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath The last factor in @xmath is manifestly antisymmetric in @xmath
and @xmath , but @xmath is symmetric in @xmath and @xmath . So one can
take @xmath in this potential term.

@xmath @xmath by the antisymmetry in @xmath and exchanging dummy
internal and spatial indices in ( 506 ). Hence @xmath . Then the only
nontrivial possibility is @xmath . @xmath

There is in fact another possibility for the vanishing of the ninth
term,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (507)
  -- -------- -- -------

but we will now dismiss it. Because the last factor is symmetric in
@xmath , @xmath is symmetric in JK , and so uses up @xmath d.o.f’s, so
the theory is trivial for K @xmath . Otherwise, we require this new
constraint to propagate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (508)
  -- -------- -- -------

But @xmath alone contains @xmath terms, so there must be at least 3 more
constraints, and we discover yet 3 more below, so this theory is
trivial.

3) So we are finally left with K new scalar constraint factors from the
fourth and fifth terms,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (509)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, we examine the evolution of this internal-index vector of new
constraints. We do now require the @xmath ELE, but we can simplify it by
use of the restrictions imposed by @xmath and with some regrouping of
terms by dummy index exchanges, to obtain ⁷³ ⁷³ 73 The corresponding
@xmath part of the calculation uses @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (510)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, using the fact that @xmath is a (1, 0)-density, the propagation of
@xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (511)
  -- -------- -- -------

In obtaining this result, we have used the following cancellations in
addition to those which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (512)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (513)
  -- -------- -- -------

These follow from the last two indices of @xmath being antisymmetric.

We next demand that ( 511 ) vanishes weakly. Again, we will first
consider the @xmath terms. For the theory to be nontrivial, the third,
sixth and seventh non-automatically vanishing terms force us to have,
without loss of generality, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. This last condition means that, within this ansatz, fundamental
interacting 1-form fields are massless. We are then left with the first,
second, fourth and fifth terms. The fourth term forces upon us

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (514)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the Jacobi identity ( 116 ), so the @xmath ’s are axiomatically
the structure constants of some Lie algebra, @xmath . Thus ( 509 ) can
be identified with the Yang–Mills–Gauss constraint ( 125 , 209 ).
Furthermore, the vanishing of the first term forces us to have @xmath ,
which means that the @xmath ’s are totally antisymmetric. The remaining
terms are then automatically zero: the second term vanishes trivially
because of the new antisymmetry, and the fifth term vanishes by the
following argument. Writing @xmath for the symmetric matrix @xmath , and
rearranging the ( 514 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (515)
  -- -------- -- -------

By means of a KF @xmath MG dummy index change, 3 uses of antisymmetry
and a @xmath P dummy index change, the second term on the right-hand
side is equal to its negative and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (516)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but then the dummy index change KF @xmath MG and antisymmetry in the
third structure constant along with symmetry between the two @xmath ’s
means that the right-hand side of the above is zero as required.

So the potential term must be [c.f ( 178 )]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (517)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now investigate the meaning of totally antisymmetric structure
constants @xmath . This involves expanding on the account in I.1.7.3 of
the standard approach to Yang–Mills theory in flat spacetime, where one
starts with Lorentz and parity invariance, which restricts the
Lagrangian to be @xmath . Furthermore, one demands invariance @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (518)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the standard result under a set of infinitesimal transformations
parameterized by @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (519)
  -- -------- -- -------

by symmetry in the internal indices of @xmath .

For @xmath positive-definite, there is the following theorem [ 151 , 365
]

Gell–Mann Glashow Theorem : ( 519 ) and the following two statements are
equivalent.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (520)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (521)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lie algebra terminology used and the proof of the theorem are
summarized in App IV.B. Also, ( 519 ) @xmath ( 520 ) @xmath in the usual
flat spacetime canonical working.

Although we get @xmath to do the usual work, we arrive at the above from
a different angle. We started with @xmath -d 1-form fields on @xmath
-geometries, obtained @xmath as an identity and demanded that @xmath ,
which has forced us to have the secondary constraints @xmath . But once
we have the @xmath , we can use @xmath ( 520 ) @xmath ( 519 ), so our
scheme allows the usual restriction ( 521 ) on the type of Lie algebra.
We can moreover take ( 519 ) to be equivalent to the gauge

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (522)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, if we introduce K auxiliary variables @xmath such that variation
with respect to them encodes @xmath then we should do so according to
G-BM. In our emergent notation, this uniquely fixes the form of @xmath
to be [c.f ( 178 )]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (523)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, if we identify @xmath with @xmath , we arrive at Yang–Mills
theory for @xmath , with coupling constant and gauge group G
(corresponding to the structure constants @xmath ). So this work
constitutes a derivation, from @xmath -d principles alone, of Yang–Mills
theory minimally-coupled to GR.

One may argue also that the auxiliary variables should require to be
Diff-BM. An investigation of this however shows that this is weakly
equivalent to not applying BM to the auxiliary variables. A number of
interesting points arise from this line of thinking.

First, consider the toy example of particles for which all velocities
involved are Eucl-BM. From ( 1 ), ( 2 ) the translational and rotational
actions on each vector velocity are of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (524)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (525)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (526)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then free-endpoint variations with respect to @xmath and @xmath yield
@xmath and @xmath respectively, so things keep on working out as before.

What is and is not BM has a strong physical impact and is put in by
hand. Each field has associated charges that permit it to feel some
forces but not others.

In the current situation, the electromagnetic auxiliary @xmath picks up
a Diff-BM correction:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (527)
  -- -------- -- -------

Unlike above, there is an extra complication: this inclusion involves
the previously cyclic coordinate itself appearing. This is
unproblematic: the EL equations, definition of momentum and the free
endpoint equation ensure this works out. Finally @xmath -variation (or
free-endpoint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (528)
  -- -------- -- -------

of the momentum constraint. Yang–Mills theory works along the same
lines.

1.3.3 Discussion

This work shows that the TSA can accommodate many examples of physical
theories. We can immediately write down a gravity-coupled formalism with
the SU(3) gauge group of the strong force, or with larger groups such as
SU(5) or O(10) of grand unified theories. However, the work does not
restrict attention to a single simple gauge group, since it also holds
for the direct sum ( 521 ). As provided in App IV.B as a corollary to
the Gell-Mann–Glashow theorem, we can then rescale the structure
constants of each U(1) or compact simple subalgebra separately, which is
equivalent to each subalgebra having a distinct coupling constant [ 365
] . The simplest example of this is to have @xmath = 0, which
corresponds to K non-interacting copies of electromagnetism. Other
examples include the gauge bosons of (unbroken) SU(2) @xmath U(1)
electroweak theory and of the SU(3) @xmath SU(2) @xmath U(1) Standard
Model.

We emphasize that our formalism cannot predict how many of these gauge
fields there are in nature, nor what their gauge groups are. This is to
be expected once one accepts that the TSA is ‘adding on matter’ rather
than a unification (see also VI and VII).

BFÓ showed that a scalar field, a 1-form field, and a 1-form field
coupled to scalar fields all obey the same null cone as gravity. In this
section we have shown that this is also true for K interacting 1-form
fields, thus providing more evidence for a universal null cone for the
bosonic fields, derived entirely from @xmath -d principles.
Investigation of the fermionic sector would tell us whether this null
cone is indeed universal for all the known fields of nature. We also
note that our formalism reveals that the universality of the null cone
and gauge theory have a common origin resulting from the universal
application of Diff-BM in conjunction with the need to propagate the
quadratic Hamiltonian constraint.

In this TSA formulation, fundamental 1-form fields are not allowed to
have mass. The only bosonic fields allowed to have mass are scalar
fields. This would make spontaneous symmetry breaking a necessity if we
are to describe the real world, since the weak @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath bosons are massive. I then speculated that it might be that
(Higgs) scalars alone are allowed to have mass in the TSA. However, I
showed that strong gravity easily accommodates massive 1-forms (IV.1.4)
and the spin- @xmath fermion mass term causes no trouble (VI.4). Finally
I figured out how to include massive 1-forms in another particular TSA
formulation (VII).

We finally consider whether classical topological terms can be
accommodated in the TSA. Although it is not free of controversy [ 288 ,
295 ] , t’Hooft’s standard explanation of the low energy QCD spectrum
makes use of an extra topological term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (529)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the classical Lagrangian [ 189 ] , to avoid the U(1) Problem . This
consists of a peak observed to be unsplit but theoretically expected to
be split due to a U(1) symmetry. The topological term resolves the U(1)
Problem by breaking the U(1) symmetry. Then the parameter @xmath is
constrained to be small ( @xmath ) by the non-observation of the neutron
dipole moment [ 3 ] . The inclusion of the topological term corresponds
to dropping the parity-invariance of the Lagrangian. There is then a new
strong CP Problem : if this symmetry is broken, why is it broken so
weakly? The topological term is a total derivative [ 365 ] .
Nevertheless it makes a contribution to the action when the QCD vacuum
is nontrivial.

We argue also that we need not yet confront the accommodation of
topological terms, because so far we are only describing a classical,
unbroken, fermion-free world. But the need for the new term arises from
QM considerations when massive quarks are present [ 288 ] . On the long
run, it is not clear to me whether spatial compactness and other
topological features associated with curved spaces can affect the global
notions used in particle physics.

1.4 Coupling matter to strong gravity

I now attempt to couple matter to the strong gravity TSA theories,
following the procedure of BFÓ. This enables comparison with the GR
case, and leads to a better understanding of how the TSA works. In
particular 1) strong gravity theories impose an ultralocal structure
rather than a Lorentz one, and they cause the breakdown of gauge theory,
which reinforces BFÓ’s notion that the null cone and gauge theory have a
common origin in GR. 2) This helps clarify the central role of the
differential Gauss laws of electromagnetism and Yang–Mills theory in the
masslessness of 1-form fields in the TSA.

1.4.1 Scalar fields

I include first a single scalar field by considering the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (530)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath as before.

The conjugate momenta are given by the usual expressions ( 318 ) and (
471 ), where now @xmath . The local square root gives the primary
Hamiltonian constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (531)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath -variation gives the secondary momentum constraint ( 473 ).

The constraint @xmath contains the canonical propagation speed @xmath of
the scalar field. A priori, this is unrestricted. However, the
propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (532)
  -- -------- -- -------

The theory has just one scalar d.o.f, so if the cofactor of @xmath in
the last term were zero, the scalar dynamics would be trivial. Thus I
have derived that @xmath : the scalar field theory cannot have any
spatial derivatives. So, strong gravity necessarily induces the Carroll
group structure on scalar fields present, thereby forcing them to obey
ultralocal field theory. This is analogous to how GR imposes the null
cone structure on scalar fields present in [ 39 ] .

I finally note that these results (and those in the next subsection) are
unaffected by whether one chooses to use the gravitationally ‘bare’
instead of the gravitationally BM formulation.

1.4.2 K interacting 1-form fields

I consider a BSW-type action containing the a priori unrestricted 1-form
fields @xmath , I = 1 to K ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (533)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the ansätze used before.

The conjugate momenta are given by ( 318 ) and ( 501 ) where now @xmath
. The local square root gives the primary Hamiltonian constraint,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (534)
  -- -------- -- -------

I get the secondary momentum constraint ( 503 ) by @xmath -variation.

From the strong subcase of the theorem, the evolution of the Hamiltonian
constraint is then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (535)
  -- -------- -- -------

I demand that @xmath vanishes weakly. The first two terms vanish weakly
by the Hamiltonian constraint, leaving us with nine extra terms. Because
there are less than 3 K 1-form d.o.f’s to use up, nontriviality dictates
that most of these extra terms can only vanish strongly, that is by
fixing coefficients in the potential ansatz. Furthermore, I notice that
all contributions to ( 535 ) are terms in @xmath or are partnered by
such terms. Since further constraints are independent of @xmath , these
terms in @xmath are of the form @xmath , and nontriviality dictates that
it must be the (spatial) scalar factors @xmath that vanish. I proceed in
three steps.

@xmath ) The first, second, third, fifth and sixth non-weakly-vanishing
terms have no nontrivial scalar factors, so we are forced to have @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The conditions on the @xmath ’s
correspond to the 1-forms obeying the local Carroll structure.

@xmath ) This automatically implies that the seventh, eighth and ninth
terms also vanish.

@xmath ) The only nontrivial possibility for the vanishing of the fourth
term is if @xmath , in which case the constraint algebra has been
closed.

It is enlightening to contrast these (primed) steps with their
(unprimed) counterparts from the GR case of IV.1.2.

1) is the same as @xmath ) except that @xmath , which corresponds to the
1-form fields obeying the local Lorentz light-cone structure

2) is the same as @xmath ) except that instead of the automatic
vanishing of the eighth term, one is forced to take @xmath , which is
the start of the imposition of an algebraic structure on the hitherto
unknown arrays.

3) One is now left with K new nontrivial scalar constraints, which
happen to form the Yang–Mills Gauss constraint ( 509 ). So the algebra
is not yet closed, and the GR working is then substantially longer.

1.4.3 Discussion of strong gravity matter-coupling results

The above results help clarify some aspects of the TSA results for GR.
First, notice also how now that a family of supermetrics is allowed the
matter dynamics is insensitive to a possible change of supermetric,
which is encouraging for the coupling of conformal gravity to matter
fields.

Second, we can take further the view that local causal structure and
gauge theory are manifestations of the same thing. In the GR case, the
universal light-cone and gauge theory come together from the @xmath term
in @xmath , whilst the absence of this in strong gravity ensures that
the collapse of the null cone to the Carrollian line is accompanied by
the breakdown of gauge theory: there is neither gauge symmetry nor a
Gauss law. In the GR case, the quantum-mechanics-inspired
positive-definiteness assumed of the 1-form kinetic matrix @xmath then
turns out to be necessary in the restriction of the choice of gauge
group, so there would be a price to pay if one insisted instead on
entirely classical assumptions. In the strong gravity case, the absence
of emergent gauge structure means that there is no such price to pay for
using classical assumptions alone. Provided that @xmath is invertible,
the outcome of steps @xmath ) to @xmath ) is unaltered.

Note through what happens above in the absence of the Gauss law that it
is specifically this characteristic of the 1-form theory that kills off
its mass terms in the TSA of BFÓ, rather than some underlying principle
for general matter. This is a useful first insight into the status of
mass in the 3-space approach to GR. It is also easy to demonstrate that
the general derivative-free potential term built out of 1-forms persists
coupled to strong gravity.

I emphasize that our result concerning the breakdown of gauge theory is
in particular a result about GR, although it clearly occurs for all our
theories and the theories they approximate. In the strong-coupled
gravity limit such as in the vicinity of the initial singularity, in
this formalism dynamical consistency dictates that gauge theory breaks
down in GR. Gauge interactions become impossible as one approaches such
a regime. This appears not to be in accord with the view that gauge
interactions persist in extreme regimes to form part of a unified theory
with gravity, such as in string theory. However, little is known about
physics in such regimes, so this classical GR intuition might not hold.
If string theory can tame such singularities, the circumstances under
which gauge theory breaks down according to GR might not occur. However,
it could even be that string theory breaks down in such a regime, since
according to one interpretation, stringy matter could be a phase of some
larger theory which breaks down in a high-energy phase transition [ 209
] . Also, Carrollian regimes might arise in string theory under other
circumstances, and exhibit different behaviour from the strong-coupled
limit of GR coupled to gauge theory, as suggested by the recent
Born–Infeld study [ 155 ] .

2 Coupling of matter to conformal gravity

It is an important test of the theoretical framework of conformal
gravity to see whether it is capable of accommodating enough classical
field theories to be a viable description of nature. Below we begin to
show this is the case, in parallel with the previous section. The
universal null cone result is also obtained.

2.1 General theorems

We require a modified version of theorem 1 for use in conformal gravity,
and also a new theorem relating homogeneity in @xmath to the propagation
of the new constraint of conformal gravity, @xmath . The forms of these
below suffice for the construction of a useful range of classical field
theories coupled to conformal gravity: we will demonstrate that the
range of theories covered by these theorems includes much of known
classical bosonic physics coupled to conformal gravity. Furthermore,
these theories are picked out from more general possibilities by
exhaustive implementation of Dirac’s demand for dynamical consistency.

Let @xmath be a set of matter fields that we wish to couple to conformal
gravity, with potential term @xmath and kinetic term @xmath . We first
decompose these as polynomials in the inverse metric. This is because it
is the power of the metric that determines the powers of @xmath that
must be used to achieve the necessary homogeneity. Let @xmath be the set
of fields such that these polynomials are of no higher degree than
@xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (536)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (537)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the following theorem guarantees that @xmath is preserved by the
dynamical evolution.

Theorem C1. For matter fields @xmath , the conformal gravity plus matter
action of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (538)
  -- -------- -- -------

varied with free end points is guaranteed to have @xmath @xmath @xmath .

Note how the powers of @xmath match the powers of the inverse metric
that are needed to make 3-diffeomorphism scalars from the matter fields
of different possible ranks.

Proof Vacuum conformal gravity works, hence the theorem is true for
@xmath .

Induction hypothesis: suppose the theorem is true for some @xmath .

Then, for @xmath , @xmath variation gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (539)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, from @xmath and the metric ELE for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (540)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by the induction hypothesis and using that @xmath , @xmath are
homogeneous of degree @xmath in @xmath . Hence, if the theorem is true
for @xmath , it is also true for @xmath . But it is true for @xmath , so
it is true by induction @xmath @xmath . @xmath

As in IV.1.2, we will now consider @xmath and @xmath as being made up of
contributions from each of the fields present. We will label these
fields, and the indices they carry, by capital Greek indexing sets. We
then obtain the following formulae for the propagation of the conformal
gravity Hamiltonian constraint.

Theorem C2

i) For nonderivative coupled matter fields @xmath with @xmath
homogeneously quadratic in @xmath and @xmath containing at most
first-order derivatives,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (541)
  -- -------- -- -------

ii) If, additionally, the potential contains covariant derivatives, then
there is an extra contribution to i):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (542)
  -- -------- -- -------

The proof offered here includes both conformal gravity ( @xmath ) and
strong conformal gravity ( @xmath , @xmath ). Again, use of formulae i),
ii) permits the @xmath calculations to be done without explicitly
computing each case’s ELE’s.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (543)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (544)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (545)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the local square root gives a primary Hamiltonian-type constraint,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (546)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (547)
  -- -------- -- -------

using the chain-rule on ( 546 ) and using @xmath . Now use the
chain-rule on @xmath , the ELE’s @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath to
obtain the first step below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (548)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the second step above, we regroup the terms into pure gravity terms
and matter terms, expand the matter variational derivatives and use the
definitions of the momenta to eliminate the velocities in the first
three matter terms. We now observe that the first and sixth matter terms
cancel, as do the third and fourth. In the third step we use the pure
gravity working and the momentum constraint ( 545 ), and the definitions
of the momenta to cancel the fifth and eight terms of step 2.
Factorization of step 3 gives the result.

ii) Now @xmath has 2 additional contributions in step 2 due to the
presence of the connections:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (549)
  -- -------- -- -------

which, using ( 168 ) and conformal gravity’s slight modification of (
346 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (550)
  -- -------- -- -------

integration by parts on the second term of ( 549 ) and factorization
yields ii). @xmath

Although Theorem C1 does not consider potentials containing Christoffel
symbols, in all the cases that we consider below (which suffice for the
investigation of the classical bosonic theories of nature) the
propagation of @xmath rules out all theories with such potentials. Thus
it is not an issue whether such theories permit @xmath to be propagated.

2.2 Examples

In this section we take @xmath for Lorentzian (as opposed to Euclidean
or strong) conformal gravity. We will also use @xmath from the outset,
and @xmath , so that we are investigating whether our theory of pure
conformal gravity is capable of accommodating conventional classical
matter theories and establishing the physical consequences. We find that
it does, and that the known classical bosonic theories are picked out.

2.2.1 Scalar fields

The natural action to consider according to our prescription for
including a scalar field is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (551)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, as in III.2.5, we give two different expressions to exhibit the
homogeneity and to use in calculations. @xmath is an arbitrary function
of @xmath alone whilst @xmath .

The conjugate momenta @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 428 ) and ( 427 )
but with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (552)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (553)
  -- -------- -- -------

As in the case of pure conformal gravity, we have the primary constraint
( 429 ), and the end-point part of the @xmath -variation gives @xmath ,
so that @xmath by the primary constraint. But by construction (theorem
C1) this action has the correct form to propagate the constraint @xmath
provided that the LFE

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (554)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds (in the distinguished representation), but this is guaranteed from
the rest of the @xmath -variation.

The @xmath -variation gives the secondary momentum constraint ( 473 )
whilst the local square root gives rise to a primary Hamiltonian-type
constraint, which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (555)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation.

Then, using formula i), the propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint
is, weakly,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (556)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, if the cofactor of @xmath were zero, there would be a secondary
constraint which would render the scalar field theory trivial by using
up its d.o.f. Hence @xmath is fixed, which is the universal light-cone
condition applied to the scalar field. This means that the null cone of
gravitation is enforced even though the gravitational theory in question
is not generally covariant in the spacetime sense.

2.2.2 1-Form fields

According to our prescription, the natural action to include
electromagnetism is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (557)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath as in IV.1.2. We will first show that
electromagnetism exists as a theory coupled to conformal gravity. We
will then discuss how it is uniquely picked out (much as it is picked
out in RWR [ 39 ] ), and how Yang–Mills theory is uniquely picked out
upon consideration of K interacting 1-form fields (much as it is picked
out in [ 11 ] ).

Again, the conjugate momenta @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 427 ) and
( 428 ) but now with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (558)
  -- -------- -- -------

and additionally we have the momentum conjugate to @xmath , ( 479 ). By
the same argument as in III.2.5, @xmath arises and is preserved by a
lapse-fixing equation, which is now

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (559)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath -variation gives the secondary momentum constraint 481 ,
whilst the local square root gives a primary Hamiltonian-type
constraint,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (560)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation.

Then, using formula i), the propagation of the Hamiltonian constraint
is, weakly,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (561)
  -- -------- -- -------

Suppose the cofactor of @xmath is zero. Then we require @xmath . But
this is three conditions on @xmath , so the vector theory would be
rendered trivial. Thus, exhaustively, the only way to obtain a
consistent theory is to have the universal null cone condition @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (562)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we identify as the electromagnetic Gauss constraint ( 62 , 205 ).
The propagation of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (563)
  -- -------- -- -------

is free of @xmath and hence identical to that in the RWR case. Since the
RWR argument for the propagation of @xmath follows from ( 563 ), this
guarantees that the result also holds in conformal gravity.

Since the potential is U(1) symmetric, we can finally encode this new
constraint by making use of U(1)-BM , modifying the bare kinetic term by
introducing an auxiliary

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (564)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following extensions of this working have been considered.

1) Additionally, replacing @xmath by @xmath in the action preserves the
correct form to guarantee @xmath is maintained. We now have derivative
coupling contributions also, so we need to make use of formula ii) of
theorem 2 as well as formula i). Thus, weakly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (565)
  -- -------- -- -------

This has the same structure in @xmath as for the GR case [the overall
@xmath is unimportant, as is the replacement of the GR @xmath factors by
@xmath factors here], so an argument along the same lines as that used
in RWR will hold, forcing the Gauss constraint and @xmath , @xmath
(Maxwell theory).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (566)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (567)
  -- -------- -- -------

(for a priori distinct supermetrics @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) to the
ansatz preserve the conformal properties, hence guaranteeing that @xmath
is maintained by the lapse-fixing equation obtained by applying ( 566 ,
567 ) to ( 559 ). The new conjugate momenta are ( 501 ). @xmath
-variation gives the secondary momentum constraint, ( 503 ) and the
local square root gives a primary Hamiltonian-type constraint,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (568)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the distinguished representation.

Using formulae i), ii) we read off that the propagation of the
Hamiltonian constraint is, weakly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (569)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the same sense as for the single 1-form case above, ( 569 ) has the
same structure as for the GR case, so the argument used in [ 11 ] will
hold, forcing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (570)
  -- -------- -- -------

(for some emergent coupling constant ) and leaving the new constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (571)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again as for the single vector field case, the @xmath ELE is unchanged
from the GR case. The action of the dot on @xmath gives no volume terms.
Hence the working for the propagation of @xmath is unchanged from that
in [ 11 ] , which enforces

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (572)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (573)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (574)
  -- -------- -- -------

From ( 570 ) and ( 573 ), it follows that the @xmath are the structure
constants of some Lie algebra, g . From ( 574 ) and the
Gell-Mann–Glashow theorem [ 151 , 365 ] , g is the direct sum of compact
simple and U(1) subalgebras, provided that the kinetic term is positive
definite as assumed here. We can defend this assumption because we are
working on a theory in which even the gravitational kinetic term is
taken to be positive definite; positive-definite kinetic terms ease
quantization.

3) In the BFÓ formulation of the TSA, mass terms are banned by the
propagation of the Gauss laws. Mass terms contain nontrivial powers of
the volume; however the above arguments can easily be extended to
accommodate them. In the many vector fields case, the effect of a mass
term is to give rise to a new term @xmath in the ELE’s, which
contributes a term @xmath to the propagation of @xmath . For this to
vanish, either @xmath which renders the vector theory trivial, or @xmath
.

App IV.A: Naïve renormalizability

I use the below as part of the justification of the scope of the matter
terms considered in IV and VI. Feynman diagrams are schematic
computational rules for each possible contribution to particle
processes; path integral approaches are descended from such concepts.
Fig 11 has my propagator convention and depicts the terms used below.

Now, for a boson-fermion theory with @xmath -point interactions, the
general Feynman diagram with @xmath @xmath -point vertices, @xmath
internal fermion legs, @xmath external fermion legs, @xmath internal
boson legs, @xmath external boson legs, and @xmath loops has the
momentum space form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This has a superficial degree of divergence @xmath . But by @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath for any vertex type @xmath , lest there be
divergence. Also, observed lepton number conservation requires fermion
legs to occur in pairs.

App IV.B: Gell-Mann–Glashow theorem

An algebra a is a vector space V equipped with a product @xmath . A
subalgebra b of a is a vector subspace W of V which is also an algebra
with product . It is invariant if @xmath . A real representation @xmath
of a is a map @xmath . It is reducible if @xmath some subspace U in V
that is left invariant by @xmath . If it is not reducible, it is
irreducible . It is totally reducible if it can be written as a direct
sum of reducibles.

A Lie algebra g is Abelian if @xmath @xmath @xmath . An Abelian algebra
with 1 generator is a U(1) algebra. is simple if it contains no proper
invariant subalgebras and it is not Abelian. is semi-simple if it is the
direct sum of simple Lie algebras. A simple or semisimple Lie algebra is
compact if @xmath is positive-definite.

Now for the Proof of the Gell-Mann–Glashow theorem [ 365 , 151 ] :

( 519 ) @xmath ( 520 ) trivially by basis change, provided that @xmath
is positive definite, in which case we can define @xmath .

( 520 ) @xmath ( 521 )

In the basis assumed in ( 520 ) are matrices of the form @xmath . ⁷⁴ ⁷⁴
74 A is for adjoint and R is for reducible. Because these are imaginary
and antisymmetric, they are by definition Hermitian. Thus we can use the
simple fact that Hermitian matrices are either irreducible or totally
reducible. . In the irreducible case, by definition there is no proper W
@xmath V that is left invariant by the @xmath , ie there is no set of
less than K linearly-independent vectors @xmath such that @xmath is a
linear combination of the @xmath . As @xmath , this means that there is
no set of linear combinations @xmath that is closed under @xmath with
all the @xmath . But such a set would provide the generators of an
invariant subalgebra. Hence the absence of such a set means by
definition that the Lie Algebra is simple.

In the totally reducible case, then there must be a suitable choice of
the @xmath that are block-diagonal supermatrices @xmath , where the
constituent @xmath submatrices are either irreducible or vanish.
Adopting this basis also for the Lie algebra gives structure constants
of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (575)
  -- -------- -- -------

But, since @xmath is totally antisymmetric, this is proportional also to
@xmath and @xmath . So for any representation @xmath of the Lie algebra
in this basis,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (576)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath real and totally antisymmetric in CAB . This is what we mean
by an algebra being a direct sum of subalgebras, and furthermore, for
each M , @xmath is either irreducible (corresponding to a simple
subalgebra), or zero (corresponding to a U(1) subalgebra).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (577)
  -- -------- -- -------

since by antisymmetry it is a sum of positive quantities. Furthermore,
strict equality occurs only if @xmath . For suppose not. Then @xmath is
an invariant Abelian subalgebra, which is a contradiction, since the
@xmath form a simple Lie algebra.

( 521 ) @xmath ( 519 )

( 521 ) means that in some basis @xmath . To construct @xmath , take
@xmath , which is an arbitrary real symmetric positive-definite matrix
since each @xmath is. Then ( 519 ) follows for each simple subalgebra,
using first the Jacobi identity and then antisymmetry:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (578)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is also trivially true for the U(1) subalgebras since their
structure constants vanish. @xmath .

Corollary : One can always define the scale of the gauge fields such
that @xmath .

proof : @xmath for totally-antisymmetric structure constants. All the
@xmath can be put into block diagonal form, with irreducible or zero
submatrices along the diagonal. Then by Schur’s Lemma, @xmath must also
be block-diagonal, with blocks of the same size and position as in the
@xmath , and with the submatrix in each block being proportional to the
unit matrix. So @xmath has the form @xmath where the @xmath are
arbitrary real positive numbers. Then we can always rescale the gauge
fields so that these are all equal to 1. @xmath

App IV.C: Teitelboim’s inclusion of matter into the HKT route

One wishes to include matter fields @xmath in such a way that the
resulting @xmath and @xmath close as the Dirac Algebra ( 287 ).
Teitelboim notes and uses that minimally-coupled scalars,
electromagnetism and Yang–Mills theory have @xmath ultralocal in @xmath
. It so happens for all these examples that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (579)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the matter contributions, and that @xmath
and @xmath separately obey the Dirac Algebra [ 349 , 352 ] . This is the
result mentioned in IV.1.2.

The minimally-coupled scalar is trivially ultralocal. For a single
1-form to work in this way, it is enforced that @xmath is physically
irrelevant, and thus one quickly arrives at electromagnetism. For many
1-forms, ultralocality and the inclusion of the single 1-form case
enforces @xmath to be physically irrelevant. Now, by Teitelboim’s extra
assumption that the @xmath generate an internal symmetry, the Poisson
bracket of two @xmath ’s must be a combination of these @xmath ’s:
@xmath . This enforces both

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (580)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (581)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (582)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the appearance of these, Teitelboim deduces that the theory has
gauge symmetry. He argues this to be a consequence of embeddability. As
for the TSA, I observe that the resulting Lagrangian contains a
positive-definite combination of internal indices of @xmath from which
the GMG theorem tells me that the corresponding Lie algebra is
furthermore a direct sum of U(1) and compact simple Lie subalgebras.

V TSA: Discussion and interpretation

1 TSA versus the principles of relativity

I take Wheeler’s question about the form of the Hamiltonian constraint
seriously. Starting from the relational 3-space ontology, the TSA gives
Hamiltonian-type constraints

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (583)
  -- -------- -- -------

as identities from RI. Consistency alone then dictates what options are
available for @xmath – the Dirac approach. I have included matter fields
@xmath since I have found that conclusions are best made only once this
is done. @xmath is s.t @xmath is homogeneous quadratic in its velocities
and @xmath at worst depends on connections (rather than their
derivatives). I then get the following master equation for the
propagation of the Hamiltonian-type constraint:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (584)
  -- -------- -- -------

The strategy tied to the Galilean RP2 for this is to declare that @xmath
. This kills all but the last factor. It would then seem natural to take
@xmath , whereupon the fields are not dynamical. They are however not
trivial: they include fields obeying analogues of Poisson’s law, or
Ampère’s, which are capable of governing a wide variety of complicated
patterns. One would then have an entirely nondynamical ‘Galilean’ world.
Although this possibility cannot be obtained from a BSW-type Lagrangian
(the T factor is badly behaved), this limit is unproblematic in the
Hamiltonian description. Of course, the Hamiltonian-type constraint
ceases to be quadratic:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (585)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now one might still vary with respect to the metric, obtaining a
multiplier equation in place of the ADM (or BSW) evolution equation,
@xmath . In vacuum the trace of this and @xmath leads to @xmath which in
the absence of privileged vectors implies that @xmath is independent of
position so that clocks everywhere march in step. Then also @xmath . The
cosmological constant alone cannot exist in an unfrozen CWB world. But
the inclusion of matter generally breaks these results. One might well
however not vary with respect to the metric and consider the worlds with
a fixed spatial background metric. This includes as a particular case
the Hamiltonian study of the flat spatial background world in the local
square root version of App II.B, but permits generalization to curved
backgrounds.

The strategy tied to the Carrollian RP2 is to declare that @xmath . One
still has the penultimate term so presumably one further declares that
@xmath contains no connections (the possibility of connections is
studied more satisfactorily in VI). It is ‘natural’ then to take the
second factor of the last term to be 0 thus obtaining a world governed
by Carrollian relativity.

The strategy tied to the Lorentzian RP2L is somewhat more colourful. Use
@xmath , reorder and invent a momentum constraint:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (586)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now go for the orthodox general covariance option: that the third and
fourth terms cancel, enforcing the null cone. This needs to be
accompanied by doing something about the fifth term. One can furthermore
opt for the orthodox @xmath : the recovery of embeddability into
spacetime corresponding to GR (RWR result), or for the preferred-slicing
but York-GR-like worlds of @xmath . Either will do: the recovery of
locally-Lorentzian physics does not happen for generally-covariant
theories alone! One requires also to get rid of the connection terms but
the Dirac procedure happens to do this automatically for our big
ansätze. Thus GR spacetime arises alongside preferred slicing,
Carrollian and Galilean worlds, in which aspects of GR-like spacetime
structure are not recovered.

With the above in mind, a clarification is required as regards the
previous use of exhaustive proofs. The ultralocal and nondynamical
strategies for dealing with the last term of ( 584 ) are available in
all the above options. It may not shock the reader that degenerate and
dual-degenerate possibilities might coexist. Indeed Carroll matter in
the Galilean option permits a BSW Lagrangian… But in the Lorentzian case
this means RP1 is not fully replaced! At the moment, we do derive that
gravitation enforces a unique finite propagation speed, but the
possibility of fields with infinite and zero propagation speeds is not
precluded. ⁷⁵ ⁷⁵ 75 The latter is the analogue of the ‘each particle
moving in its own potential’ bad-ordering mechanics example in II.2.2.1.
Thus the objection that Newtonian mechanics and electromagnetism have
different relativities is precisely not being countered! So in this
approach, if one were to observe an analogue of electrostatics (a
Poisson law), or of magnetostatics, one could not infer that there is a
missing displacement current (or any other appropriate individual
‘Lorentzifications’ of electrostatics and magnetostatics in the absence
of a good reason such as Faraday’s Law to believe in unifying these two
analogue theories). One would suspect that formulating physics in this
way would open the door to analogue Aethers coexisting in a universe
with Einstein’s equations.

In more detail, BFÓ dismissed this possibility as trivial from counting
arguments. But these are generally misleading, since they do not take
into account the geometry of the restrictions on the solution space. It
is true that if there are more conditions than degrees of freedom then
there is typically no solution, but some such systems will nevertheless
have undersized and not empty solution spaces.

As a first example of this, consider the flat spacetime single 1-form
case of App II.B. The crucial term is then @xmath . The @xmath option
gives the universal light-cone, but the other factors could be zero in a
variety of situations: they mean a vanishing Poynting vector: E̱ @xmath Ḇ
= 0. This includes E̱ = 0 (a fragment of magnetostatics), Ḇ = 0 (a
fragment of electrostatics) and @xmath . Each of these cases admits a
number of solutions. These include complicated patterns analogous to
those which can occur in electrostatics and magnetostatics, which could
not be described as trivial.

As a second example, consider the single 1-form in homogeneous curved
spacetimes. $̱\pi$ = E̱ = 0 imposes a severe but not total restriction on
Minisuperspace. The Bianchi types IV , V , VI (h @xmath ), VII (h @xmath
), VIII , IX are banned outright, whereas the fields in Bianchi types II
, VI (h = @xmath ), VII (h @xmath ) have less degrees of freedom than
expected pointwise in Einstein--Maxwell theory. ⁷⁶ ⁷⁶ 76 h is a further
invariant for types VI and VII given by @xmath for @xmath the structure
constants of each Bianchi model’s associated Lie Algebra. Nevertheless,
solutions exist (see p 202 of [ 224 ] ). The treatment of Ḇ = 0 is
identical to that of E̱ = 0 by dual rotation. E̱ @xmath Ḇ also admits
nontrivial solutions such as the charged Taub metric, or its
generalization on p 195 of [ 224 ] . These are not trivial models. Thus
one has indeed an undersized but still interesting solution space. Now,
these solutions could all be interpreted as belonging not just to
Einstein–Maxwell theory, but also to a theory T with Einstein cones and
distinct

(even degenerate) cones belonging to a strange 1-form theory.

However, despite these examples illustrating non-triviality, RP1 is
safe. For, the theory T permits no macroscopic 1-form propagations,
since @xmath means no momentum, @xmath means the theory is ultralocal so
1-form information does not propagate away from any point, and @xmath
means that there is none of the mutual orthogonality that ensures the
continued propagation of light in electromagnetism. In the absence of
such propagation, the concept of a 1-form particle moving in a
background solution of theory T makes no sense (since this is but an
approximation to the field equations of theory T, which permit no 1-form
propagation). Thus such a 1-form is causally irrelevant, so the recovery
of RP1 from the TSA is not affected.

Moreover, one does have a source of potentially nontrivial scenarios
from this insight: such nonpropagating Carroll or non-( @xmath ) Lorentz
or Galileo fields could nevertheless be coupled via potential terms to
propagating fields, leading to scattering of the propagating fields.
Whether such unusual fields are capable of producing interesting
theoretical cosmology results may deserve further investigation.

2 Discussion of conformal theories

2.1 Discussion from ABFÓ paper

The conformal branch of the TSA provides examples of theories of
evolving 3-geometries that do not fit together to form spacetime.
Nevertheless, the classical bosonic physics corresponding to these
theories has the standard locally Lorentzian form. Thus the universal
null cone can appear alongside preferred slicing rather than
embeddability.

The differences between the conformal-gravity–matter and GR–matter
metric ELE’s are small: the absence of a term containing the ‘expansion
of the universe’ @xmath and the presence of a global term such as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (587)
  -- -------- -- -------

where scalar matter has been included. Such a global term mimics the
effect of a small epoch-dependent cosmological constant. This global
term is a ‘cosmological force’ because it occurs in the ELE’s with
proportionality to @xmath , just like the cosmological constant
contribution does in GR. We expect it to be epoch-dependent because it
contains matter field contributions, which will change as the universe
evolves. The occurrence of this global term should be compared with the
scale-invariant particle model, in which there is a universal
cosmological force induced by all the familiar forces of nature such as
Newtonian gravity and electrostatics. There, this cosmological force is
extremely weak over solar system scales but has a decisive effect on
cosmological scales, ensuring the conservation of the moment of inertia.
Our global term is an action-at-a-distance term which is the price to
pay for our particular implementation of scale invariance. Some of our
other conformal theories do not have the global features;
correspondingly they allow for the volume of the universe to be a
meaningful concept. Thus these other theories are closer to GR than
conformal gravity in this respect.

Conformal gravity represents a new approach to scale invariance. Its
construction shows how BM and constraint propagation are powerful tools
for a different way of constructing theories. Conformal gravity also
highlights the thought-provoking manner in which GR only just fails to
be fully scale invariant.

2.1.1 On the weak field limit

We expect that conformal gravity will pass the the solar-system tests
just as GR does. This is because, first, the expansion of the universe
does not play a role on such small scales in GR so its absence will not
affect the results. Second, at maximal expansion, a data set may be
evolved by both the GR and conformal gravity equations. The difference
between these two evolutions is well defined in Riem. Since the first
derivatives match up at maximal expansion, the difference between the
evolutions is small. For sure, the size of the difference will depend on
the global terms. But these can be made small by a well-known
construction as far as the finite-time evolution for a patch of initial
data that is substantially smaller than the radius of the universe is
concerned. Such patches can be constructed to contain a simple model
solar system: a patch of spherically-symmetric weak field regime on
which test particles and test light-rays move. I have found nothing to
date to contradict this assertion, briefly noting that the conformal
gravity system is the same as the ADM one to first order. I have not
pursued this very far because the currently unresolved cosmological
difficulties below stand out as stronger grounds on which to question
conformal gravity. Binary pulsar calculations, which in GR involve the
second-order Ricci tensor [ 364 ] , may be harder to check than solar
system tests. Additionally, in GR these are based on a tensors on
Minkowski spacetime approximation, which may not be applicable to
conformal gravity. Finally, conformal gravity is the extreme in
difference from GR of the conformal theories. The closer to GR, the less
doubt there is about the reproduction of GR results.

2.1.2 Cosmology

On account of the strong evidence from the Hubble redshift,
nucleosynthesis and the microwave background it does seem unlikely that
conformal gravity will be able to supplant the Big Bang cosmology.
Crudely, as conformal gravity currently stands there is none of the
first and the grounds on which a standard ‘hot’ explanation of the other
two would be based are questionable (although Barbour illustrates some
simple points in [ 36 ] ). So when writing ABFÓ, we considered rather
the potential theoretical value of conformal gravity as a foil to the
Big Bang. Theorists concerned with achieving the deepest possible
understanding of cosmology and the foundations of physics value
alternative models, ⁷⁷ ⁷⁷ 77 For example, in [ 135 ] an eternal
singularity is presented as an alternative explanation for the isotropy
of the microwave background; in [ 269 ] it is shown that an anisotropic,
Bianchi V universe can account for the correct light element abundances.
even if they explain or mimic only part of the whole picture. This is
akin to the role of Brans–Dicke theory in solar-system tests of GR.

Conformal gravity may require a more sophisticated approach to
cosmology. Consider the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW)
homogeneous and isotropic cosmologies, which are the backbone of
standard cosmology. As solutions in which nothing changes except size
and homogeneous intensity, they are suspiciously trivial from a
dynamical viewpoint. In a scale-invariant theory, the FLRW-type
solutions are merely static points in the configuration space. There has
long been concern [ 225 ] about the accuracy with which FLRW cosmologies
approximate more physically realistic inhomogeneous solutions of GR
under the assumption that it is the correct physical theory. Conformal
gravity raises a more serious doubt: it gives the possibility of physics
and small-scale gravity that is in close agreement with GR but which
differs greatly from GR cosmologically (and quantum-mechanically). In
comparison, the Brans–Dicke/dilatonic modifications of GR [ 368 , 69 ]
have not been found to significantly affect the key physical basis of
Big Bang cosmology.

Since conformal gravity has no dynamics analogous to the FLRW universes
of GR, the only possible direct progress in its cosmology would be
through the study of anisotropic and especially inhomogeneous solutions.
This is the opposite emphasis to the norm in classical and quantum
cosmology. In ABFÓ this was said to ‘‘have some chance to throw up a
radical new explanation of the redshift” ⁷⁸ ⁷⁸ 78 This is not the only
way out of difficulty though. I explain in the next subsection why I
currently rather favour more conventional explanations. . This was based
on it being known that in GR, in addition to Hubble redshift, a change
in clumpiness (shape) of the universe can cause redshift. The solar
photons that reach us are redshifted by having to climb out of the solar
gravitational potential well (gravitational redshift), and
inhomogeneities cause similar effects in cosmology (the integrated
Sachs–Wolfe and Rees–Sciama effects [ 286 , 309 ] ). The scale-invariant
particle model is suggestive in this respect. We speculated that the
rearrangement of geometry and matter of an evolving universe can cause a
similar redshift in conformal gravity. In such a case, it will not be
due to differences in the gravitational potential between different
points of space but between different epochs. Now, the potential can be
changed either by a change of scale or by a change of shape. In
conformal gravity, the former is not available and so the latter would
have to be the origin of the observed cosmological redshift. Since the
change of shape of the universe can be observed, this should lead to
testable predictions.

Conformal gravity may also offer a different perspective on
singularities. The Big Bang itself is an initial singularity where the
known laws of physics break down. It is inevitable in GR by theorems of
Hawking [ 176 ] . These require the expansion of past-directed normal
timelike geodesic congruences to be positive everywhere on a given
spatial hypersurface. The GR form of these theorems will not hold in
conformal gravity since such a notion of expansion is no longer
meaningful. ⁷⁹ ⁷⁹ 79 We do not know if other forms of singularity
theorem hold. We cannot so easily dismiss results involving null and/or
local expansion. Another source of trouble in adapting GR proofs for
conformal gravity will be the lack of a 4-d generally covariant
equivalent to the EFE’s. If local singularities form, they will
contribute to the global terms in conformal gravity everywhere . This
could be fatal in the particle model, but in conformal gravity there may
be two ways out. First, singularities may only contribute a finite
amount once integrated. Second, there may be a tendency to preclude
singularities in our conformal theories by the ‘collapse of the lapse’
becoming more than a gauge effect (see V.2.3.3). In GR, the Hubble
redshift interpretation forces one to admit the breakdown of known
physics in our finite past, whilst in conformal gravity, the denial of
such a breakdown requires a new interpretation of the Hubble redshift.

Whereas our greatest interest is in whether conformal gravity can give
us an alternative cosmology, our CS+V theory has a notion of universal
expansion, so it will be much closer to GR both in agreeing with the
standard cosmology and in not offering these new perspectives on
nonsingularity and global cosmological forces. I provide more
cosmological ideas in V.2.3.2.

2.1.3 Brief quantum outline

We finish with a simple discussion toward quantization of conformal
gravity [ 12 , 6 ] . We wonder about what rôle @xmath now plays. This
and the fundamental LFE ( 432 ) are nonstandard objects from the
quantization perspective. The new global terms may also play a role.
Whereas in GR the DeWitt supermetric gives an indefinite i.p as a
consequence of the sign of the expansion contribution to the kinetic
energy, in conformal gravity the new @xmath supermetric gives a
positive-definite i.p, altering the status of the i.p Problem. Our
quantum program is attractive in that conformal gravity has a marginally
smaller configuration space than GR (rather than some choice of
additional structures). Note that these features are widespread
throughout the various conformal theories.

The study of some of the novel features of quantum conformal gravity can
be isolated by the sequential study of @xmath strong gravity, strong
conformal gravity and conformal gravity. The effect of using a
positive-definite @xmath supermetric can be tried out in @xmath strong
gravity. Then the additional effect of introducing a volume and of the
rôle of @xmath can be tried out in strong conformal gravity, while the
additional conformal gravity complication of a nontrivial
integro-differential LFE is absent here, from my observation that its
counterpart here leads to @xmath being a spatial constant.

We hope to use a ‘top-down’ approach. However, we start from space
rather than spacetime for relational reasons [ 38 , 31 , 35 , 39 , 36 ]
and to illustrate that it is potentially misguiding to always presuppose
and generalize spacetime structure. We hope to quantize in the timeless
naïve Schrödinger interpretation favoured by Barbour [ 31 , 32 , 35 ] .

The Problems of quantizing gravity are hopelessly interrelated, so that
adding to a partial resolution to tackle further Problems can spoil that
partial resolution [ 238 ] . III.1.5 contains a further example of this
malady: it is not to be expected that Ashtekar variable techniques [ 25
] , with their simplification of operator ordering and their natural
regularization, could be imported into conformal gravity. Thus,
quantization of conformal gravity will differ from, but not necessarily
be easier than, quantization of GR. Should conformal gravity adequately
describe the classical universe, its quantization program will become
more important. Even if this were not the case, we expect to further the
understanding of quantization and of quantum GR by the study of such
theories as toy models.

2.2 Further conformal alternatives

2.2.1 First-principles formulation of CS+V theory

Here are some well-founded candidates for CS+V theory. These particular
candidates use a ‘Laplacian implementation’ of volume-preserving
conformal transformations (VPConf) like in that in III.2.6, but are
built adhering to various more clear-cut first principles. Note that we
are also in the process of considering alternative implementations [ 13
] . The finite Laplacian implementation of the VPConf transformations in
III.2.6,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (588)
  -- -------- -- -------

is unsatisfactory, for Ó Murchadha and I independently found that these
do not close to form a group. Rather,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (589)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of the Laplacian corresponding to the original metric, which is
not of the form

@xmath for some @xmath . This is related to @xmath not being a
conformally-covariant object. Moreover, there are no simple
conformally-covariant differential operators acting on scalars that are
plausible here.

But (as presented in II), I realized that the form of BM is dictated by
the infinitesimal transformations associated with the generators. Now,
the

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (590)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (591)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus one should rather use this infinitesimal Laplacian implementation,
which in fact reverts to earlier drafts of the paper [ 12 ] .

I want an action such that part of the variation with respect to
auxiliaries gives the CMC condition @xmath and another part gives the
correct LFE to propagate this. I offer two approaches to this. Both
follow from my arbitrary frame principle. The difference between them
arises from there being two different kinds of covariance.

The ‘York style’ is to write the action in the arbitrary conformal frame
out of good conformally covariant objects, bearing in mind that the
theory only has a temporary technically-convenient conformal gauge
symmetry (with respect to the bona fide metric scale-factor @xmath ),
since the Lichnerowicz equation then gauge-fixes @xmath by specifically
mapping to a particular point on the Conf orbit. ⁸⁰ ⁸⁰ 80 Thus this use
of gauge theory is different from the U(1), Yang–Mills and Diff uses of
gauge theory. There, the choice of gauge is unphysical, whereas here it
is physical because it is prescribed by an additional condition required
for passage to the physical 3-metric. Consequently there is no Conf BM
in this approach: conformally-bare velocities are to be regarded as
conformally covariant. This conformal mathematics underlies both York’s
work and our attempt to write down a CS+V theory in III.2.6, and
explains the underlying technical similarities. In this approach, what
might have been regarded as the trace and tracefree parts of a single
tensor are rather regarded as distinct objects which are alloted
distinct conformal rank as befits the formation of conformally-covariant
derivatives. In particular, a relative scaling of the @xmath and @xmath
of @xmath arises. This corrects the naïve mismatch in amount of @xmath
between the auxiliary variation LFE and the LFE required to propagate
the CMC condition. ⁸¹ ⁸¹ 81 I use @xmath and @xmath . In this approach,
there are two distinct auxiliaries, and the one encoding the CMC
condition ( @xmath ) should probably be regarded as a multiplier, not a
best-matching. The action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (592)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is (the infinitesimal version of) what was considered in III.2.6.

The ‘Barbour style’ is to consider an action with a true conformal
symmetry, with scale factor @xmath . Then @xmath is neither the symmetry
scale factor nor a bona fide metric scale-factor: it is an extraneous
auxiliary whose role is to make the conformal symmetry true via its
banal transformation property. Then VPConf-BM is indeed required ⁸² ⁸²
82 It is in fact only a nontrivial correction to @xmath since @xmath .
to make @xmath into a good VPConf object. The natural action is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (593)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath infinitesimal, so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (594)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (595)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (596)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then free-endpoint variation and the trace of ( 595 ) give

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (597)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the naïve @xmath is replaced by the scaled-up p .

Note that ( 594 ) does not have a relative scaling of @xmath between
@xmath and @xmath . Before, the exclusion of this led to a mismatch in
the @xmath terms between the @xmath -variation and @xmath propagation
LFE’s, so one might expect ( 594 ) to be inconsistent. However, it turns
out that @xmath -variation of ( 594 ) has a new source of @xmath terms.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (598)
  -- -------- -- -------

by the @xmath = @xmath = 1 cases of ( 344 ) and ( 346 ). This term
occurs with cofactor numerically proportional to @xmath , and as this is
constant, it can be taken inside @xmath , and happens to contribute just
the right amount of @xmath to the @xmath -variation LFE to obtain the
CMC LFE.

Note also that a ‘ @xmath ’ relative scaling emerges in the primary
constraint arising from

squaring the momenta, due to the nonminimal coupling:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (599)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (600)
  -- -------- -- -------

which may be identified with the Lichnerowicz–York equation. The above
working could be seen as an alternative derivation of this equation.

Next, note that we came across the above via setting the @xmath factor
in ( 331 ) to 0, but they are also resliceable since @xmath i.e the
constraint algebra works just as well if CMC slices are not chosen. Thus
I identify the above as not being alternative theories but new
formulation of CWB GR in the CMC gauge. However there is no longer any
consistency reason for setting @xmath . So I can consider the arbitrary-
@xmath versions of the two approaches above in order to obtain
alternative theories of gravity which have genuine privileged slicings.
These follow from replacing the @xmath ’s in the actions by @xmath .
Thus, if one takes York’s IVP mathematics more seriously than GR itself,
then one is entitled to consider a range of privileged-slicing theories
in addition to resliceable GR.

2.2.2 Recovery of conformal gravity

The single-auxiliary formulation of conformal gravity is clearly in the
‘Barbour style’. The 2-auxiliary formulation is not quite in the ‘York
style’, but can be easily made to comply with it since the scaling of
@xmath is rendered irrelevant for conformal gravity because @xmath
arises. The action is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (601)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note also how @xmath (not @xmath ) now clearly gives the simplest
presentation (but this is the intractable degenerate case).

2.2.3 Further alternative conformal theories

The survey of alternative theories in III.2.6 is not exhaustive. First,
recall that the trick of dividing through by the volume was adopted in
the maximal CWB case to allow the LFE to work. However, there is nothing
stopping one also trying to divide through by the volume in the CMC CWB
case, even though the LFE is already well-behaved without this
correction. This gives Kelleher’s theory [ 213 , 212 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (602)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (603)
  -- -------- -- -------

is enforced giving an interesting (almost certainly too) restrictive
cosmological scheme (see V.2.3.2).

Another alternative theory is my

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (604)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath varied standardly rather than freely flapping. Then
consistency requires the York time

to have the freedoms of Newtonian absolute time:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (605)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last step is by the auxiliary variation. Hence @xmath , a
total constant (and @xmath ). Thus I name this theory Newton–York
absolute time theory . It is intermediate in restrictiveness between GR
and Kelleher’s theory. I found that all the other combinations of types
of auxiliary did not yield any further distinct consistent theories.

Note that all bar CS+V and CG are 2-auxiliary ‘York style’ theories,
with their @xmath relative scalings. I am not sure whether the choice of
implementation (out of the above two, the Laplacian one, or the one in [
13 ] ) affects precisely which ‘CS+V’ configuration space is involved.
We consider this well worth investigating, given the connection between
CS+V and a representation of the CWB GR d.o.f’s.

2.3 Discussion and interpretation

2.3.1 Conformal gravity and CS+V theory as PDE systems

2.3.1.1 Traditional thin sandwiches

For conformal gravity, there is no Problem of zeros globally for all of
its solutions in the classic thin sandwich approach since the potential
is of fixed sign. The impasse may then be instead whether such fixed
sign potentials are capable of describing moderately complicated
astrophysics. For ‘York-style’ CS+V theories, differences in @xmath
should again alter the behaviour of the thin sandwich formulation. For
both conformal gravity and the CS+V theories, the auxiliary and its
@xmath -derivative (or the second auxiliary) become involved so that one
has not the usual sort of 3-equation thin sandwich system, but rather an
extended 5-equation system.

Here is the conformal gravity vacuum traditional thin sandwich system
for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (606)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (607)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Barbour-style CS+V traditional thin sandwich system for @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath is messy once I substitute for @xmath so I do not give
it explicitly. One feature is that the 3-vector equations are now fifth
order whereas the LFE is sixth order, both due to the @xmath in the
potential. The @xmath case is an as-yet untested scheme for a (piece of
CWB) GR. Were it to have good p.d.e properties, it would be of
considerable direct interest both in numerical relativity and in
quantization. But it is plausible it will pick up difficulties from the
traditional thin sandwich subsystem it includes. However, allowing for
other values of @xmath gives elliptic thin sandwich operators (see C.3).
Thus it may be so it may be that some working (toy?) worlds emerge from
such a study, in which some of Wheeler’s old classical and quantum hopes
could be tried out.

2.3.1.2 Conformal thin sandwiches

I next consider the ‘York style’ @xmath CS+V conformal thin sandwich.
This is messy if written using @xmath for @xmath , so I keep this as a
later admissibility restriction to be imposed on the @xmath solutions.
Collecting together the @xmath CS+V LFE, @xmath and the ‘ @xmath CS+V
Lichnerowicz–York’ equation, the conventional GR conformal thin sandwich
of I.2.9.4.1 arises once the equations are re-expressed in terms of
@xmath (s.t @xmath rather than @xmath ), and the Lichnerowicz–York
equation along with the product rule is used in the LFE to eliminate
@xmath .

Next I consider the conformal gravity conformal thin sandwich
formulation. Collect the conformal gravity LFE, @xmath and the
‘conformal gravity Lichnerowicz equation’ ( 434 ), write in terms of
@xmath , and use the product rule along with ( 434 ) to eliminate @xmath
in the LFE, thus obtaining:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (608)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (609)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (610)
  -- -------- -- -------

This differs from GR’s conformal thin sandwich and is thus a
starting-point for conformal gravity predictions to compete with GR’s as
regards colliding compact objects. Note however that some things will be
shared: for moment of time-symmetry data (see App C, I.2.11), GR and the
above are identical. Just as well numerical relativity is developing
away from such overly simple cases! Note that one can also build
arbitrary- @xmath CS+V theory conformal thin sandwiches as a testbed for
numerical relativity.

2.3.2.3 IVP–CP formulation

For conformal gravity, one would first solve the 4 IVP equations for
@xmath and the longitudinal vector potential @xmath , then redeclare
@xmath and @xmath so that @xmath and then tackle the evolution problem
in the @xmath -distinguished representation. As the IVP’s are identical
in all relevant ways to the GR IVP, they are therefore as well-posed.
One then faces a CP step coupled to the solution of the LFE. As a
procedure this is not novel: its analogue in GR is the maintenance of a
(partial) gauge-fixing in the to study of the evolution equations. The
LFE’s in question here are also technically close to the usual ones in
theoretical numerics. The novelty is in some of LFE’s being enforced .

It may be problematic that GR’s p.d.e theorems are strictly tied to the
harmonic gauge, which may be of limited computational value. This
becomes harsher for the above conformal theories since now there is no
apparent right to use harmonic coordinates, so there are no known
theorems at all.

2.3.2 Cosmology

Whereas inhomogeneity can produce redshift, it is unlikely to produce
anywhere near as much redshift (around 6) as is required to account for
observations of distant galaxies. The standard cosmology furthermore
makes use of much larger redshifts than this so as to explain features
believed to be of earlier ⁸³ ⁸³ 83 In the case of element abundances,
the observed abundance is explained both in terms of early-universe
nucleosynthesis and the more contemporary influence of astrophysics.
origin than galactic structures, such as the microwave background or the
abundances of the light elements. The GR cosmological effects mentioned
above are capable of producing fluctuations in redshift but are small
compared to the Hubble redshift. It is also worth noting that in GR the
maximum gravitational redshift from light emerging from a star is 2 [
364 ] . It remains to be checked whether these results also occur within
conformal gravity. Finally if one were to attempt to explain larger
redshifts cumulatively from clumpy effects, one would be faced with
unobserved anisotropy correlated with the presence of intervening
galactic structures.

I rather propose some simpler, more conventional solutions to this
cosmological difficulty. First, note that if the universe is described
by one of our conformal theories, it need not be conformal gravity. The
CS+V theories permit the standard GR cosmology if we so wish (though one
might choose an appreciably different @xmath ). This might be regarded
as being too similar to GR to generate interest as an alternative
cosmology. However, there are theories of ‘intermediate restrictiveness’
between conformal gravity (no standard cosmology) and the CS+V theories
(roughly the same as the standard cosmology). These examples do achieve
some of the goals of alternative cosmologies beyond the illustrative
value of the nonexistence of standard cosmology in conformal gravity as
originally conceived.

For example, in Kelleher’s theory [ 212 ] , redshift is clearly
available ( @xmath fully constant rather than conformal gravity’s @xmath
), and its form is most rigid compared to GR (where @xmath can vary with
cosmic time.). Furthermore, the isotropic cosmology ansatz rigidly leads
to a scale-factor @xmath independently of the matter content:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (611)
  -- -------- -- -------

Both the rigidity of this form and its insensitivity to the matter are
completely unlike GR. From a GR perspective this looks like a flat
universe with a peculiar but physically-admissible equation of state,
and yet in truth it is a closed universe corresponding to a conformal
theory. Of course, @xmath does not fit current observations well, and
corresponds to a universe believed to be younger than some of its
constituent stars! Nevertheless, this example deserves further
investigation to delineate which of its predictions agree with GR and
which differ. It may be seen as too rigid to be realistic. To this I
offer three ways out (some of which may be combined), which I leave as a
future project.

First, there is no guarantee that this @xmath is a stable attractor of
inhomogeneous solutions. It may be that the theory permits other more
typical asymptotic behaviours to which there corresponds no exact
solution. This would furbish more interesting alternative cosmology
examples.

Second, Newton–York absolute time theory is somewhat less rigid. Had it
been possible to include volume division into this theory, the
subsequent cosmology would have a dust-like @xmath . Unfortunately, the
combination of this theory with volume division turns out to be
Kelleher’s theory again, because volume division interferes with the
viability of the CMC bypass of the integral inconsistency (see C.1). I
am yet to investigate the cosmology of Newton–York absolute time theory
itself.

Third, the means of coupling the matter may not yet have been
determined. Note that the couplings in [ 212 ] , [ 12 ] and [ 199 ] are
all different. In fact, if I Conf-BM the matter in conformal gravity, I
get a Hubble redshift: for each species A , replacing @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (612)
  -- -------- -- -------

Are there rigid rules determining matter coupling or is it down to
taste? Isenberg–Ó Murchadha–York type scalings [ 199 ] in a ‘Barbour
style’ formulation would give Hubble expansion, furbishing conformal
gravity with a more conventional cosmology. The form of the matter
coupling may also change the rigidities of the resulting cosmologies in
Kelleher and Newton–York absolute time theories.

2.3.3 CS+V theory: interpretation and possible tests

I arrive at arbitrary- @xmath ‘York-style’ conformal theories since
embeddability is no longer necessary for consistency. But then @xmath
and @xmath have very different interpretations. For, whereas for @xmath
the theory can be resliced away from the CMC stacking and the
constraints still close for embeddability, this is not true for @xmath .

For the @xmath CS+V theory, the use of a CMC stack of hypersurfaces is
thus ultimately a gauge choice , which is available provided that the
LFE is soluble. It is a partial gauge choice since the
point-identification (shift) between hypersurfaces in the stack is still
unspecified. That the LFE encodes this gauge choice means that one is
automatically provided with a partially gauge-fixed action. Any
pathology in this CMC gauge might then go away under the valid procedure
of reslicing so as to be in another gauge.

But @xmath CS+V theories are not just written to favour a particular
slicing or possess a privileged slicing. They are not generally
resliceable because this leads to inconsistency. Thus these describe
stacks of CMC slices and not pieces of GR-like spacetime. As a result of
this, pathologies of the stack of CMC slices become real effects since
reslicing to avoid these is not possible.

Thus while @xmath CS+V theory is just (a restriction of) CMC-sliced GR,
@xmath CS+V theories are quite distinct at a conceptual level.

To complete the picture, the choice of @xmath slicing is available in
conformal gravity, so one can use it to pass to other slicings by
embeddability. But unlike in CS+V, these new slicings remember the
privileged @xmath slicing, since the volume of these slices gets
incorporated into the field equations.

Not being able to reslice leads to differences, at least in principle.
Suppose one has access to a compact object whose curvature profile
permits (GR-inspired) collapse of the lapse to occur well outside its
horizon. Then in a GR world, one could send an observer past where the
lapse collapses, and as nothing physical occurs there and the observer
is still safely away from the horizon, the observer can ‘return to
Earth’ and report that @xmath CS+V theory has been falsified. But in a
@xmath CS+V theory world, the observer would have become frozen forever
where the lapse collapses and thus would not be able to return. Note
that this is somewhat similar to the frozen star concept which predated
the GR notion of black holes, except that the freezing could be
occurring outside the horizon. Although @xmath CS+V theory could
therefore be an improvement as regards strong cosmic censorship (the
occurrence of singularities at all ), there is also the GR-inspired
possibility in the Eardley–Smarr example: that sufficiently steep
curvature profiles generate too slow a collapse of the lapse to avoid
singularities. Also, the collapse of the lapse would not save one from
other non-curvature blowup pathologies usually regarded as
singularities.

@xmath CS+V theory ought to also be testable much as Brans–Dicke theory
is, by solar system tests. While plain ‘arbitrary- @xmath GR’ was
suggested as another useful testbed for GR [ 216 ] (c.f the use of
Brans–Dicke theory), this is not much good because it’s inconsistent (by
[ 157 ] or the RWR result). What I have demonstrated however is that the
idea of this ‘arbitrary- @xmath GR’ can be salvaged because it is a
consistent theory provided that it is treated as a (non-resliceable)
stack of CMC hypersurfaces, in which case it becomes CS+V theory . Thus
I provide a 1-parameter family of theories to test against (not just
extreme but also) everyday GR. Moreover, by the nature of the conformal
mathematics in which they are so naturally expressed, they should be
easily useable as testbeds for theoretical numerical relativity. This
should require but minor modifications of existing codes. Conformal
gravity could also be used/tested in this way. Numerical relativity uses
conformal mathematics, not necessarily any notion of embeddability into
GR-like spacetime. The alternative theories of this section may be seen
as arising from taking this conformal mathematics in its own right as
possibly a serious alternative to GR itself. Finally, @xmath CS+V theory
may be seen as a formulation of GR proper, and thus still be directly
useful (both conceptually and as a tool) in theoretical numerical
relativity even if the suggested alternatives to GR are dismissed or
heavily bounded by future compact-object observations and analysis.

VI TSA: criticism

I sharpen the understanding of what the TSA is because of interest in
why the impressive collection of results in the GR case above arises in
BFÓ and AB. I seek for tacit simplicity postulates, survey which
assumptions may be weakened and assess the thoroughness and plausibility
of BFÓ and AB’s principles, results and conjectures. I thus arrive at a
number of possible TSA variations. I stress that this is not just about
improving the axiomatization. One must be able to find a version that
naturally accommodates spin- @xmath fermions coupled 1) to GR if the TSA
is to provide a set of plausible first principles for GR 2) To conformal
gravity if this is to be a viable alternative.

In VI.1, I argue that the use of BSW-type actions in the implementation
of R2 is problematic. First, Barbour’s use of it draws inspiration from
the analogy between it and the Jacobi formulation of mechanics. But in
VI.1.1 I point out that the Jacobi formulation itself has limitations
and a significant generalization. Furthermore in VI.1.2 I point out that
the analogy itself is inexact in several important respects. There is
then a ‘conformal Problem’ and a ‘notion of distance Problem’ (VI.1.3).
Second, should the notion of ‘BSW-type theories’ not include all the
theories that permit the BSW elimination process itself? But when I
sketch this to include fermions in VI.1.4, I find that not the BSW form
but rather its significant generalization is obtained. Thus the
inclusion of fermions will severely complicate the use of exhaustive
proofs such as those in BFÓ and AB. Another example of such
complications is how particles are to be included alongside fields in
RWR. I furthermore point out in VI.1.5 that the usual higher derivative
theories are not necessarily being excluded by BFÓ. These last two
subsections include discussion of their HKT counterparts.

In VI.1.6, I formalize the second point above by showing that I could
just as well use lapse-uneliminated but lapse eliminable actions for GR
and conformal gravity. For GR, these actions may be studied within
Kuchař’s split spacetime framework (SSF) [ 230 , 231 , 232 , 233 ] .
This framework brings attention to tilt and derivative coupling
complications in general (VI.2.1), which are however absent for the
minimally-coupled scalar, and ‘accidentally absent’ for the Maxwell and
Yang–Mills 1-forms, which are what the TSA picks out. But tilt is
present for the massive analogues of these 1-forms. I deduce the
relation between tilt and the existence of a generalized BSW form. In
VI.2.2 I counter BFÓ’s hope that just the known fundamental matter
fields are being picked out by the TSA, by showing that the massless
2-form is also compatible. In VI.2.3, I find alternative reasons why the
Maxwell 1-form is singled out by BFÓ, from the point of view of the
hypersurface framework. I end by explaining the complications that would
follow were one to permit derivative-coupled 1-forms.

In VI.3, I point out that it is consistent to take the bosonic sector of
nature to be far simpler than 4-d generally covariant spacetime
structure might have us believe. Out of the tilt, derivative coupling
and best-matching kinematics of spacetime, the entirely spatial
best-matching kinematics suffices to write down actions for GR coupled
to a full enough set of bosonic fields to describe nature.

In VI.4.1, I show how all these results also hold true upon inclusion of
spin- @xmath fermions. VI.4.2 lists further research topics for fermions
in the light of the advances made.

1 Problems with the use of BSW actions

1.1 Insights from mechanics

Barbour uses the analogy between the BSW formulation of GR ( 226 ) and
the Jacobi formulation of classical mechanics (in I.1.2.2). I consider
below limitations both on the Jacobi formulation, and limitations on the
applicability of this analogy in the next subsection.

The Jacobi formulation has a catch: the conformal factor is not allowed
to have zeros. If it does then the conformal transformation is only
valid in regions where there are no such zeros. These zeros are physical
barriers in mechanics. For they correspond to zero kinetic energy by the
conservation of energy equation. As the configuration space metric is
positive-definite, this means that the velocities must be zero there, so
the zeros cannot be traversed.

The working for the Lagrangian homogeneously quadratic in its velocities
( 47 ) leads to a configuration space geometry that is conformal to a
Riemannian geometry, which may be useful since Riemannian geometry is
well-understood. Let @xmath be instead a completely general function.
Then ⁸⁴ ⁸⁴ 84 Here, Newtonian time is @xmath whilst @xmath is a
parameter. Dot is used for @xmath in mechanics workings and dash for
@xmath . A -indices take values 1 to @xmath , @xmath indices take values
1 to @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath indices take values 1 to @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (613)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (614)
  -- -------- -- -------

by Routhian reduction, where @xmath , some homogeneous linear function
of the @xmath [ 247 ] . For example, @xmath could be a Finslerian metric
function from which we could obtain a Finslerian metric @xmath ,
provided that @xmath obeys further conditions [ 21 ] including the
nondegeneracy of @xmath . So in general the ‘geometrization problem’ of
reducing the motion of a mechanical system to a problem of finding
geodesics involves more than the study of Riemannian geometry.

To some extent, there is conventional freedom in the choice of
configuration space geometry. This is because standard manoeuvres can
alter whether it is Riemannian. This is because one is free in how many
redundant configuration variables to include, and in the character of
those variables (for example whether they all obey second-order ELE’s).

As a first example of this, consider the outcome of the Routhian
reduction of ( 47 ) for without loss of generality @xmath cyclic,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (615)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a modified potential. So removing redundancy in a
Riemann-geometrizable action by Routhian reduction can lead to a
non-Riemann-geometrizable system, on account of the penultimate
‘gyroscopic term’ [ 247 ] , which is linear in the velocities. I
consider the reverse of this procedure as a possible means of arriving
at Riemannian geometry to describe systems with linear and quadratic
terms. I observe that if the linear coefficients depend on configuration
variables, then in general the quadratic structure becomes contaminated
with these variables.

As a second example, higher-than-quadratic systems may be put into
quadratic form by Ostrogradsky reduction [ 379 ] , at the price of
introducing extra configuration variables.

1.2 Criticism of BSW–Jacobi analogy

As explained in I.2.5, GR is an already-parameterized theory. This is
made manifest by writing it in its BSW form ( 226 ). Although this looks
similar to the Jacobi action in mechanics, there are important
differences. Recollect from I.2.7.1 that the GR configuration space is
infinite-d; with redundancies, one can consider it to be Superspace. The
DeWitt supermetric is defined on Superspace pointwise . By use of
DeWitt’s 2-index to 1-index map ( 218 ), it may be represented by a
@xmath matrix, which is @xmath and thus indefinite. The special case
Minisuperspace (I.3.3) has a @xmath minisupermetric, thus also
indefinite. In contrast mechanics has a positive-definite kinetic term.

Also, the BSW action has the ‘bad’ ordering, whereas the Jacobi action
has the ‘good’ ordering. Below, I first consider Minisuperspace, for
which this extra complication does not arise, since by homogeneity the
‘good’ Jacobi and ‘bad’ BSW orderings are equivalent.

Finally, BSW’s work led to the thin sandwich conjecture (I.2.9.1) the
solubility of which features as a caveat in BFÓ’s original paper. Being
able to pose this conjecture for a theory amounts to being able to
algebraically eliminate the lapse from its Lagrangian. This implies that
the theory is timeless in Barbour’s sense [ 31 , 35 ] . Note that the
extension of the conjecture to include fundamental matter fields has
only recently begun [ 158 ] . Such investigations are required to assess
the robustness of the conjecture to different theoretical settings, to
see if in any circumstances it becomes advantageous to base numerical
relativity calculations on the thin sandwich algorithm.

1.3 Lack of validity of the BSW form

1.3.1 Conformal Problem of zeros

In perfect analogy with mechanics, vacuum GR has a conformally-related
line element @xmath , for which the motion associated with ( 226 ) is
geodesic [ 109 ] . But the observation in mechanics that such conformal
transformations are only valid in regions where the conformal factor is
nonzero still holds for GR. It is true that the details are different,
due to the indefiniteness of the GR supermetric. This causes the zeros
to be spurious rather than physical barriers [ 273 ] . For whilst a zero
@xmath of the potential corresponds to a zero of the kinetic term by
virtue of the Hamiltonian constraint, this now means that the velocity
need be null, not necessarily zero, because of the indefiniteness. Thus,
rather than grinding to a halt, the motion may continue through @xmath
‘on the Superspace null cone’, which is made up of perfectly reasonable
Kasner universes. Nevertheless, the conformal transformation used to
obtain geodesic motion is not valid, so it is questionable whether the
BSW form is a ‘geodesic principle’, if in general it describes
conformally untransformed non-geodesic curves for practical purposes.

To illustrate that the presence of zeros in the potential term is an
important occurrence in GR, note that Bianchi IX spacetimes have an
infinity of such zeros as one approaches the cosmological singularity.
And these spacetimes are important because of the BKL conjecture (see
I.3.3). The above argument was originally put forward by Burd and
Tavakol [ 70 ] to argue against the validity of the use of the ‘Jacobi
principle’ to characterize chaos in GR [ 348 ] . Our point is that this
argument holds against any use, BFÓ’s included, of the BSW form in
Minisuperspace models of the early universe in GR.

The way out of this argument that I suggest is to abstain from the
self-infliction of spurious zeros by not performing the conformal
transformation in the first place, thus abandoning the interpretation of
the BSW form as a geodesic principle in GR. Conformal gravity however is
distinct from GR and has no cosmological singularity, so arguments based
on the BKL conjecture are not applicable there. Conformal gravity’s
zeros are real as in mechanics, because @xmath is positive-definite, and
Barbour and Ó Murchadha use this to argue that topologies with @xmath at
any point are not allowed [ 41 ] .

1.3.2 The BSW form is an unknown notion of distance

BFÓ called the local square root ordering ‘bad’ because it gives one
constraint per space point, which would usually render a theory trivial
by overconstraining due to the ensuing cascade of secondary constraints.
Yet GR contrives to survive this because of its hidden foliation
invariance [ 39 ] . However Giulini [ 158 ] has pointed out another
reason why the local square root ordering is bad: it does not give rise
to known geometry. Below, we extend his finite-d counterexample to the
geometry being Finslerian.

The BSW form as a notion of distance provides as the ‘full metric’ on
Superspace

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (616)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath by DeWitt’s 2-index to 1-index map ( 218 ) and where hats
denote unit ‘vectors’. So in general, @xmath is a sufficient condition
for the full metric to be degenerate and hence not Finsler (Giulini’s
particular example had a 1-d @xmath so this always occurred). But if
@xmath , the full metric is not a function (it contains delta functions
and integrals). So using the BSW form as a notion of distance leads to
unknown geometry, so there is no scope for the practical application of
the BSW form as a geodesic principle.

This is to be contrasted with the global square root, for which the
above procedure gives instead (semi)Riemannian geometry. For
Minisuperspace, the local square root working presented does indeed
collapse to coincide with this global square root working, and the
resulting (semi)Riemannian geometry is of considerable use in
Minisuperspace quantum cosmology [ 273 ] . Whereas conformal gravity is
still plagued by the notion of distance difficulty, the GR issue of the
sheaves (I.2.8.1) is resolved by privileged foliation. I should
emphasize that I do not know of any reason why degeneracy due to
stratification and degeneracy due to sheaves are at all related. What I
am sure about is that the badness of the local square root geometry has
nothing to do with this since this badness is already there for field
theories with simple configuration spaces. I conclude that it is not
appropriate to use the BSW form as a geodesic principle on Superspace.

1.4 The fermionic contribution to the action is linear

Since the kinetic terms of the bosons of nature are also quadratic in
their velocities, I can use the modifications

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (617)
  -- -------- -- -------

to accommodate bosonic fields @xmath in a BSW-type action,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (618)
  -- -------- -- -------

This local square root encodes the correct Hamiltonian constraint for
the gravity–boson system.

Although the pointwise Riemannian kinetic metric is larger than the
DeWitt supermetric, in the case of minimally-coupled matter it contains
the DeWitt supermetric as an isolated block:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (619)
  -- -------- -- -------

If this is the case, it makes sense to study the pure gravity part by
itself, which is a prominent feature of almost all the examples hitherto
studied in the TSA. I identify this as a tacit simplicity requirement,
for without it the matter d.o.f’s interfere with the gravitational ones,
so it makes no sense then to study gravity first and then ‘add on’
matter In Brans–Dicke (BD) theory, this is not immediately the case:
this is an example in which there are gravity-boson kinetic cross-terms
@xmath [see ( 369 )] in the pointwise Riemannian kinetic metric unlike
in ( 619 ). The TSA form is then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (620)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, the metric and dilatonic fields form together a theory of gravity
with 3 d.o.f’s. Compared to the more disturbing examples in VI.2.4, this
is a mild example of derivative coupling. ⁸⁵ ⁸⁵ 85 Furthermore, if one
admits the conformal redefinition of the metric and scalar d.o.f’s,
blockwise isolation of the form ( 619 ) is permitted, thus freeing the
theory from derivative coupling.

I now begin to consider whether and how the 3-space formulation can
accommodate spin- @xmath fermionic fields, @xmath . Following the
strategy employed above for bosons, the BSW working becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (621)
  -- -------- -- -------

because @xmath is linear in @xmath . ⁸⁶ ⁸⁶ 86 I show in VI.2 that the
algebraic dependence on @xmath emergent from such decompositions
requires rigorous justification. I provide this for ( 621 ) in VI.4.1
Then the usual trick for eliminating @xmath does not touch @xmath ,
which is left outside the square root:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (622)
  -- -------- -- -------

The local square root constraint encodes the correct gravity-fermion
Hamiltonian constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (623)
  -- -------- -- -------

I postpone the issue of the precise form of the best matching to be used
until VI.4.1 My concern in this section is the complication of the
configuration space geometry due to the inclusion of fermions.

For now the elimination procedure is analogous not to the Jacobi working
but rather to its generalization ( 614 ). So even the pointwise geometry
of the gravity-fermion configuration space is now compromised: @xmath
could sometimes be a Finslerian metric function. By allowing ( 621 ),
one is opening the door to all sorts of complicated possible actions,
such as

1) @xmath .

2) Arbitrarily complicated compositions of such roots, powers and sums.

3)More generally, @xmath , where @xmath is allowed to be an arbitrary
function of not only the @xmath but also of the Q - 1 independent ratios
of the velocities.

4) The above examples could all be Finslerian or fail to be so by being
degenerate. They could also fail to be Finslerian if the @xmath are
permitted to be functionals of overall degree 0 in the velocities, which
we can take to be a growth of the local-global square root ambiguity.

Here are some examples of these.

i) Inclusion of particles: for 1 particle,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (624)
  -- -------- -- -------

by use of proper time. We could have (i) = (1) to (n) of these, in which
case want one root

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (625)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (626)
  -- -------- -- -------

for each particle from each square root in the sum. In a RWR context,
one would Diff-BM the particle velocities (which act on everything)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (627)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then one has a momentum constraint with a standard vector and scalar
contribution to it.

ii) If without loss of generality the first @xmath @xmath particles are
to be charged, the linear piece

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (628)
  -- -------- -- -------

is to be added. Note that the particles are not to be U(1)-BM; the
well-known correction for charged particles is to the momenta and not
the velocities, and this arises just so for the above form.

iii) The phenomenological matter contribution @xmath occurs linearly
outside the BSW square root [c.f ( 228 )]. Note however that if I study
this system in more detail (i.e in terms of fundamental matter), then I
find that this term really belongs inside the square root. For if one
admits

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (629)
  -- -------- -- -------

should really have a contribution from matter momenta, and uses ( 182 )
for fundamental @xmath and @xmath (done here for the scalar field
example), then one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (630)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (631)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (632)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that its RI form is @xmath rather than @xmath .

iv) I will eventually admit some ugly 1-form theories to the TSA via
horrendous combinations of type 2) in VII.1.2.

We would therefore need to modify the RI BSW implementation of principle
R2 to a general BSW implementation capable of including fermions. This
amounts to dropping the requirement of the matter field kinetic term
being homogeneously quadratic in its velocities, thus bringing the TSA
matter simplicity 5 into alignment with Teitelboim’s assumptions. We
note that with increasing generality the possibility of uniqueness
proofs becomes more remote. Although some aims of the TSA such as a full
derivation of the universal null cone would require some level of
uniqueness proofs for spin- @xmath fermions, my strategy in this chapter
is to show that spin- @xmath fermions coupled to GR do possess a 3-space
formulation and also to point out that the uniqueness results may have
to be generalized in view of the generalization of the BSW form required
in this section.

Could one not choose to geometrize the gravity-fermion system as a
Riemannian geometry instead, by use of the reverse of Routhian
reduction? But the coefficients of the linear fermionic velocities in
the Einstein–Dirac system contain fermionic variables, so the resulting
Riemannian geometry’s coefficients would contain the fermionic variables
in addition to the metric. This is a breach of the DeWitt structure ,
since it means that contact is lost with DeWitt’s study of the
configuration space of pure GR [ 107 , 109 ] . So this choice also looks
highly undesirable.

For 40 years the natural accommodation of spin- @xmath fermions in
geometrodynamics has been problematic (see I.2.7.2, II.1). So this is a
big demand on the TSA, and one which must be met if the TSA is truly to
describe nature. My demands here are less than Wheeler’s in [ 375 ] : I
am after a route to relativity with all matter ‘added on’ rather than a
complete unified theory. The HKT route appears also to be incomplete at
this stage: Teitelboim was unable to find a hypersurface deformation
explanation for spin- @xmath fermions [ 352 ] . Thus when this work was
started, all forms of the seventh route to relativity were incomplete
with respect to the inclusion of spin- @xmath fermions. In VI.4.1, I
point out the natural existence of GR–spin- @xmath theory within the
TSA.

1.5 Higher derivative theories

I now argue against the significance of the preclusion of higher
derivative theories by BFÓ. For the precluded theories are easily seen
not to be the usual higher derivative theories. There are two simple
ways of noticing this. First, the primary constraints encoded by the BFÓ
theories with arbitrary @xmath will always be of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (633)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the usual higher derivative theories give something more
complicated. Second, BFÓ’s theories have fourth-order terms in their
potentials but their kinetic terms remain quadratic in the velocities,
whilst the usual higher derivative theories’ kinetic terms are quartic
in the velocities. This mismatch of derivatives between and for @xmath ,
overrules the theories from within the generally covariant spacetime
framework, so BFÓ are doing nothing more than general covariance can do
in this case. On the other hand, the potentials BFÓ consider are not
absurd given their ontology; such potentials were specifically inquired
about by Wheeler in [ 377 ] .

It is not clear whether the usual higher derivative theories could be
written in some generalized BSW form. The form would either be
considerably more complicated than that of pure GR or not exist at all.
Which of these is actually true should be checked case by case. I
consider this to be a worthy project in its own right by the final
comment in VI.1.2, since this problem may be phrased as ‘for which
higher derivative theories can the thin sandwich formulation be posed?’
To illustrate why there is the possibility of nonexistence, consider the
simplest example, @xmath theory. The full doubly-contracted Gauss
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (634)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, whereas one may discard the divergence term in the 3 + 1 split of
@xmath , in the 3 + 1 split of @xmath , this divergence is multiplied by
@xmath and so cannot similarly be discarded. So it is unlikely that the
elimination of @xmath will be algebraic in such theories, which is a
requirement for the BSW procedure. Were this algebraic elimination
possible, we would get more complicated expressions than the local
square root form from it. Indeed, higher derivative theories are known
to have considerably more complicated canonical formulations than GR [
343 , 68 ] ; it is standard to treat them by a variant of Ostrogradsky
reduction adapted to constrained systems [ 68 ] .

It is worth commenting that HKT’s derivation of @xmath being quadratic
in its momenta and containing at most second derivatives may also be
interpreted as tainted, since it comes about by restricting the gravity
to have two d.o.f’s, as opposed to e.g. the three of @xmath theory or of
Brans–Dicke theory. Thus I do not foresee that any variant of the
seventh route to relativity will be able to find a way round the
second-order derivative assumption of the other routes.

1.6 Lapse-uneliminated actions

I have explained why the interpretation of the BSW form as a geodesic
principle is subject to considerable complications, and that it may
obscure which theories are permitted or forbidden in the TSA. I next
show that the use of the manifestly lapse-eliminated BSW form, and
consequently the Problems with its interpretation, may be circumvented
by the use of lapse-uneliminated but lapse eliminable actions (just as
the Jacobi and Euler–Lagrange interpretations of mechanics are
equivalent). It is easy to show that the equations of motion that follow
from the lapse-uneliminated 3 + 1 ‘ADM’ Lagrangian ( 224 ) are weakly
equivalent to the BSW ones:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (635)
  -- -------- -- -------

and similarly when matter terms are included. I use arbitrary @xmath and
@xmath above to simultaneously treat the GR and strong gravity cases.
The ADM propagation of the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (636)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath or @xmath , where it is understood that the evolution is
carried out by the ADM ELE’s or their strong gravity analogues.

I next check that using uneliminated actions does not damage the
conformal branch of the TSA. The conformal gravity action ( 334 ) is
equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (637)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the lapse is @xmath . The following equivalent of ( 635 ) holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (638)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (639)
  -- -------- -- -------

the conformal gravity equivalent of the Hamiltonian constraint.

In the next section, I develop a strategy involving the study of
lapse-uneliminated actions. This represents a first step in
disentangling Barbour’s no time [ 31 , 32 , 35 ] and no scale [ 36 , 12
] ideas. It also permits me to investigate which standard theories exist
according to the other TSA rules, by inspection of formalisms of these
theories. Where possible, one could then eliminate the lapse to cast
theories into TSA form. This is not always possible: some perfectly good
theories appear to have no actions which are simultaneously best-matched
and BSW reformulable (in having an algebraically-eliminable lapse). Thus
the uneliminated form can be used to help test whether the TSA is or can
be made to be a satisfactory scheme for all of nature.

I furthermore next use this lapse-uneliminated formulation to interpret
the GR branch of the TSA within Kuchař’s hypersurface or split spacetime
framework (SSF), which has striking interpretational consequences.

2 The 3-space approach and the split spacetime framework

2.1 Kuchař’s hypersurface or split spacetime framework

In his series of four papers, Kuchař considers the deformation of a
hypersurface [ 230 ] , the kinematics of tensor fields on the
hypersurface [ 231 ] , the dynamics of the fields split with respect to
the the hypersurface [ 233 ] , and the geometrodynamics of the fields [
233 ] . The fields are decomposed into perpendicular and tangential
parts, as in I.2.1 (N.B @xmath in this section). I am mainly concerned
with 1-forms, for which the decomposition is @xmath . A deformation at a
point @xmath of a hypersurface @xmath may be decomposed as in (fig 12).

I follow Kuchař’s use of first-order actions. For the 1-form, this
amounts to rewriting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath , where the Lagrangian potential is

@xmath . Then the ‘hypersurface Lagrangian’ is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (640)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath -contribution to the momentum constraint @xmath is
obtained from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (641)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see fig 13) integrating by parts where necessary, and the @xmath
-contribution to the Hamiltonian constraint on a fixed background @xmath
may be further decomposed into its translation and tilt parts, ⁸⁷ ⁸⁷ 87
The subscript @xmath denotes the tilt part and the subscript @xmath
denotes the translational part.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (642)
  -- -------- -- -------

The translational part @xmath may contain a term @xmath due to the
possibility of derivative coupling of the metric to the 1-form, whilst
the remainder of @xmath is denoted by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (643)
  -- -------- -- -------

2.2 SSF as a TSA tool

I will show that BFÓ original TSA is complete for the bosons of nature,
and more.

For the 1-form field, using the decomposition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (644)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath (by the definition of canonical momentum), one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (645)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (646)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the 1-form, @xmath and @xmath play the role of Lagrange multipliers;
one would then use the corresponding multiplier equations to attempt to
eliminate the multipliers from ( 640 ). In my examples below, @xmath
will also occur as a multiplier, but this is generally not the case.

The above sort of decomposition holds for any rank of tensor field.
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are universal for each rank, whereas @xmath
contains @xmath , which has further details of the particular field in
question. These three universal features are the kinematics due to the
presupposition of spacetime. The @xmath contribution is ‘shift
kinematics’, whilst the tilt contribution is ‘lapse kinematics’.

The point of Kuchař’s papers is to construct very general consistent
matter theories by presupposing spacetime and correctly implementing the
resulting kinematics. I show below that in not presupposing spacetime,
BFÓ are attempting to construct consistent theories by using shift
kinematics (Diff-BM) alone, and thus attempting to deny the presence of
any ‘lapse kinematics’ in nature. This turns out to be remarkably
successful for the bosonic theories of nature.

I begin by noting that nonderivative-coupled fields are a lot simpler to
deal with than derivative-coupled ones. I then ask which fields are
included in this simpler case, in which the matter fields do not affect
the gravitational part of the Hamiltonian constraint so that the
gravitational momenta remain independent of the matter fields. Thus it
became clear to me that this is a tacit assumption in almost all of
BFÓ’s work.

TSA Gravity–Matter Simplicity 0 : the implementation of ‘adding on’
matter is for matter contributions that do not interfere with the
structure of the gravitational theory.

This amounts to the absence of Christoffel symbols in the matter
Lagrangians, which is true of minimally-coupled scalar fields ( @xmath )
and of Maxwell and Yang–Mills theories and their massive counterparts
(since @xmath ). Thus it suffices to start off by considering the
nonderivative-coupled case on the grounds that it includes all the
fields hitherto thought to fit in with the BFÓ scheme, and also the
massive 1-form fields.

Consider then the Proca 1-form. Its Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (647)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (648)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (649)
  -- -------- -- -------

suffices to generate the tilt change of @xmath and @xmath for the
universal 1-form (see Sec 6 of [ 232 ] ). The first term of this
vanishes since @xmath by antisymmetry for the 1-forms described by ( 647
). Also @xmath by antisymmetry so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (650)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (651)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (652)
  -- -------- -- -------

and elimination of the multipliers in ( 650 ) using ( 651 , 652 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (653)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is non-ultralocal in the momenta. I note that this does nothing to
eliminate the remaining term in the tilt: the Proca field has nonzero
tilt.

But, for @xmath , the @xmath multiplier equation gives instead the Gauss
constraint of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (654)
  -- -------- -- -------

This would not usually permit @xmath to be eliminated from ( 653 ) but
the final form of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (655)
  -- -------- -- -------

so the cofactor of @xmath in ( 640 ) weakly vanishes by ( 654 ), so
@xmath may be taken to ‘accidentally’ drop out. This means that the tilt
of the Maxwell field may be taken to be zero. The tilt is also zero for
the metric and for the scalar field. So far all these fields are allowed
by BFÓ and have no tilt, whereas the so-far-disallowed Proca field has
tilt.

I can begin to relate this occurrence to the BSW or generalized BSW
implementation of R2 . For, suppose an action has a piece depending on
@xmath in it. Then the immediate elimination of @xmath from it is not
algebraic , so the procedure of BSW is not possible. By definition, the
tilt part of the Hamiltonian constraint is built from the @xmath
contribution using integration by parts. But, for the @xmath -eliminated
Proca Lagrangian, this integration by parts gives a term that is
non-ultralocal in the momenta, @xmath , which again contains @xmath
within. Thus, for this formulation of Proca theory, one cannot build a
TSA Einstein–Proca action to start off with. Of importance, this
difficulty with spatial derivatives was not foreseen in the simple
analogy with the Jacobi principle in mechanics, where there is only one
independent variable.

The above argument requires refinement from the treatment of further
important physical examples. This is a fast method of finding matter
theories compatible with the TSA by the following argument. If there is
no derivative coupling and if one can arrange for the tilt to play no
part in a formulation of a matter theory, then all that is left of the
hypersurface kinematics is the shift kinematics, which is BM[general R1]
. But complying with hypersurface kinematics is a guarantee for
consistency for established spacetime theories so in these cases BM
suffices for consistency.

First, I consider K interacting 1-forms @xmath with Lagrangian ⁸⁸ ⁸⁸ 88
By @xmath I strictly mean @xmath where @xmath indexes each gauge
subgroup in a direct product. Then each such gauge subgroup can be
associated with a distinct coupling constant @xmath . .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (656)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (657)
  -- -------- -- -------

The overall tilt contribution is now the sum of the tilt contributions
of the individual fields, so @xmath suffices to generate the tilt
change. Again, @xmath by antisymmetry so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (658)
  -- -------- -- -------

by ( 642 , 643 ). The multipliers are @xmath and @xmath , with
corresponding multiplier equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (659)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (660)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . I thus obtain the eliminated form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (661)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the massive Yang–Mills field is left with nonzero tilt. For @xmath ,
the second multiplier

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (662)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case, the tilt is nonzero, but the Yang–Mills Gauss constraint
‘accidentally’ enables the derivative part of the tilt to be converted
into an algebraic expression, which then happens to cancel with part of
the Lagrangian potential:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (663)
  -- -------- -- -------

Second, I consider U(1) 1-form–scalar gauge theory [c.f ( 108 – 110 )]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (664)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (665)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath still suffices to generate the tilt (as scalars contribute no
tilt),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (666)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath multiplier equation is ( 651 ) again, whilst the @xmath
multiplier equation is now

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (667)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be explained in terms of electromagnetism now having a
fundamental source. In constructing @xmath from ( 642 , 643 , 666 ), I
can convert the tilt to an algebraic expression by the sourced Gauss law
( 667 ) which again happens to cancel with a contribution from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (668)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is not too hard to show that the last two ‘accidents’ also
‘accidentally’ conspire together to wipe out the tilt contribution in
Yang–Mills 1-form–scalar gauge theory ( 119 , 120 , 129 ) used to obtain
broken SU(2) @xmath U(1) bosons for the electroweak force. This theory
is also obviously nonderivative-coupled.

I now present a more general treatment about the occurrence of these
‘accidents’. They arise from eliminating @xmath from its multiplier
equation. For this to make sense, @xmath must be a multiplier, thus
@xmath . Then for general @xmath , the multiplier equation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (669)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the requirement that @xmath be independent of @xmath on using ( 669
) means that @xmath is independent of @xmath . Thus the ‘accidents’
occur whenever the Lagrangian potential is linear in @xmath .

The above two examples have broadened my understanding, and lead to the
following precise reformulation of the BSW-type version of RI[R2])
within the SSF as

RI-castable[R2] : I use lapse-uneliminated actions homogeneously
quadratic in their velocities and permit only those for which the matter
contributes a weakly vanishing tilt.

I can combine this with the generalization of dropping the homogeneously
quadratic requirement, in anticipation of the inclusion of spin- @xmath
fermions.

So for Einstein–Maxwell theory, Einstein–Yang–Mills theory, and their
corresponding scalar gauge theories, 1) the absence of derivative
coupling guarantees that they can be coupled to GR without disrupting
its canonical structure as tacitly assumed by BFÓ. 2) The absence of
tilt guarantees that the resulting coupled theories can be put into BSW
form. Because the theories have homogeneously quadratic kinetic terms,
this is the most straightforward notion of BSW form. 3) Now, the SSF
guarantees consistency if all the required kinematics are included. But
the only sort of kinematics left is BM. Thus, all these theories are
guaranteed to exist as TSA theories.

These workings begin to show (if one presupposes spacetime), what sorts
of obstacles in Kuchař’s split spacetime ontology might be regarded as
responsible for the uniqueness results for bosonic matter when one
starts from BFÓ’s 3-d ontology.

2.3 The TSA allows more than the fields of nature

I have described how the fields hitherto known to be permitted by the
TSA may be identified within the SSF. These fields all have just BM
kinematics and no other significant universal feature (tilt or
derivative coupling). Are these fields then the known fundamental matter
fields, which somehow have less universal kinematic features than
generally covariant spacetime structure would lead one to expect? This
question may be subdivided as follows. Does the TSA single out only the
known fundamental matter fields? Does the TSA single out all the known
fundamental matter fields? Kuchař makes no big deal about the simplified
form weakly equivalent to his decomposition of the electromagnetic
field, because it does not close to reproduce the Dirac Algebra (see
Secs 11-12 of [ 232 ] ); it only does so modulo @xmath . He takes this
to be an inconvenience, one which can be got round by adhering to the
form directly obtained from the decomposition, whereas BFÓ take it as a
virtue that the simplified form ‘points out’ the new constraint, @xmath
, as an integrability condition.

The first question can be answered by counterexample. One should
interpret the question as coarsely as possible; for example one could
argue that the TSA is not capable of restricting the possibility of
Yang–Mills theory to the gauge groups conventionally used to describe
nature, or that by no means is massless 1-form–scalar gauge theory
guaranteed to occur in nature. Rather than such subcases or effects due
to interaction terms, I find it more satisfactory to construct a
distinct matter theory which is not known to be present in nature. The
last subsection has put me into a good position to do this.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (670)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (671)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then @xmath suffices to generate the 2-form tilt and @xmath by
antisymmetry. The multipliers are @xmath and @xmath with corresponding
multiplier equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (672)
  -- -------- -- -------

which may be used to eliminate the multipliers, giving rise to the
non-ultralocal form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (673)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (674)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (675)
  -- -------- -- -------

So the massless 2-form’s tilt is zero and this leads to the elimination
of @xmath by the same sort of ‘accident’ that permits @xmath to be
eliminated in electromagnetism. So, for this massless 2-form, BM is
equivalent to all the spacetime hypersurface kinematics, and as this
guarantees closure, we deduce that there exists a resulting TSA theory
starting with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (676)
  -- -------- -- -------

which leads to the enforcement of ( 674 ), which is subsequently encoded
by the introduction of an auxiliary variable @xmath . This working
should also hold for any @xmath -form for @xmath , the number of spatial
dimensions. Yet only the @xmath case, electromagnetism, is known to
occur. This is evidence against BFÓ’s speculation that the TSA “hints at
partial unification” of gravity and electromagnetism, since these extra
unknown fields would also be included as naturally as the
electromagnetic field. Note also that the ingredients of low-energy
string theory are getting included rather than excluded: @xmath -forms,
the dilatonic coupling… These are signs that the TSA is not as
restrictive as BFÓ originally hoped.

The second question must be answered exhaustively. It is the minimal
requirement for the TSA to be taken seriously as a description of
nature. The TSA gives gravity, electromagnetism and Yang–Mills theories
including those of the strong and electroweak nuclear forces. One may
argue that disallowing fundamental Proca fields is unimportant – use
spontaneous symmetry breaking – but the inability at this stage to treat
the weak bosons directly is disturbing. The next project is the
inclusion of spin- @xmath fermions (see VI.4), in order to complete the
TSA for the theories of the simplest free fundamental fields that can
account for nature (though recollect that this is subject to the
simplicity in I.2.3.4). I then follow by investigating all the
interactions involved in the Standard Model [ 295 ] .

2.4 Derivative coupling and the 3-space 1-form ansatz

In their study of 1-forms, BFÓ used a BSW-type action with potential
term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (677)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is natural within their 3-space ontology. They then obtain @xmath
and @xmath in the usual 3-space way (from the local square root and from
@xmath -variation). Then the propagation of @xmath enforces @xmath ,
@xmath and also @xmath , whose propagation then enforces @xmath . Having
thus discovered that a new (Abelian) gauge symmetry is present, @xmath
is then encoded by the corresponding U(1)-BM, by introduction of an
auxiliary velocity @xmath [c.f ( 487 )]. Identifying @xmath , this is a
derivation of Einstein–Maxwell theory for @xmath .

I find it profitable to also explain this occurrence starting from the
4-d ontology of the SSF. The natural choice of 1-form potential and
kinetic terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (678)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the following set of four results from Sec 2 of [ 231 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (679)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (680)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (681)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (682)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (683)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, if one adopts the spacetime ontology and then imports BFÓ’s
3-space assumptions into it, one finds the following ‘spacetime
explanations’ for BFÓ’s uniqueness results.

First, BFÓ’s tacit assumption that addition of a 1-form @xmath does not
affect the 3-geometry part of the action can be phrased as there being
no derivative coupling, @xmath , which using ( 646 ) implies that @xmath
, @xmath . Since @xmath , this by itself implies @xmath , @xmath .

In [ 7 ] , I wrote that Barbour would argue that @xmath is a velocity,
since it occurs as a

correction to velocities in the kinetic term [ 36 ] ⁸⁹ ⁸⁹ 89 When
writing the thesis, I derived that this is essentially correct, but care
is needed for the reason given here: one could just as well have
products of a velocity with coordinates. (following from its auxiliary
status, just as @xmath and @xmath are velocities),it makes sense for the
3-space ansatz to contain no @xmath . But from ( 683 ), this by itself
is also equivalent to @xmath , @xmath from the 4-d perspective. Also,
inspecting ( 683 ) for Maxwell theory reveals that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (684)
  -- -------- -- -------

So in fact @xmath , so @xmath itself is not a velocity. Notice in
contrast that the issue of precisely what @xmath is does not arise in
the TSA because it is merely an auxiliary velocity that appears in the
last step of the working.

One argument for the 3-space 1-form field ansatz is simplicity:
consideration of a 3-geometry and a single 3-d 1-form leads to Maxwell’s
equations. However, I argue that in the lapse uneliminated form,
provided that one is willing to accept the additional kinematics, I can
extend these d.o.f’s to include a dynamical @xmath . The TSA is about
not accepting kinematics other than BM, but the spacetime hypersurface
framework enables one to explore what happens when tilt and
derivative-coupling kinematics are ‘switched on’. Working within the
SSF, if @xmath is allowed to be dynamical, there is derivative coupling,
and consistency would require the presence of 2 further bunches of
terms, with coefficients proportional to @xmath and to @xmath . The
first bunch consists of the following sorts

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (685)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second bunch consists of the following sorts of terms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (686)
  -- -------- -- -------

The naïve blockwise Riemannian structure of the configuration space of
GR and

nonderivative-coupled bosonic fields ( 619 ) can get badly broken by
derivative coupling (c.f Kuchař IV.5). Either of the above bunches by
itself exhibits all the unpleasant configuration space features
mentioned in VI.1.4: the first two terms of ( 685 ) are linear and hence
the geometry is not Riemannian, the third is a metric-matter cross-term,
and the last two terms breach the DeWitt structure; likewise the first
term of ( 686 ) is linear, the second is a cross-term and the third is a
breach of the DeWitt structure. If the DeWitt structure is breached in
nature, then the study of pure canonical gravity and of the isolated
configuration space of pure gravity are undermined. Whereas there is no
evidence for this occurrence, I have argued in I.2.3.4 that some forms
of derivative coupling are only manifest in experimentally-unexplored
high-curvature regimes.

In the SSF, if @xmath were dynamical, then it would not be a Lagrange
multiplier, and so it would not have a corresponding multiplier equation
with which the tilt could be ‘accidentally’ removed, in which case there
would not exist a corresponding BSW form containing @xmath . This
argument however is not watertight, because it does not prevent some
other BSW form from existing since variables other than @xmath could be
used in attempts to write down actions that obey the 3-space principles.
As an example of such an attempt, I could use the @xmath -dependent
change of variables to @xmath to put Proca theory into BSW form. In this
case I believed when I wrote [ 7 ] that the attempt fails as far as the
TSA is concerned, because @xmath features as a non-BM velocity in
contradiction with the adopted implementation of principle general R1 .
⁹⁰ ⁹⁰ 90 But also see VII.1 for an amendment, and for further
counterexamples of uniqueness once one allows form 2) on p 146. This
shows however that criteria for whether a matter theory can be coupled
to GR in the TSA are unfortunately rather dependent on the formalism
used for the matter field. The TSA would then amount to attaching
particular significance to formalisms meeting its description. This is
similar in spirit to how those formalisms which close precisely as the
Dirac Algebra are favoured in the hypersurface framework and the HKT and
Teitelboim [ 352 ] articles. In both cases one is required to find at
least one compatible formalism for all the known fundamental matter
fields.

3 Connection between space and spacetime viewpoints

Presupposing 3-space (taken to mean 3-geometry, not the 3-metric), the
universal kinematics is Diff-BM. The split ( 642 , 643 ) of @xmath or
perhaps more simply the equations ( 679 , 680 , 681 , 682 ) (and their
analogues for higher-rank tensors (see e.g Sec 9 of [ 232 ] ), sum up
the position of Diff-BM within the SSF. In this latter case, there are
three sorts of universal kinematics for tensor fields: BM, tilt and
derivative coupling. All three of these are required in general in order
to guarantee consistency (if the spacetime theory works) and Kuchař’s
papers are a recipe for the computation of all the terms required for
this consistency. Thus in GR where it is available, the SSF is powerful
and advantageous as a means of writing down consistent matter theories.
If conformal gravity is regarded as a competing theory to GR, it makes
sense therefore to question what the 4-geometry of conformal gravity is,
and whether its use could lead to a more illuminating understanding of
matter coupling than offered by the TSA. I am thus free to ask how
special GR is in admitting a constructive kinematic scheme for coupled
consistent tensorial matter theories.

As BFÓ formulate it, the TSA denies the primary existence of the lapse.
But I have demonstrated that whether or not the lapse is eliminated does
not affect the mathematics, so I prefer to think of the TSA as denying
‘lapse kinematics’. BFÓ’s use of BSW forms does lead to a more
restrictive scheme than the split spacetime framework, but I have
demonstrated in VI.2 that this restriction can be understood in terms of
when the split spacetime framework has no tilt. Furthermore, I have
unearthed the tacit TSA gravity-matter simplicity 0 and have rephrased
this and the generalized BSW form of RI[R2] as nonderivative coupling
and the no tilt condition respectively within the SSF.

Working in the SSF with lapse-uneliminated actions with only shift
(Diff-BM) kinematics has the additional advantage that I can immediately
turn on and hence investigate the mathematical and physical implications
of the tilt and derivative-coupling kinematics. Nevertheless, it is
striking that BM kinematics suffice to describe all of the known
fundamental bosonic fields coupled to GR. The absence of other
kinematics includes the absence of the derivative-coupled theories whose
presence in nature would undermine the study of pure canonical gravity
of DeWitt and others. I see my above work as support for this study. The
less structure is assumed in theoretical physics, the more room is left
for predictability. Could it really be that nature has less kinematics
than the GR SSF might have us believe?

Following from the debate of BM versus bare ‘discover and encode’
methods in II.2.2 and III.1.2, I have by now demonstrated the
gauge-theoretic gauge constraints to be integrabilities of @xmath . This
permits the following alternative to starting with the BM implementation
of general R1 :

Integrability[general R1] : start with a 3-d action with bare
velocities. @xmath can be deduced immediately from the action, and
demanding @xmath leads to a number of other constraints. These are all
then to be encoded by use of auxiliary variables.

This has the immediate advantage of treating Diff-BM on the same footing
as the encoding of Gauss constraints (G-BM). In VII.1 I also consider
achieving the same footing but rather by moving in the other direction.

So far, at least the bosonic sector of nature appears to be much simpler
than the GR SSF might suggest, and the GR branch of the TSA may be
formulated in two hitherto equivalent ways (making use of either the BM
or the Integrability implementation of general R1 ). I next consider
both of these for spin- @xmath fermions.

4 Spin- @xmath fermions and the TSA

Whereas it is true that the spinorial laws of physics may be rewritten
in terms of tensors [ 293 ] , the resulting equations are complicated
and it is not clear if and how they may be obtained from action
principles. Thus one is almost certainly compelled to investigate
coupled spinorial and gravitational fields by attaching local flat
frames to our manifolds.

There are two features I require for the study of the spin- @xmath laws
of nature coupled to gravity. First, I want the study to be clear in
terms of shift and lapse kinematics, given my success in this chapter
with this approach. However, one should expect the spinors to have
further sorts of kinematics not present for tensor fields. Second, I
want to explicitly build SO(3, 1) (spacetime) spinors out of SO(3)
(spatial) ones. ⁹¹ ⁹¹ 91 This is standard use of representation theory,
based on the accidental Lie algebra relation SO(4) @xmath SO(3) @xmath
SO(3), which depends on space being 3-d. This relation is a common
source of tricks in particle physics and quantum gravity. By SO(3, 1)
and SO(3) spinors, I strictly mean spinors corresponding to their
universal covering groups, SL(2, C) and SU(2) respectively. I am not yet
concerned in this thesis with the differences betwen SO(4) and SO(3, 1)
from a quantization perspective, which render Euclidean quantum programs
easier in some respects [ 355 , 294 ] .

I begin here by looking at the first feature in the following
4-component spinor formalism. Introduce Dirac’s suited triads, denoted
by @xmath , which obey @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
spacetime spinorial covariant derivative is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (687)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (688)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the spacetime spin connection The spatial spinorial covariant
derivative is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (689)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (690)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the spatial spin connection.

Next split the spacetime spin connection, following Henneaux’s treatment
[ 180 ] which has the virtue of keeping track of the geometrical
significance of each of the pieces. I supply each piece with contracting
gamma matrices as suits its later application. As

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (691)
  -- -------- -- -------

there are 4 components in its decomposition. @xmath may be used as it
is, to form the 3-d spinorial covariant derivative. By ( 690 ), suited
tetrad properties, the Dirac algebra ( 93 ) and @xmath , @xmath (see
I.2.1.3),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (692)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (693)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (694)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (695)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (696)
  -- -------- -- -------

by splitting ( 694 ) into two pieces; the first of these is directly
geometrically meaningful, whereas the second is geometrically meaningful
when combined with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (697)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (698)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus the tensorial Lie derivative @xmath is but a piece of the spinorial
Lie derivative ( 698 ) [ 150 , 221 ] . The second term in ( 695 ) is
already in clear-cut spatial form, while the last term is just @xmath ,
by ( 692 ). Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (699)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, although derivative coupling (second term) and tilt (third term)
appear to be present in ( 699 ), Géhéniau and Henneaux [ 150 ] observed
that these simply cancel out in the Dirac field contribution to the
Lagrangian density,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (700)
  -- -------- -- -------

[c.f the second form in ( 99 )].

Whilst Nelson and Teitelboim [ 279 ] do not regard such a choice of
absence of derivative-coupling as a deep simplification (they adhere to
the HKT school of thought and the simplification is not in line with the
hypersurface deformation algebra), the Géhéniau–Henneaux formulation is
clearly encouraging for the TSA. For, using BSW procedure on the 3+1
split Einstein–Dirac Lagrangian, one immediately obtains a generalized
RI-castable -type action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (701)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus one knows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (702)
  -- -------- -- -------

[a particular case of the form ( 622 )], will work as a spatial ontology
starting-point for Einstein–Dirac theory. Note that in addition to the
more complicated form of the Diff-BM correction to the Dirac velocities,
there is also a triad rotation correction ( 697 ). Thus either of the
following arguments should be adopted. The BM[general R1] implementation
should be generalized to accommodate this additional, natural geometric
correction: given two SO(3) spinor bundles @xmath , @xmath , the (full
spinorial) drag shufflings of @xmath (keeping @xmath fixed) are
accompanied by the rotation shufflings of the triads glued to it. The
triad rotation correction then leads to a further ‘locally Lorentz’
constraint @xmath [ 112 ] . Alternatively, it can be checked that this
constraint will be picked up by the Integrability[general R1]
implementation, since it is an integrability condition. This check may
be implied to be verified by Nelson and Teitelboim’s work [ 279 ] : both
@xmath and @xmath are indeed integrability conditions for @xmath . For
in terms of Dirac brackets ( 53 ) @xmath , starting from @xmath , @xmath
gives @xmath and then we can form @xmath which gives @xmath (and @xmath
) so one has recovered all the constraints as integrability conditions
for @xmath . Also, one does not recover @xmath if one starts with @xmath
or @xmath , so in some sense @xmath is privileged. However, this does
highlight my other caveat for the integrability idea: one might choose
to represent the constraint algebra differently by mixing up the usual
generators. For example, a linearly-related set of constraints is
considered in [ 279 ] , for which the integrability of any of the
constraints forces the presence of all the others. My defense against
this is to invoke again that we only require one formulation of the TSA
to work, so we would begin with the quadratic constraint @xmath nicely
isolated.

Also note I succeed in including the 1-form–fermion interaction terms of
the Einstein–Standard Model theory:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (703)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath takes the values U(1), SU(2) and SU(3). The decomposition
of these into spatial quantities is trivial. No additional complications
arise from the inclusion of such terms, since 1) they contain no
velocities so the definitions of the momenta are unaffected (this
includes there being no scope for derivative coupling) 2) they are part
of gauge-invariant combinations, unlike the Proca term which breaks
gauge invariance and significantly alters the Maxwell canonical theory.
In particular, the new terms clearly contribute linearly in @xmath to
the Lagrangian potential, so by the argument at the end of VI.2.2, an
‘accident’ occurs ensuring that tilt kinematics is not necessary. Also,
clearly the use of the form ( 700 ) is compatible with the inclusion of
the interactions ( 703 ) since, acting on @xmath the gauge correction is
the opposite sign. So our proposed formulation’s combined Standard Model
matter Lagrangian is ⁹² ⁹² 92 Here @xmath is given by the @xmath , SU(3)
@xmath SU(2) @xmath U(1) version of ( 656 ) and one would need to sum
the square bracket over all the known fundamental fermionic species.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (704)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be adjoined to @xmath , and successfully subjected to the BSW
procedure, thus announcing that an enlarged version of ( 702 ) will
serve as a spatial ontology starting-point.

There is also no trouble with the incorporation of the Yukawa
interaction term @xmath which could be required for some fermions to
pick up mass from a Higgs scalar. Thus the Lagrangian for all the known
fundamental matter fields can be built by assuming BM kinematics and
that the DeWitt structure is at the outset respected. The thin sandwich
conjecture can be posed for all these fields coupled to GR. The
classical physics of all these fields is timeless in Barbour’s sense.

It remains to cast the action ( 702 ) in entirely spatial terms, as it
still has remnants of spacetime in its appearance: it is in terms of
4-component spinors and Dirac matrices. However, recall that the Dirac
matrices are built out of the Pauli matrices associated with SO(3), and
choosing to work in the chiral representation ( 95 ), the 4-component
spinors may be treated as D and L SO(3) 2-component spinors ( 94 ). Thus
a natural formulation of Einstein–Dirac theory in terms of 3-d objects
exists. To accommodate neutrino (Weyl) fields, one would consider a
single @xmath SO(3) spinor, i.e set its pair @xmath and its mass to zero
before the variation is carried out. Whilst we are free to accommodate
all the known fundamental fermionic fields in the TSA, one cannot
predict the number of Dirac and Weyl fields present in nature nor their
masses nor the nongravitational forces felt by each field.

Suggested Further Work

Here are some suggestions for further work given the above progress.
Consider lapse eliminated or lapse-eliminable actions including @xmath
and @xmath built from spatial first principles using SO(3) spinors.
Obtain @xmath and treat its propagation exhaustively to obtain
constraint algebras. Does the universal null cone result still hold ? Is
Einstein–Dirac theory in any sense picked out? How does the thin
sandwich conjecture for Einstein–Dirac theory behave? On coupling a
1-form field, do these results hold for Einstein–Maxwell–Dirac theory?
On coupling K 1-form fields, do they hold for Einstein–Yang–Mills–Dirac
theories such as the Einstein–Standard Model? There is also the issue of
whether conformal gravity can accommodate spin- @xmath fermions.

It is worth considering whether any of my ideas for generalizing the TSA
extend to canonical supergravity [ 105 , 142 , 296 , 101 , 102 , 207 ] ,
or to the minimal supersymmetric standard model This could be seen as a
robustness test for our ideas and possibly lead to a new formulation of
supergravity, or as a precaution of looking if our way of seeing the
world is compatible with physics that could conceivably soon become
observationally established (see I.3.3). The supergravity constraint
algebra is not known well enough ⁹³ ⁹³ 93 The most recent confirmation
that we are aware of that this work remains incomplete is on p. 96 of [
102 ] . to comment whether the new supersymmetric constraint @xmath
arises as an integrability condition for @xmath . Note however that
Teitelboim was able to treat @xmath as arising from the square root of
@xmath [ 351 ] ; however this means that the bracket of @xmath and its
conjugate gives @xmath , so it is questionable whether the supergravity
@xmath retains all of the primary importance of the GR @xmath .

Finally, given the competition from [ 39 , 7 , 10 ] and this thesis it
would be interesting to see whether the HKT or Kouletsis formulations
can be made to accommodate spin- @xmath fermions, and also to refine
Teitelboim’s GR-matter postulates to the level of these formulations’
pure GR postulates.

VII More on TSA matter schemes

In this chapter, I use the most general spacetime (rather than TSA)
single 1-form ansatz. I then use the arguments of VI.2 to pass to TSA
formulations where possible. I carefully show how the TSA does permit a
formulation of massive 1-form fields. This completes the dispelling of
the possibility that the TSA has something to say about the origin of
mass. This and further more complicated examples show that
electromagnetism is not particularly being picked out by the TSA’s
relational principles, thus also dispelling any “hints at partial
unification”. I also use the single 1-form example to smooth out the
treatment of lapse-eliminability in VI. I finally consider in the light
of my examples what the TSA has to say about the Principle of
Equivalence ( POE ). I make much use below of the following mathematics.

More on multipliers and cyclic coordinates

I am dealing with fields, so spatial derivatives may enter the
multiplier and cyclic equations ( 42 , 43 ) rendering them p.d.e’s.
Sometimes this can be avoided through integration by parts.

In some cases, elimination from a multiplier equation is not possible.
This occurs for L linear in the multiplier (so the multiplier equation
does not contain the multiplier itself), for L homogeneous in the
multiplier (so the multiplier equation contains the multiplier as a pure
factor), or if the multiplier equation, be it p.d.e or algebraic, is
insoluble or not explicitly soluble for the multiplier. The insoluble
case would mean the system is inconsistent. It may also not be possible
to eliminate using the cyclic equation ( 43 ). This is more delicate
since it is accompanied by passage to the Routhian. It is not possible
to do this if L is linear in the cyclic velocity so that ( 43 ) is
independent of it, or insoluble or not explicitly soluble. Finally, note
that some of the above features depend on the choice of variables.

1 Update of TSA with a single 1-form

1.1 A means of including Proca theory

Note that whether a theory can be cast into TSA form can only be treated
formalism by formalism. I explain here how to obtain a formalism in
which Proca theory is allowed. The tricks used do not suffice to put all
other theories I considered into TSA form. Thus the TSA retains some
selectivity, although I demonstrate here via including Proca and various
other theories that the TSA is less selective than previously assumed. I
tie this selectivity to the POE in VII.2.

Of what use is the inclusion of Proca theory? It is then easy to see how
to include massive Yang–Mills theory as a phenomenological theory of
what weak bosons look like today, and Proca theory itself appears
phenomenologically e.g in superconductivity. Whereas these applications
are quite peripheral, it is nevertheless reassuring that one need not
abandon the TSA to do phenomenology.

Here is another way of looking at electromagnetism. The ‘accident’
method of VI.1.2 ‘lets go’ of the constraint; fortunately it is ‘caught
again because it arises as an integrability, but one would not generally
expect this to be the case. One could rather avoid the tilt by
redefining variables according to @xmath . Then one never ‘lets go’ of
the constraint.

Do Proca theory just like the above. Whereas this was previously
objected to on p 158, notice that my observation on p 115-6 also holds (
@xmath can be taken to be a BM velocity if one so wishes as this only
changes the equations weakly), which removes the objection. Thus the
following is a TSA formulation of Einstein -Proca theory

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (705)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also note that the Proca constraint is second-class. It then makes no
sense by definition to work immediately with constraint propagation.
Rather, the way to proceed is to obtain the Proca constraint, use it on
the other constraints to eliminate @xmath and then one has constraints
which close.

Why did we not hit on Proca theory before? Before we were doing
‘discover and encode’ as regards non-gravitational auxiliaries. This
does not work here, ostensibly because the Proca constraint is
second-class, while ‘discover and encode’ is a procedure whereby gauge
theory (associated with first class constraints [ 183 ] ) is emergent. I
require rather the more broad-minded approach in which all the
auxiliaries are treated on the same footing by being present in the
action from the outset. This works here by starting with actions for
3-geometries together with one scalar and one 1-form matter fields. To
have Proca theory, that scalar then turns out to be the above auxiliary.

Similarly, gauge theory breaking down near singularities (IV.1.4.3) is
actually a permissible choice rather than an inescapable necessity. For,
if one chooses to adopt the action resulting from the ‘discover and
encode’ TSA formulation, then gauge theory breaks down, while if one
chooses to start from the outset with scalars alongside gauge variables
then it does not break down.

1.2 Further nonuniqueness examples

First, choose to assume that there is no fundamental underlying theory
so that local flat spacetime naïve renormalizability makes sense. This
puts a stringent bound on how many terms can be in the 1-form ansatz.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (706)
  -- -------- -- -------

(the other combinations are total derivatives or zero by
symmetry–antisymmetry). Note that I already split the first term in
VI.2.4. The second term has in effect only one piece @xmath (including
use of integration by parts). The last two terms are trivial to
decompose.

Using ( 679 – 682 ), the second term’s tilt contribution vanishes by
parts. Suppose the first term is present but not the second. Then the
action is TSA-castable if @xmath and @xmath either by the @xmath
multiplier equation ‘accident’ or by the @xmath . If the second term is
also present the first of these options is blocked because @xmath is
then not a multiplier, but the @xmath option survives thanks to
additional integration by parts. The third and fourth terms are
compatible with both options.

Thus I have found two classes of single 1-form theories which I can cast
into TSA form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (707)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (708)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first is Proca theory if @xmath . If @xmath , its @xmath formulation
has a Lagrangian density of type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (709)
  -- -------- -- -------

so the @xmath -multiplier equation is @xmath , so by the quadratic
formula,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (710)
  -- -------- -- -------

Compared to @xmath which gives @xmath , the above is far more
complicated [an example of my case 2) in VI.1.4] but nevertheless a
valid TSA presentation. Thus @xmath -theory was excluded by BFÓ on
simplicity grounds rather than for fundamental reasons.

For @xmath , the second class coupled to GR is linear as regards @xmath
(because it is in terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (711)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the linear kinetic term. This is similar in layout to
the TSA formulation with spin- @xmath fermions, except that here tilt
elimination does not happen to also eliminate the derivative coupling
terms.

Next, choose to assume there is a fundamental underlying theory
rendering naïve renormalizability irrelevant. Are there then any other
sorts of TSA theories with a single 1-form?

Clearly adjoining any polynomial in @xmath to the spacetime Maxwell
Lagrangian will do, and the TSA forms just get nastier. A messy Cardano
formula is required if some amount of @xmath term is furthermore
present. If terms as high as @xmath are present, despite being algebraic
the @xmath -multiplier equation is not generally explicitly exactly
soluble for @xmath by Galois’ well-known result.

I also considered Born -Infeld theory. The easiest non-Maxwell Born
-Infeld theory

[ L = @xmath ] also leads to the TSA form ( 710 ), while the Born
-Infeld theory particular to string theory also gives a @xmath
-multiplier equation not generally explicitly exactly soluble for @xmath
.

Thus the TSA in fact admits a broad range of single 1-form theories.

2 TSA and the principle of equivalence

Curved spacetime matter field equations are locally Lorentzian if they
contain no worse than Christoffel symbols [by applying ( 6 )]. The
gravitational field equations are given a special separate status in the
POE (‘all the laws of physics bar gravity’). However, derivatives of
Christoffel symbols, be they from double derivatives or straightforward
curvature terms multiplied by matter factors, cannot be eliminated
likewise and are thus POE -violating terms.

Let me translate this to the level of the Lagrangians I am working with.
If the Lagrangian may be cast as functionally-independent of Christoffel
symbols, its field equations clearly will not inherit any, so the POE is
satisfied. If the Lagrangian is a function of the Christoffel symbols,
then by the use of integration by parts in each Christoffel symbol’s
variation, generally derivatives will appear acting on the cofactor
Christoffel symbols, leading to POE -violating field equations. A clear
exception is when the Lagrangian is a linear function of the Christoffel
symbols. Lagrangians unavoidably already containing matter-coupled
Christoffel symbol derivatives lead to POE -violating field equations.

The first 1-form Lagrangian above contains no Christoffel symbols by
antisymmetry (as do Yang–Mills theory and the various bosonic gauge
theories). Linearity gives a guarantee of protection to Dirac theory, in
a different way from the fortunate rearrangement in VI: despite being
derivative-coupled this behaves according to the POE by this linearity.
This means also holds for my second class of 1-form theories above. On
the other hand, the excluded 1-form theories have Lagrangians nonlinear
in the Christoffel symbols. Thus the TSA and the POE are acting in a
similar way as regards the selection of admissible theories. I
conjecture that (possibly subjected to some restrictions) the TSA leads
to the POE .

Crudely, tilt and derivative coupling come together in the spacetime
split, and tilt tends to prevent TSA formulability. Crudely, tilt and
derivative coupling originate in spacetime Christoffel symbol terms,
which are POE -violating. At a finer level, 1) I know tilt and
derivative coupling need not always arise together by judicious
construction otherwise (my second class of 1-form theory example). This
could potentially cause discrepancies between TSA formulability and
obedience of the POE from derivative-coupled but untilted examples. 2)
Christoffel-linear actions are not POE -violating; moreover in the
examples considered [Dirac theory, the standard interacting theories
related to Dirac theory, and theory ( 708 ) ] this coincides with
unexpected TSA formulability. 2) also overrules the given example of 1)
from becoming a counterexample to the conjecture.

There is one limitation I am aware of within the examples I considered.
I showed that Brans–Dicke (BD) theory, whose Lagrangian contains
Christoffel symbol derivatives multiplied by matter terms (the @xmath
term), happens to have derivative coupling but no tilt. Hence this is
another example of 1), but now BD theory is TSA formulable but POE
-violating. Thus one should first classify POE -violating Lagrangians
into e.g ones which merely containing covariant derivatives and ones
which contain matter coupled to the curvature scalar, and then have a
conjecture only about the former. BD theory was in fact the first theory
considered in the TSA in connection with the POE (see [ 39 ] and now my
conformally-untransformed working in VI.1.4). But then I found all those
other theories in VI and above have TSA fomulability and the POE
occurring together. I suggest a further systematic search for
(counter)examples should be carried out: including many 1-forms, higher
derivative gravity terms, torsion.

2.1 On the origin of gauge theory

Traditionally, gauge theory arises in flat spacetime by gauging a la
Weyl (I.1.7). One postulates Lorentz-, gauge- and parity-invariance in
finding the dynamics of the gauge fields themselves. Observation then
requires some of the gauge theories to be broken a la Higgs. However I
emphasize instead that gravitation may be doing some of this for us.
Non-Maxwellian curl leading derivative terms in flat spacetime are just
as Lorentz-invariant as Maxwellian curl ones, but accepting that we live
in a curved GR spacetime, ⁹⁴ ⁹⁴ 94 This includes the POE holding
perfectly; the argument is unaffected by replacing this part of GR by
the POE holding up to somewhat past our current stringent observational
limit on POE violation. the former could not locally arise in the first
place since they are POE violators . Thus both gauge theory and its
broken form may be seen as arising from GR rather than separate gauge
and gauge-breaking postulates.

This viewpoint does not just relate to how TSA geometry–matter results
come about. I find Teitelboim also came across it: “our efforts for
preserving path independence have led us to gauge invariance” [ 349 ] .
But, as the previous paragraph indicates, I also see it plainly in the
unsplit spacetime formulation of GR, which makes me suspect that this
point is older and has been forgotten.

One issue is whether anything new could be inspired by this point of
view. For example, might theories along the lines of my second class of
1-form theory, which obeys the POE via Christoffel-linearity rather than
absence of Christoffel symbols through the Maxwellian curl leading
derivatives, also be present in nature? This might underly cosmological
mysteries or future particle physics experiments. N.B whether this is
overruled on other grounds does not affect the viability of the above
viewpoint on the origin of gauge theory.

VIII Toward a quantum TSA?

This chapter describes the present state of work toward quantization,
which underlies a fair amount of preceding material. Recollect that
spacetime and space are suggestive of different quantization approaches.

1 Barbour’s suggestion for quantization

Barbour favours the timeless naïve Schrödinger Interpretation (NSI) of
quantum gravity. ⁹⁵ ⁹⁵ 95 This idea was originally Hawking’s [ 177 ] ,
and also used by him and Page [ 179 ] , and by Unruh and Wald [ 360 ]
who coined its name. This is about the probability of this or that
universe configuration occurring, based on the

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (712)
  -- -------- -- -------

Whereas Barbour had hopes of rendering the GR configuration space
tractable in a geodesic principle formulation, I have shown in VI.1.3
that the GR configuration space curve study is a lot nastier than
determining Riemannian geodesics (and conformal gravity retains at least
some aspects of this nastiness).

Let me illustrate with simple toys that the geodesic principle was a
good conceptual idea. For a 3-body system, the configuration space is
the Triangle Land, the space of triangles @xmath . Here typical
NSI-tractable issues are asking what P(T equilateral) or P(T isosceles)
are [compare Hawking and Page asking what P(large flat universe) and
P(inflation) are [ 179 ] ]. I expect the configuration space metric
would often play an important role in answering these. Gergely has
studied the relevant geometry [ 152 ] . Detailed comparison with
Superspace has not been done (and as Triangle Land has Superspace-like
features such as stratification and singular barriers, this may be an
interesting project). For Minisuperspace, Misner wrote [ 273 ] that he
eventually came to understand that the considering the configuration
space metric (the minisupermetric) was often crucial at both a classical
and a quantum level (but beware the zeros!).

My above criticism should be taken as a lack of extendibility of insight
depriving one of tools, but not a fault. But the NSI should be surveyed
for faults. Barbour and I think that its ‘non-normalizability leading to
relative probabilities only’ feature is not a fault but a limitation (be
it technical or actually physically-realized), so I do not worry about
this here. But I do see the following as faults [ 237 , 202 ] .

Fault 1 No questions of becoming , such as what is P(isosceles evolves
toward equilateral) or P(Bianchi cosmologies isotropize toward FLRW
cosmologies), are answerable.

Fault 2 In the NSI, the WDE equation is unaccounted for; if accounted
for, there is incompatibility: the NSI i.p does not respect the WDE
solution space.

Barbour then proposes the

Time Capsule Conjecture for TISE-type equations,

1) there exist configurations with ‘memories’ or ‘diaries’ or ‘fossils’
or ‘records’ from which information about history might be inferrable in
an actually timeless world.

2) Furthermore, TISE-type equations might favour such configurations.

3) This might be driven by the asymmetric shape of the configuration
space.

This conjecture is an extrapolation of the behaviour of a toy TISE, the
one which Mott [ 277 ] used to explain the occurrence of alpha particle
tracks in bubble chambers. These track configurations are time capsules,
and prima facie very unlikely configurations but nevertheless often
visible in the laboratory. The target of the conjecture is the WDE
viewed as a TISE.

Note that 1) is compatible with the NSI, and is a novel means of cutting
down fault 1, but 2) clearly takes one outside the NSI because the WDE
is invoked. Thus the NSI i.p needs to be replaced, and my main concern
is whether this replacement by a WDE-compatible i.p is generally
possible. I explain below that some of the theories in this thesis
(viewed as toys), are rather nicer than GR as regards the i.p Problem
and might just be related to a method of use in full quantum gravity.
Also note that whereas elements of the above conjecture have begun to be
substantiated for simple semiclassical and Minisuperspace WDE examples [
82 , 171 ] , these works use consistent histories rather than the NSI.

2 Wheeler–DeWitt approach

2.1 Strong gravities

I must first fix the manifold structure of space. I promote @xmath ,
@xmath to quantum operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (713)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (714)
  -- -------- -- -------

(ordered with @xmath to the left) which signify that @xmath alone, and
the arbitrary- @xmath strong gravity WDE

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (715)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next one requires an i.p. As in the argument for GR (I.3.3.3), consider
first a Schrödinger i.p in attempting to resolve the i.p Problem. Now,
unlike GR, in the @xmath cases this provides an immediate resolution of
the i.p Problem, since now a probabilistic interpretation is admitted,
straight from the supermetric’s positive-definiteness. Thus I have
direct analogues of ( E @xmath ) TISE’s with constant potential. This
i.p should be normalizable, and as an analogue of ‘first quantization’,
it does not require a ‘+ –’ split of states.

For @xmath the Schrödinger i.p does not admit a probabilistic
interpretation, straight off from the supermetric’s indefiniteness. So
contemplate a Klein–Gordon i.p instead. Now unlike GR the potential is
of a fixed sign, and thus directly analogous with the standard
Klein–Gordon equation (or the tachyonic one, depending on the sign of
the @xmath ‘mass’). Thus the Klein–Gordon type i.p ought to be
normalizable. There is then the issue of the ‘+ –’ split of states. This
follows in pure strong gravity theory because there is a Superspace
Killing vector for all @xmath , which is furthermore timelike for each
@xmath . The use of this Killing vector, unlike in GR, is now acceptable
since it adequately respects the @xmath strong gravities’ much simpler
potential term.

NB if @xmath -perturbations are to be much smaller than @xmath , they
cannot alter the sign of the potential. Thus there is hope for the above
procedure to be applicable to GR and a range of scalar-tensor theories
somewhat away from the extreme regime. This would closely parallel Isham
and Pilati’s perturbative quantization idea of expanding about strong
gravity, in which a GR regime is recovered away from the singularity [
201 , 298 , 299 , 143 ] . At the very least, I have opened up the @xmath
extension of this study, of relevance to quantum scalar-tensor theories.
But note that one may have to confront Pilati’s full GR quantization
stumbling block: obtaining a quantum expression for the @xmath
-perturbation.

2.2 Conformal gravity

Again I fix the manifold structure of space. I promote @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath to quantum operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (716)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (717)
  -- -------- -- -------

(ordered with @xmath to the left), which signify that @xmath alone, and
the conformal gravity WDE

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (718)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now the choice of some @xmath (e.g the @xmath above) permits the use of
Schrödinger i.p, and makes quantum conformal gravity directly analogous
to a E @xmath TISE.

Quantum conformal gravity has the additional issue of whether the LFE
should be imposed classically or quantum-mechanically. I would opt to
treat it classically, akin to a gauge-fixing condition. Tentatively, one
has a timeless universe described by a TISE-like equation, nevertheless
a preferred @xmath emerges as the solution of the LFE, which (being
monotonic) may be used to order configurations along curves in
configuration space. The privileged foliation ties the further multiple
choice aspect of the POT ⁹⁶ ⁹⁶ 96 This is the possibility that the
quantum theory could depend on which choice of time function is made [
237 , 202 ] . and the sheaf aspect of the configuration space degeneracy
to the existence and uniqueness properties of the elliptic LFE, for
which many tools are likely to be available. The global POT aspect ⁹⁷ ⁹⁷
97 This is the possibility that no time functions exist globally [ 237 ,
202 ] . also becomes tied to the properties of the LFE. These can be
contemplated at a far more trivial level for strong conformal gravity.
The foliation-dependence of quantization POT aspect is rendered
irrelevant by the theory admitting a preferred foliation; this Problem
rather becomes whether preferred slicing theories are viable
descriptions of any part of our universe. The @xmath POT aspect remains
unchallenged.

Note that the configuration space CS is better behaved than Superspace
in being geodesically-complete (c.f I.2.8.1, I.2.9.4.2). Also note that
it remains unexplored whether the linear constraints can be dealt with
classically in strong and conformal gravities; in the latter case this
would presumably entail ‘Conformal Superspace quantization’ rather than
‘Superspace quantization’. One interesting point is whether arbitrary-
@xmath theories are perhaps more than toys, since varying- @xmath
universes could be viable. This is inspired by scalar–tensor theory’s
tendency to GR-like late-universe behaviour. I speculate that something
similar might happen in some sort of CS+V theories, permitting the
emergence of GR-like spacetime from a privileged-sliced early universe
regime. It remains to be seen if such a regime could take @xmath values
with canonical theory markedly distinct from GR in
quantum-cosmologically relevant regimes. Note that it follows from [ 217
] that full scalar–tensor theory itself can posses unpleasant
ultrahyperbolic supermetric regions in addition to hyperbolic
supermetric regions, but not elliptic supermetric regions.

I finally note that the above TISE’s are unlike the many
wave-equation-like toys habitually used in the quantum gravity
literature. The corresponding toys would now rather be Helmholtz-type
linear elliptic equations (see C.1). The potential sign then becomes
important for good behaviour; the correct sign is clearly enforced in
the gravitational theories due to @xmath : the kinetic term’s positivity
determines the potential term’s sign. Helmholtz-type equations on
manifolds are known to have intricately-patterned shape-dependent
solutions (see [ 253 ] for beautiful examples of patterns in compact
universe models). The superspace analogue of this might just help with
3) of Barbour’s conjecture.

3 Other approaches

First for the old and the new. Following from the classical work in
III.1.6 and V.2.2.3, it is likely that Wheeler’s quantum-mechanically
motivated thin sandwich scheme is realized in some of the alternative
3-space theories. Again a small @xmath -perturbation should not disrupt
any pure strong gravity theory that works in this way. On the other
hand, I have already argued that Ashtekar variables-type approaches do
not work in III.1.5.

3.1 Internal time approach

Second, I consider the search for an internal time, motivated by a
(typically GR) spacetime ontology. Decompose the traditional variables
into @xmath and perform the canonical transformation to @xmath . Note
that the definition of @xmath as the coordinate conjugate to @xmath is
@xmath -independent. Then treat @xmath classically as an equation for
the scale factor (now related to @xmath ). Having solved this, @xmath
may be replaced by the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (719)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is now a momentum, its corresponding coordinate @xmath (the
York time) serves as a good internal time function, as quantizing and
adopting a position representation yields a

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (720)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the corresponding i.p solves the i.p Problem. Unfortunately in GR
@xmath becomes the nonlinear Lichnerowicz p.d.e, which is not exactly
soluble so one does not know how to explicitly construct @xmath [ 235 ]
.

But for the strong gravity theories, @xmath is just an algebraic
equation ( 377 ), solved by ( 378 ). Thus, ( 719 ) is explicitly

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (721)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (722)
  -- -------- -- -------

where I have straightforwardly rescaled the internal time used. Note
that the Hamiltonian (RHS operator) is of the form @xmath for @xmath the
functional Laplacian (containing a positive-definite pointwise
supermetric which aids its well-definedness).

Thus York time is a practically-realizable internal time in strong
gravities. The @xmath case of this was alluded to by Pilati in [ 298 ] .
He also observed that it is York time that crucially leads to the
previous section’s Klein–Gordon approach’s Killing vector, and also that
this conformal mathematics will break down if an @xmath -perturbation is
included. Thus I cannot see the above internal time use surviving away
from the singularity.

For some conformal gravity theories, the use of York time is as for GR.
It is a good internal time in principle but in each case one requires
the exact solution of a Lichnerowicz-type equation for the scale factor
in order to make progress. In others, like in conformal gravity and
Kelleher’s theory, York time is not a good internal time even in
principle, since it is frozen. Also, if @xmath is emergent, one has less
use for another internal time candidate @xmath .

B Higher-dimensional spacetime?

This largely separate Part makes a start [ 16 , 17 , 9 ] on applying 3 +
1 split ideas to the study of higher-d spacetimes with large extra
dimensions. Recollect from I.3.3.4 that these possibly play a role in
string theory phenomenology. They involve most of the physics being
confined or closely-bound to lower-d braneworlds surrounded by a
higher-d bulk spacetime. Some models studied are directly relevant to
string theory and M-theory: Hořava–Witten theory [ 188 ] , heterotic
string phenomenology [ 261 ] and the related ekpyrotic scenario [ 214 ]
. However, many models studied [ 2 , 320 , 19 , 161 , 307 , 308 , 333 ]
are in fact formulated within the framework of (higher-d) general
relativity (GR). Among these are:

1) the second Randall–Sundrum scenario [ 308 ] in which the graviton is
tightly-bound to the brane by the curvature due to the warping of the
bulk metric, which is pure anti de Sitter (AdS).

2) A more general scheme of Shiromizu, Maeda and Sasaki (SMS) [ 333 ] ,
in which the 4-d Einstein field equations (EFE’s) are replaced by 4-d
“braneworld EFE’s” (BEFE’s), which are not closed since there is a ‘dark
energy’ Weyl tensor term, knowledge of which requires solving also for
the bulk. The perceived interpretational difficulties due to this
constitute the ‘Weyl Problem’. The other main distinctive feature of
SMS’s BEFE’s is the presence of a term quadratic in the braneworld
energy-momentum, which arises from the junction condition used [ 246 ,
100 , 206 , 333 ] .

Two important questions arise in consideration of such models.

Question 1: how should such models be built and interpreted consistently
within the framework of the 5-d EFE’s? This would require a careful
underlying choice of conceptually-clear general framework, in the sense
we discuss below.

Question 2: what exactly is the connection between such models and the
underlying string or M theory? More precisely, to what extent can the
agreements or otherwise of predictions of such models with observations
be taken as support for (or disagreement with) such theories? We
concentrate on question 1 here, making a comparative study of the
general schemes that have been employed in the literature in order to
construct bulks which surround thin matter sheets such as branes or
domain walls. Two broad schemes have been proposed to construct bulks:
(3, 1; 1) constructions [ 83 , 382 , 363 ] starting from information on
a (3, 1) spacetime hypersurface (usually taken to be the brane we
hypothetically live on), and (4, 0; –1) constructions [ 334 , 278 ]
starting by the construction of data on a (4, 0) spatial hypersurface.
However, we first emphasize that one should grasp the fundamental
arguments and results before specializing to the thin matter sheet
models.

We begin by arguing in B.1.1 against ( @xmath , 1; 1) constructions. In
B.1.2–3 we add to the arguments in I.2.3.2 and I.2.9.2 against the
usefulness of the Campbell–Magaard embedding result both as a
theoretical pretext and as a constructor of higher-dimensional
spacetimes. Having argued for the superiority of York’s and not
Magaard’s data procedure, we investigate the extent to which this is
adaptable to @xmath , @xmath (B.1.4). Other data construction techniques
are considered in B.1.5. We further consolidate the viewpoint against

( @xmath , 1; 1) schemes by arguing in B.1.6 against a suggested virtue
of these: their use to remove singularities [ 303 , 156 ] .

We then introduce thin matter sheets in B.2, and study the (3, 1; 1)
schemes with thin matter sheets, recollecting the derivation of the
junction conditions (B.2.1), and showing how the SMS formulation (B.2.2)
may be reformulated in a large number of ways using geometrical
identities that interchange which terms are present in the braneworld
EFE’s. This is illustrated by the formulation in B.2.3 which directly
parallels the GR CP formulation and thus makes no explicit use of the
Weyl term, and by formulations in B.2.4 in which the quadratic term has
been re-expressed entirely in terms of derivatives off the brane. These
formulations are used to clarify a number of aspects of the ‘Weyl
Problem’, in particular to argue for the study of the full brane-bulk
system. Further aspects of such formulations are discussed in B.2.5. The
implications of material in B.1 in the case of thin matter sheets, are
discussed in B.2.6–7.

In B.3, we continue the study of the ( @xmath , 0; –1) scheme favoured
by our arguments, in the presence of both thin and thick (i.e finitely
thin) matter sheets. We begin in B.3.1 by providing a hierarchy of very
difficult general thin matter sheet problems in which the main
difficulties stem from low differentiability and details about the
asymptotics. Within this class of problems we identify how the far more
specific scenarios currently studied emerge as more tractable cases, and
thus identify which as-yet unjustified assumptions such studies entail.
The IVP step, of use in the study of how braneworld black holes extend
into the bulk (the ‘pancake’ versus ‘cigar’ debate [ 83 ] ), involves
less assumptions. Thus we restrict attention to the ( @xmath , 0) data
construction problem, which we apply to thin matter sheets in B.3.2 and
more straightforwardly to thick matter sheets in B.3.3. We then conclude
as regards question 1.

1 Sideways problem in absence of thin matter sheets

With the advent of schemes to construct bulks [ 83 , 334 , 278 , 382 ,
58 , 330 ] , the old questions regarding identification of sensible
input and output for p.d.e systems (I.2.3.1–2, I.2.8–10) become relevant
in a new context.

We principally use the arbitrary ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ) ADM–type
split ( 136 ), for which further specific notation is given in fig 14.
Discussion of some of the literature [ 285 , 367 ] requires another
metric split, the arbitrary ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ) KK–type split

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (723)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note first that for KK theory itself, this split is (3, 1; 1), with
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath held to be independent of the added dimension’s
coordinate @xmath . It is this cylindricity condition that implicitly
permits @xmath to be interpreted as the classical electromagnetic
potential. More recent generalizations of this scheme, called
‘noncompact KK theory’ [ 285 , 367 ] , have involved large extra
dimensions in place of cylindricity, by permitting @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath to depend on @xmath . In some simple instances, @xmath is held to
be 0. But clearly for @xmath and @xmath , the two splits ( 136 ) and (
723 ) are identical. ⁹⁸ ⁹⁸ 98 This requires the identification @xmath .
More generally, a KK split is the inverse of an ADM split with the
identifications @xmath , @xmath . So there is already a vast literature
on embeddings with a large extra dimension since this is what is usually
treated in the GR CP. This fact is not exploited in [ 285 , 367 ] ,
where rather the Campbell–Magaard result supposedly plays an important
role. But from the far larger and more careful GR CP and IVP literature,
one can easily infer that such a use is technically and conceptually
flawed.

Note that the above GR CP analogue suggests at a simple level that (3,
1; 1) methods such as that of SMS might be viewed as z-dynamics i.e
“dynamics” with the coordinate of the new dimension, @xmath , as IDV.
Such a “dynamical” interpretation does not follow from KK theory, since
there @xmath was taken to be independent of @xmath . Whereas a way of
relating SMS’s BEFE’s and ‘noncompact KK theory’ has been pointed out [
304 ] , it is surely far more revealing to relate the steps leading to
SMS’s BEFE’s to the GR CP and IVP literature as we do in B.2.

1.1 Bad or unexplored behaviour of sideways analogue of GR CP

I.2.3.2 collects signature-independent results, including the
Campbell–Magaard result. Although this is identified as an
arbitrary-signature CP and IVP result and already heavily criticized in
the Introduction, I now further criticize it because of recent
suggestions of applications of this result both in ‘noncompact KK’
theory [ 313 , 285 , 367 ] and in braneworld bulk construction [ 14 , 15
, 330 ] . Some of these criticisms hold more broadly against the other
(3, 1; 1) constructions of bulks. My concern in this section is that the
( @xmath , 1; 1) counterparts of important GR CP results become bad and
unexplored. Further poor behaviour of Magaard’s sideways IVP is in
B.1.2. I sum up against the Campbell result in B.1.3.

Most of the important results of the GR CP (c.f I.2.3.3) turn out to be
entirely dependent on the lower-d signature @xmath . In other words, the
choice of methods which properly respect the difference between space
and time is absolutely crucial.

The results in question arise due to the need in proper mathematical
physics for well-posedness and not just existence and uniqueness; for
CP’s the domain of dependence (DOD) property is part of this, in order
to have a sensible notion of causality. In our view causality can
effectively be studied only in settings where the “independent dynamical
variable” is a bona fide time. One reason for this is that given
information on an arbitrarily-thin

(3, 1) hypersurface,the (4, 1)-d DOD is negligible because of this
thinness (see fig 15). Other reasons are discussed below.

The ( @xmath , 1; 1) problem is a complicated sideways Cauchy problem .
For these problems, well-posedness theorems remain notably undeveloped.
⁹⁹ ⁹⁹ 99 The few simple results known for flat spacetime sideways wave
equation problems are collected in [ 4 ] ; these results might serve as
a starting point for the study of the much more complicated nonlinear
sideways “GR CP” system. So little is known about ultrahyperbolic
equations that we deem it not sensible to talk about ( @xmath , @xmath ;
@xmath ) procedures at present for @xmath or @xmath , @xmath . We argue
that @xmath @xmath is hard enough! There is quite simply no established
way to proceed. There is no known sideways ( @xmath ) analogue of
Leray’s theorem. There are no function spaces known to be appropriate
for sideways Cauchy problems. We can explain however why the
applicability of Sobolev spaces to the GR CP does not carry over to
sideways Cauchy problems. First there is no sideways notion of DOD to
make the construction. Second even if we assume the higher-d DEC holds,
it would not give an inequality because the perpendicular vector @xmath
in now spacelike (fig 16). Third, we obtain a difference of squares
rather than the sums in ( 165 ), so the equivalent of the energy
method’s use of Sobolev norms is simply of no use to control the
“evolution” given the data.

1.2 Extra difficulty with sideways Campbell–Magaard

The (r, 1; 1) Campbell–Magaard method encounters the following
difficulty. The use of the strip @xmath as “evolutionary” data is
generally invalidated by the information leak construction in fig 17,
unless one has had the luck to construct a full global data set. But
this would require the data construction to encounter no zeros nor to
run into asymptotic difficulties. Thus, in fact signature does play a
role even for the Campbell–Magaard result.

1.3 Arguments against Campbell’s theorem: conclusion

After the above criticism, it is appropriate to conclude here about the
Campbell–Magaard result. Although one can still state a form of
Campbell–Magaard in these terms (about constructing an embedding for a
small region to be determined outside which all prior knowledge of the
metric is forsaken), this only permits a rigorous theorem at the price
of exposing its application to building bulks as weak and undesirable.
The result is also weak because of technical inappropriateness as
described in I.2.3.2, and because of lack of further supporting results
(I.2.3.3 and B.1.2). Its application to construct physically-meaningful
embeddings of known 4-d worlds is furthermore rendered questionable
because it is so readily generalizable to all manners of
matter-containing bulks, among which there are insufficient criteria for
discrimination.

Some of these poor features are Magaard–specific, and can be avoided by
realizing Campbell’s theorem otherwise. My Campbell-method 2 realization
in I.2.9.2.3 is at least for small regions known beforehand . My
Campbell–irreducible method realization in I.2.9.5 is at least for a
system that is everywhere valid albeit the existence and uniqueness may
break down in some regions, and is based on adequately covariant
mathematics. Thus these superior forms of Campbell’s theorem are ‘about
as badly behaved as the thin sandwich’. But a strong theorem would be
for all regions, at least in many well-defined and substantial cases,
like in York’s work. A strong theorem would be for adequate function
spaces and supported by further well-posedness theorems.

About its application to ‘noncompact KK theory’, subject to the above
restrictions, it is indeed always possible to embed small pieces of
spacetime with a given metric into vacuum spacetime with one extra
dimension. It is then claimed that the Campbell–Magaard theorem provides
existence for the theory’s @xmath equation to cover geometrization of
any kind of matter [ 367 ] , just like KK theory is a geometrization of
electromagnetic matter. As the Campbell–Magaard theorem relies entirely
on the analytic functions which are inappropriate for relativistic
theories, one must doubt that it is capable of providing support for any
theory. Also, as the Campbell–Magaard theorem also holds (trivially) for
whichever other choice of analytic functional form of higher-dimensional
energy-momentum tensor, it in no way picks out vacuum spacetimes.
Furthermore, this approach considers only 1-component (‘induced’)
matter; counting degrees of freedom shows that it cannot be extended to
many important cases of fundamental matter. Whereas allowing for more
extra dimensions could improve similar situations [ 367 , 383 ] ,
unification requires geometrization of the fundamental matter laws
themselves , whilst this ‘induced matter’ approach only geometrizes
solutions of the EFE’s coupled to matter of unspecified field
dependence. ¹⁰⁰ ¹⁰⁰ 100 For clarity, compare KK theory proper, in which
the electromagnetic potential and Maxwell’s equations are geometrized,
as the @xmath portion of the 5-metric and the @xmath equations of the KK
split respectively, along with a scalar field. ‘Noncompact KK theory’
could geometrize a more general vector field than the electromagnetic
potential in addition to the generalization of the KK scalar field that
is all that is usually considered. Now, this vector field is no known
vector field of nature for its field equations does not in general
correspond to that of any known vector field (although clearly the field
equation contains the inhomogeneous vacuum Maxwell equations as a
subcase since KK theory would be included in this way within ‘noncompact
KK theory’). For sure, this vector field (or even more obviously the
scalar field) is not capable of being a simultaneous geometrization of
the individual vector fields of the standard model. If one were to treat
these fields collectively, one throws away all that is gained by keeping
their classical identities separate: the results of Weinberg–Salam
theory and QCD that are obtained then by quantization.

Finally I note that the Campbell–Magaard theorem does not appear to
actually be used in any of its claimed applications to constructions:
the messy Magaard part of the prescription is simply ignored (and even
replaced by what turn out to be rudiments of the conformal method, to
which I next turn). Unlike what is claimed in [ 330 ] and elsewhere,
without such a specific prescription, all one is doing is applying
standard embedding mathematics, and not some old but little-known result
to modern scenarios.

1.4 What parts of the conformal IVP method survive?

Having argued much in their favour in I.2.9, to what extent conformal
methods can be adapted both to heuristic and to general constructions
for ( @xmath , 1; @xmath ) data ?

I treated the choice of the @xmath -d generally-covariant,
conformally-invariant trace-tracefree and TT-TL splits, and the
subsequent decoupling of the Gauss and Codazzi equations in I.2.9.3, in
a manifestly signature-independent fashion. The defocussing property of
the underlying choices of slicing is signature-independent.

But the study of the usual (3, 0; –1) Lichnerowicz equation has been
specifically elliptic. Investigation of whether the @xmath ‘wave
Lichnerowicz equation’ has good existence and uniqueness properties
could be interesting. The natural setting for this is as a Cauchy
problem (for even the 2-d wave equation is ill-posed as a Dirichlet
problem). Assuming that there exists a Cauchy surface in the (3, 1)
spacetime sense, one can attempt forward and backward evolution to
produce a global data set (assuming also that the decoupled procedure
for finding @xmath also yields a global solution). Whilst this ‘wave
Lichnerowicz’ procedure for the data could conceivably produce global
data sets in some subcases and thus avoid the onset of information leak
difficulties, the other difficulties described in B.1.2 remain, since
the next stage is still to be a sideways Cauchy problem. For example,
ultimately the ‘wave Lichnerowicz’ problem would inherit the function
space difficulty of the sideways CP that is to follow it. So we do not
think the ‘wave Lichnerowicz equation’ is likely to be suitable as a
general method. We favour instead the (4, 0; –1) approach in B.3.

That said, the ‘wave Lichnerowicz equation’ may still serve as the basis
of a useful heuristic method. We consider this in B.2.6. Note also that
the outline of the carefully thought-out simplifications and tricks for
the Lichnerowicz and Codazzi equations listed in C.2.2 hold regardless
of signature. Considerations of @xmath , cancellation of Lichnerowicz
equation terms, conformal flatness, maximality, and of the ‘Bowen–York’
system of @xmath + 1 flat-space linear equations are all available.

Also the study of the CMC LFE has been specifically elliptic, so the
theory of existence of CMC slicings [ 337 , 62 ] is likely to be
signature-dependent.

1.5 Other methods and formulations

We note that the thin sandwich procedure of I.2.8, I.2.9.1 is ( @xmath ,
@xmath ; @xmath )-independent. Thus we pose the thin sandwich conjecture
for general ( @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ). This is also considered for
thin matter sheets in B.2.6. This is worth a try because of the concern
with the sideways Cauchy problem being a bad prescription. Note that
this suggestion signifies that the lower-d spacetime is a carrier of
information about the extra dimension, which is now spacelike rather
than a time. Many of the aspects of the Problem of Time will arise again
in this

context.

The conformal thin sandwich scalings are again signature-independent,
giving me another possible bulk construction formulation. Again however,
the usual conformal thin sandwich mathematics is elliptic, so I do not
know if this idea will work in the new sideways context.

A (3, 1; 1) Hamiltonian formulation is not provided because although it
is insensitive to @xmath [ 231 ] (just a few sign changes), and to
dimensional increase (just a few traces), it is sensitive to @xmath
through the intimate involvement of the space of geometries. Whilst the
usual Hamiltonian formulation is based on the space of Riemannian
geometries (Superspace) [ 377 , 107 ] , the space of semi-Riemannian
geometries is reported to be not even Hausdorff [ 346 ] .

1.6 Applying (r, 1; 1) methods to remove singularities

We have argued above in favour of (4, 0; –1) schemes over (3, 1; 1)
schemes. However, it is often suggested that (3, 1; 1) schemes may be
useful since in certain particular examples (3, 1) spacetime
singularities are ‘removed’ by embedding into nonsingular (4, 1)
spacetimes [ 303 , 156 ] . Whereas embeddings are undoubtedly useful
tools in the study of (3, 1) spacetimes (for the purpose of algebraic
classification [ 160 , 224 ] ), we ask what is the status of their use
to remove cosmological singularities. Is it mathematically rigorous,
generally applicable and physically meaningful?

By ‘singular’ we mean geodesically-incomplete [ 134 ] . In the study of
singularities, timelike and null geodesics (t.g’s and n.g’s) are the
only objects of fundamental importance since they are the curves
privileged by the free travel of massive and massless particles
respectively. The other objects associated with the study of
singularities arise rather as a matter of convenience.

Such objects include the expansion and shear of geodesic congruences,
and curvature scalars. We focus first on these (B.1.6.1), explaining how
they arise in the study of singularities and then demonstrating how the
embedding and embedded versions of these objects can be very different
(B.1.6.2). We then discuss the more important issue of geodesic
incompleteness in the context of embeddings (B.1.6.3). An example is
used to illustrate some of these points and others (B.1.6.4). A lack of
rigour in singularity-removal claims is uncovered in (B.1.6.5). We
return to the case with thin matter sheets in B.2.7.

1.6.1 Secondary objects in the study of singularities

For ( @xmath , 1)-d cosmology, smooth congruences of past-directed
normal t.g’s with normalized tangents denoted by @xmath are considered.
The decomposition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (724)
  -- -------- -- -------

provides the expansion @xmath and shear @xmath . The twist @xmath is
zero for the normal congruences considered here, in which case @xmath is
an extrinsic curvature @xmath . The corresponding normal Raychaudhuri
equation [c.f ( 159 )] can now be considered. Although for @xmath this
would usually mean that a caustic develops, under certain global
conditions a contradiction about the existence of conjugate points
arises. Singularity theorems are thus obtained; in a cosmological
context the simplest ¹⁰¹ ¹⁰¹ 101 There are a number of other
cosmological singularity theorems [ 178 , 364 ] not only because some
have weaker assumptions, but also because one wants to be able to treat
a number of pathological cases. One such is the Milne universe: although
this naïvely looks like a cosmology with its focusing of geodesics
normal to @xmath const as @xmath , it is merely a region of Minkowski
spacetime. So one would not want to include the Milne universe among the
singular spacetimes. The way out of this is to demand that
physically-meaningful cosmologies contain matter. This makes sense
because the problematic physics that may be associated with geodesics
focusing is the possible pile-up of matter travelling along these
geodesics leading to infinite densities. One succeeds in not including
the Milne universe by use of singularity theorems hinging on the
‘timelike genericity condition’ @xmath , since the Milne universe is
flat. of these is (Hawking, theorem 1 of [ 176 ] ).

For globally-hyperbolic (3, 1) GR spacetimes obeying the strong energy
condition and such that @xmath on some smooth (spacelike) Cauchy surface
@xmath , then no past-directed timelike curve from @xmath can have
greater length than @xmath .

By the definition of Cauchy surface, all past-directed t.g’s are among
these curves and are thus incomplete, so the spacetime is singular. Such
theorems generalize to ( @xmath , 1) spacetimes (provided that these
obey analogous energy conditions) in the obvious way since
Raychaudhuri’s equation clearly behaves in the same way for all @xmath
and the global part of the arguments uses topological space methods that
do not care about dimension.

It must be noted that the singularity theorems are about existence
whilst saying nothing about the nature of the singularity. Ellis and
Schmidt began to classify singularities according to their properties [
134 ] , a difficult study which may never be completed [ 88 ] . Below we
consider only the most elementary type of genuine singularities:
curvature singularities , for which at least one spacetime curvature
scalar such as @xmath or @xmath blows up.

1.6.2 Relating the embedded and embedding secondary objects

Here we explain how knowledge of Gauss’ hypersurface geometry renders it
unsurprising that some singular spacetimes are ‘embeddable’ in
nonsingular ones. This is because the behaviour of the higher- and
lower-d objects used in the study of singularities clearly need not be
related. As a first example, consider expansion. In the normal case,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (725)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (726)
  -- -------- -- -------

So a blowup in @xmath need not imply a blowup in @xmath . Thus the (4,
1) spacetime perspective on focusing of geodesics can be completely
different from the perspective on some (3, 1) hypersurface. Fig 18 shows
how one’s (3, 1) notion of expansion generally corresponds to expansion
and shear from the perspective of an embedding (4, 1) spacetime. In
particular, what look like caustics or singularities in the (3, 1)
spacetime could well correspond to no such feature in some surrounding
(4, 1) spacetime.

As a second example, consider curvature scalars, in particular the Ricci
scalar. Preliminarily, Gauss’ outstanding theorem is a clear indication
that extrinsic curvature can compensate for differences between higher-
and lower-d intrinsic curvatures. Our simple idea is to consider the
implications for rigorous embedding mathematics of the generalization of
this to the case where lower-d curvature scalars become infinite. From
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (727)
  -- -------- -- -------

clearly – at least for some (3, 1) worlds which have Ricci-scalar
curvature singularities @xmath – there will be surrounding (4, 1) worlds
in which @xmath (and the 5-d @xmath ) remain finite. For it could be
that @xmath suffices to compensate for @xmath . Thus it could be shear,
expansion or both that dominate the compensation for @xmath . If this
involves @xmath , it means a (4, 0) caustic forms in the (4, 1)
spacetime corresponding to the (3, 1) spacetime’s singularity. Yet this
is not the only nonsingular possibility; if @xmath it may be the shear
that compensates, including cases in which the blowup is pure shear.

Finally, clearly the higher-d singularity theorems hold so even if one
were to succeed in excising singularities from a lower-d model, one
would typically expect singularities to occur elsewhere in the resultant
higher-d models. The nature of these higher-d singularities may not be
the same as that of the excised lower-dimensional ones. So,
interestingly, by allowing extra dimensions, one would be even less
certain of the character of singularities.

1.6.3 embeddings and geodesic incompleteness

The fundamental importance of geodesics is problematic for embeddings
since in general the (3, 1)-d geodesics are not included among those of
an embedding (4, 1)-d spacetime. There is then the dilemma of which of
these sets of curves should be the physically privileged ones and thus
be the set of curves whose extendibility is in question.

If one wishes to postulate (4, 1)-d GR, in addition to the (4, 1)-d
EFE’s one must surely require that the matter follows the (4, 1)-d
geodesics (c.f I.1.5). Then the issue of extendibility of the original
(3, 1)-d geodesics becomes irrelevant since they are unprivileged curves
in the (4, 1)-d spacetime. One would rather replace them with (4, 1)-d
geodesics, which might be viewed as unsatisfactory from a GR ontology.
Note that this is at the price of altering what the effective (3, 1)-d
physics is: often it will be of affine-metric type and thus in principle
distinguishable from ordinary (3, 1)-d GR physics. This may contend with
the recovered (3, 1)-d physics being as close to the usual (3, 1)-d
physics as is widely claimed in the braneworld literature.

Suppose instead that one postulates that both (3, 1)- and (4, 1)-d
geodesics play a part in braneworld models, as the paths of
brane-confined and bulk-traversable matter (or gravity waves)
respectively. It is then not clear at all what is meant by a singularity
– exactly which curves are supposed to be incomplete?

Finally, (3, 1) incompleteness might correspond to a (3, 1) hypersurface
that becomes tangent to the characteristics of the bulk equations in
which case t.g’s and n.g’s are being forced to exit that (3, 1)
hypersurface. Also, the (3, 1)-d geodesics might be of (4, 1)-d
geodesics which are extendible only by replacing a piece of the original
foliation with a new one that extends into what was originally regarded
as the extra dimension.

1.6.4 Embedding flat FLRW in Minkowski

The following example illustrates many of the above points and leads us
to further comments. Consider a (4, 1) spacetime with metric (see e.g [
303 ] )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (728)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is simple to treat because:

1) If we foliate it with constant @xmath hypersurfaces, a portion of
each @xmath const hypersurface has induced on it a flat FLRW cosmology.
In particular, the coordinates have been chosen so that the @xmath
hypersurface is the FLRW cosmology with scale factor @xmath . We
restrict attention to @xmath due to the DEC. For @xmath there is a (3,
1) Ricci scalar curvature singularity ( @xmath is the radiation
universe, whence @xmath ).

2) The (4, 1) spacetime is in fact Minkowski.

First, foliating the flat FLRW cosmology with constant @xmath surfaces,
@xmath as @xmath , so there is (3, 0; –1) focusing as the Big Bang is
approached. Furthermore, only focusing occurs: @xmath . Next foliate the
(4, 1) spacetime with constant @xmath surfaces. The (4, 1) spacetime
contains many FLRW worlds on constant- @xmath surfaces. Build a
congruence by collecting the FLRW geodesics on each @xmath const slice.
Then the (4, 0; –1) expansion @xmath also blows up as @xmath , but there
is also a blowup of the corresponding

(4, 0; –1) shear:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (729)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also, whilst still both @xmath and @xmath in this case, we know that the
former viewed from within the @xmath (3, 1) hypersurface corresponds to
a genuine (3, 1) singularity, whilst the latter in (4, 1) would be a
mere caustic.

Second, consider the @xmath slice of the (4, 1) spacetime. Here the (3,
1; 1) expansion and shear are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (730)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus for the physical range, both blow up as @xmath . So the spacetime
includes a @xmath , @xmath point, at which there is a (4, 0) caustic.
These blow-ups combine in @xmath to cancel @xmath for all values of
@xmath ; for @xmath the shear and expansion contributions exactly cancel
each other. The unphysical @xmath case is an example of a pure shear
blowup.

Although the congruence two paragraphs up is built to naturally include
the geodesics of all the included FLRW universes, these turn out not to
be the (4, 1) geodesics (nor pieces of them). Rather, by considering the
coordinate transformation between ( 728 ) and standard (4, 1)-d
Minkowski coordinates, it is easy to show that the Minkowski geodesics
pierce the @xmath constant surfaces that are the FLRW universes (more
significantly in the early universe than today). As @xmath the @xmath
constant surfaces approach the null cone so the example is an
illustration of the foliating (3, 1) hypersurfaces becoming tangent to
the characteristics at the point of interest. Also the foliation breaks
down as @xmath because the family of hypersurfaces of constant @xmath
intersect at @xmath . All these points are illustrated in Fig 18b).

Finally, the example cannot be taken to be typical by the (4, 1) version
of genericity. Indeed, we know that not many (3, 1) spacetimes can be
even locally embedded into

(4, 1) Minkowski [ 224 ] . The value of particular examples is limited
to exhibiting possible behaviours. One would require this to be upgraded
to the study of large classes of examples to assess probable behaviours.
Indeed, one would expect higher-d cosmological models to exhibit a range
of behaviours distinct from that of the Big Bang (including
nonsingularness). This follows from knowledge of particular examples
(from the algebraic study) of inhomogeneous cosmologies in standard GR [
225 ] . We especially note that if highly-symmetric cosmologies are
haphazardly embedded, one would often expect the resulting higher-d
models to be less symmetric i.e more anisotropic and inhomogeneous than
the original lower-d models [as naïvely suggested by the appearance of
(4, 0; –1) shear from models containing no (3, 0; –1) shear]. So the
resulting higher-d models are expected occasionally to exhibit more
unusual behaviour than the lower-d models from which they arose, and
this includes the possibility of nonsingular cosmologies. Indeed, we
would expect that an increase of dimension increases the variety of
possible behaviours in inhomogeneous cosmology. But the bottom line in
the study of 4-d and 5-d singularities is the same: one is ultimately
interested in generic behaviour and this requires more sophisticated
means of study than building individual particular examples.

1.6.5 Nonrigorousness of singularity removal by embedding

So, there are arguments against the use of embedding results toward
making general statements about singularity removal. Some of our
arguments against the use of the Campbell–Magaard result (some of which
also hold against the use of further embedding theorems) are relevant to
this context. In particular, given a spacetime, there are so many
possible embeddings. Were nature higher-d, why should it choose a
particular nonsingular embedding out of an infinity of (nonsingular or
singular) embeddings that mathematically exist? The more extra
dimensions are present, the more severe this nonuniqueness is. This
makes singularity removal by such embeddings physically-questionable.
The Campbell–Magaard scheme, and other embedding schemes such as the
10-d Minkowski embedding theorem [ 160 ] ), are local . This localness
includes the notion that the theorem is only applicable to a small
region of the original manifold. We question whether this need include
the approach to a singularity, since these are edges of the lower-d
spacetime and thus have no neighbourhood. Singularities are global
features of spacetime . However even some of the global embedding
theorems (which require very many extra dimensions) are stated for the
analytic functions [ 160 ] . But low differentiability may be typical in
the approach to singularities [ 88 ] . It becomes much harder to make
any general statements once one accepts that spacetime is not analytic!

One may view at least some (3, 1) singularities as projective effects
due to taking a badly-behaved foliation (for example a foliation that
becomes tangent to the characteristics), manifested by the formation of
caustics or pure shear blow-ups. The question is why there is confusion
in reversing this projection procedure to embed (3, 1) singularities
into nonsingular (4, 1) spacetimes. If an embedding of the ( @xmath ,
@xmath ; @xmath ) type such as those considered in this section is to be
used, it is mandatory that the region of hypersurface to be embedded be
entirely of one signature @xmath (the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem
demands a nowhere-characteristic lower-d manifold). Also, from the
lower-d perspective, the singularity cannot be included in the set of
points on which data are prescribed because it is an edge of spacetime,
not a point of spacetime. Were one to try and include it by providing
data ‘right up’ to that edge, one would expect that the data would
become badly-behaved e.g some components of @xmath could be forced to be
infinite. Under the various circumstances above, embedding theorems
become inapplicable to reconstruct the higher-d spacetime.

2 (r, 1; 1) methods with thin matter sheets

The warpfactor split [ 308 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (731)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a simple subcase of the @xmath -dynamics scheme, in which the metric
is allowed to @xmath -evolve only in its scale, away from the @xmath
hypersurface where it is taken to be known. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (732)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the warpfactor. For example, using the ansatz @xmath in ( 732 )
gives an exponential Randall–Sundrum type warpfactor. Whereas the split
( 731 ) does not cover very many cases, our scheme exhibits
generalizations for it: to permit the whole metric to evolve and to
recognize the gauge freedom in @xmath , which should ideally be used to
separate coordinate effects from true physics in the spirit of [ 337 ] .

Full, overtly @xmath -dynamical schemes are used in particular examples
for domain walls [ 58 ] , braneworld black holes (such as for the
pancake or cigar bulk horizon shape problem [ 83 ] ) and in models for
braneworld stars [ 382 , 363 ] . Whereas in the Randall--Sundrum model
the higher- and lower-d cosmological constants balance out leaving
vacuum (in fact Minkowski spacetime) on the brane, more generally a
brane would consist of a thin sheet of matter -- a junction. We study
such [Shiromizu--Maeda--Sasaki (SMS)-type] braneworlds below, ¹⁰² ¹⁰²
102 This section is based on [ 16 ] and [ 17 ] . starting first however
with a careful recollection of where the underlying junction conditions
come from.

2.1 Origin of the junction conditions

Assume that we have a ( @xmath – 1)-d thin matter sheet in a @xmath -d
bulk with one extra spatial dimension ( @xmath ). Our discussion follows
[ 274 ] most closely whilst keeping the unraised index positions of
Israel’s work [ 206 ] .

Whereas the requirement of well-defined geometry dictates that the
metric is continuous across the thin matter sheet yielding the junction
condition (j.c)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (733)
  -- -------- -- -------

discontinuities in certain derivatives of the metric are permissible.
Consider then the 3 projections of the Einstein tensor @xmath . We use
the @xmath cases of the Codazzi and Gauss constraints ( 149 ) and ( 148
) for @xmath and @xmath respectively. For @xmath , the following
construction is used.

One begins by writing down the contracted Gauss equation ( 141 ) and
subtracts off @xmath times the doubly-contracted Gauss equation –( 144
):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (734)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following steps are then applied.

Step 1: The Ricci equation ( 140 ) is used to remove all the @xmath .

Step 2: The contracted Ricci equation ( 143 ) is used to remove all the
@xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (735)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is then rearranged to form the “GR CP” geometrical identity ( 147 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (736)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (737)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (738)
  -- -------- -- -------

The derivation of this last equation makes use of normal coordinates (in
which case the hypersurface derivative @xmath becomes the normal
derivative @xmath ) and the rearrangement to the ‘Israel’ geometrical
identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (739)
  -- -------- -- -------

via the definition of extrinsic curvature ( 137 ) to form the complete
normal derivative

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Step 3: One then further assumes that the (4, 1)-d EFE’s hold. If one
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (740)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (741)
  -- -------- -- -------

(performing a trace-reversal to obtain the last equation).

2.2 SMS’s braneworld EFE’s

We next recall the method SMS use to obtain their BEFE’s [ 333 ] . They
begin by forming the (3, 1)-d Einstein tensor @xmath just like we obtain
( 734 ) above. SMS then apply three steps to this equation.

Step S1: Using the definition of the Weyl tensor, @xmath is replaced by
the electric part of the Weyl tensor, @xmath and extra terms built from
the projections of @xmath .

Step S2 ( = Step 3 of the above subsection): The (4, 1)-d EFE’s are then
assumed, which permits one to exchange all remaining projections of
@xmath for (4, 1)-d energy-momentum terms. Only when this is carried out
does ( 734 ) become a system of field equations rather than of
geometrical identities. We refer to the field equations at this stage as
‘‘timelike hypersurface EFE’s’’ (THEFE’s), ¹⁰³ ¹⁰³ 103 This choice of
name reflects their superficial resemblance to the (3, 1)-d EFE’s,
although as discussed below, this resemblance is only superficial. as
opposed to the braneworld EFE’s which arise at the next stage.

Step S3: A special subcase of THEFE’s are braneworld EFE’s (BEFE’s),
which are obtained in normal coordinates by choosing the (thin)
braneworld energy-momentum tensor ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (742)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy-momentum of the matter confined to the brane.
This is a specialization due to the specific presence of (3, 1) and (4,
1) cosmological constants @xmath and @xmath , and by @xmath being the
only bulk contribution. See B.2.5 for more about this.

One then adopts the j.c’s ( 733 ), ( 737 ), and ( 741 ) with the
additional supposition of @xmath symmetry: ¹⁰⁴ ¹⁰⁴ 104 The sign
difference between ( 741 ) and SMS’s paper is due to our use of the
opposite sign convention in the definition of extrinsic curvature. We
compensate for this in subsequent formulae by also defining @xmath
rather than @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (743)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the (4, 1)-d gravitational constant @xmath has been made explicit.
Then SMS’s BEFE’s

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (744)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the terms quadratic in, and linear together
with zeroth order in @xmath respectively, given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (745)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (746)
  -- -------- -- -------

As opposed to the (3, 1)-d EFE’s, SMS’s BEFE’s are not closed since they
contain the unspecified electric part of the Weyl tensor @xmath .
Although it also contains 15 equations, the SMS BEFE–Gauss–Codazzi
system is not equivalent to the (4, 1)-d EFE’s: indeed SMS write down
further third-order equations for the “evolution” away from the timelike
brane of @xmath , by use of the @xmath -derivative of the contracted
Gauss equation ( 141 ), Bianchi identities and the Ricci equation ( 140
). This then involves the magnetic part ¹⁰⁵ ¹⁰⁵ 105 As the 5-d
alternating tensor has 5 indices, one has two choices for the number of
indices in what is to be taken to be the definition of the magnetic Weyl
tensor. The above is the 3-indexed definition; the other possible
definition is @xmath . of the Weyl tensor @xmath , the “evolution” of
which follows from further Bianchi identities. This full brane-bulk SMS
system is then closed.

Step 4: In practice, however, instead of the difficult treatment of this
third-order system, other practitioners have often worked on the SMS
BEFE’s alone. This involves the ad hoc prescription of the functional
form of @xmath (sometimes taken to be zero ¹⁰⁶ ¹⁰⁶ 106 It is zero for
example in the references 5 of [ 16 ] , as well as in the restricted
setting of an AdS bulk. ). In fact @xmath is often first decomposed
according to a standard procedure [ 265 , 263 ] . Because the original
functional form is unknown, the functional forms of each of the parts
defined by the decomposition is also unknown. ¹⁰⁷ ¹⁰⁷ 107 The unknowns
are sometimes kept, for example the ‘Weyl charge’ for black holes in [
95 ] . Some of these parts are set equal to zero whereas other parts are
restricted by unjustified but convenient ansätze. In particular, the
anisotropic stress part @xmath is sometimes set to 0 (see e.g the
references 7 in [ 16 ] ), or otherwise restricted (see the references 8
in [ 16 ] ). The radiative perfect fluid part is often kept, but is then
argued to be small (despite containing an unknown factor) in the
circumstances arising in the inflationary [ 265 ] and perturbative [ 263
] treatments. Having dealt with @xmath in one of the above ways, the
form ( 745 ) of @xmath is then often taken to be uniquely defined and
the starting-point of many works on brane cosmology [ 54 , 251 , 92 ,
322 , 210 , 73 , 264 , 190 ] .

However, SMS’s procedure is far from unique. It turns out that there are
many reformulations of the BEFE arising from geometrical identities.
Each has a distinct split of the non-Einsteinian BEFE terms into ‘bulk’
and ‘brane’ terms. Whereas all these formulations are clearly
equivalent, their use helps clarify how to interpret SMS’s braneworld.
Were one to truncate the ‘bulk’ terms in each case (in direct analogy
with the usual practice of throwing away the Weyl term), then the BEFE’s
obtained in each case would generally be inequivalent.

2.3 Ambiguity in the formulation of the BEFE’s

The Weyl term in SMS’s BEFE’s has been the subject of much mystery. Our
aim is not to argue about what functional form the Weyl term may take
(e.g zero everywhere) in particular solutions of the system. Rather we
show that different formulations of the full brane-bulk system exist
which – although completely equivalent – lead to very different splits
of the BEFE’s non-Einsteinian terms into ‘brane’ and ‘bulk’ terms. Some
of these reformulations have no explicit Weyl terms present in their
BEFE’s. We first remove some misconceptions as to how SMS’s procedure
leads to a BEFE containing a Weyl term. Does it have anything to do with
the modelling of braneworld scenarios? No, for the Weyl term is already
in the SMS THEFE before the braneworld energy-momentum ansatz is
invoked. Furthermore, all the procedures used in SMS’s method are
independent of signature and dimension. Thus this issue of a Weyl term
must have already arisen long ago in the study of the GR CP. So why is
there no manifest Weyl term piece in the GR CP formulation of the EFE’s?
The answer is simple, and has already been used in I.2.2 and B.2.2: in
the “GR CP” and Israel procedures, one uses the Ricci equation ( 140 )
to remove the @xmath term. If there is no early use of the Ricci
equation, one is left with @xmath in the THEFE’s, which requires later
use of the Ricci equation to “evolve” it.

So there is a choice as to whether one formulates the BEFE’s with or
without an explicit Weyl term. In the usual treatment of the split of
the EFE’s (I.2.2), one does not use an explicit Weyl term. In the (4,
1)-d case, this gives a well-understood system of 15 p.d.e’s in the
variables @xmath . The option of using an explicit Weyl term gives a
considerably larger, more complicated system of p.d.e’s with variables
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Although this SMS system looks somewhat like the threading formulation
(I.2.12.1), it does not appear to be tied to the idea of deliberate
incompleteness. The use of this idea in the threading formulation is
clearly tied to signature-specific physical reasons which do not carry
over to the signature relevant to SMS’s equations. We also note that
some other third-order reformulations of the @xmath split of the EFE’s
are sometimes used to seek to cast the EFE’s into hyperbolic forms that
manifestly have theorems associated with them [ 146 ] . Whereas this is
precisely the sort of result that is spoiled by considering instead a
sideways split ¹⁰⁸ ¹⁰⁸ 108 Having argued that the second-order sideways
“GR CP” is not known to be well-posed, we should add that it is unlikely
that third-order formulations are likely to be better-behaved in this
respect. , it serves to illustrate that what at first seems a ‘mere
reformulation’ of a set of equations can in fact be used to prove highly
nontrivial theorems. So, whereas similar complicated formulations have
been used elsewhere in the GR literature, SMS’s unstated motivation to
have a complicated formulation does not coincide with the motivation
elsewhere in the literature. Below we bring attention to many
reformulations of SMS’s system, so we ask: what is the motivation for
the original SMS formulation? Should the use of some simpler
second-order formulation be preferred? Is SMS’s formulation or any other
third- or second-order formulation singled out by good behaviour, either
in general or for some particular application?

Also, from first principles the SMS procedure to obtain their BEFE is
quite complicated. For, since they use the j.c obtained by the Israel
procedure, their procedure actually entails beginning with the whole
Israel procedure (Steps 1 to 3 of Sec 4.1), and then choosing to
reintroduce @xmath and @xmath by reverse application of Steps 1 and 2.
This is followed by the Weyl rearrangement (Step S1), the use of the
EFE’s (Step S2) and the substitution of the j.c into the extrinsic
curvature terms in the braneworld ansatz (Step S3). However, despite
being complicated, all is well with SMS’s scheme since any BEFE’s
obtained by other such combinations of careful procedures will always be
equivalent because the different steps are related by geometrical
identities.

Step 4 however is not an instance of being careful as it is a
truncation. Our first point is that whereas in SMS’s formulation the
non-Einsteinian terms in the BEFE might be regarded as a bulk-like
@xmath and a term quadratic in the brane energy-momentum, in other
formulations the content of these two terms can be mixed up. In general,
BEFE’s contain a group of non-Einsteinian ‘bulk’ terms we denote by
@xmath (which include both Weyl terms and normal derivatives of objects
such as the extrinsic curvature), and a group of non-Einsteinian ‘brane’
terms that depend on the brane energy-momentum. Thus any temptation to
discard the Weyl term in the SMS formulation (on the grounds that it
involves the unknown bulk over which one has no control) should be seen
in the light that if one considered instead a reformulation, then there
would be a similar temptation to discard the corresponding ‘bulk’ term,
which would generally lead to something other than the Weyl term being
discarded. Thus for each formulation, the corresponding truncation of
the ‘bulk term’ would result in inequivalent residual ‘braneworld
physics’. This is because there are geometrical identities that relate
‘bulk’ and ‘brane’ terms, so that the splits mentioned above are highly
non-unique and thus not true splits at all. We take this as a clear
indication that any such truncations should be avoided in general.
Instead, the full system must be studied.

Our second point is that each possible bulk spacetime may contain some
hypersurface on which a given @xmath vanishes. Then if one identifies
this hypersurface with the position of the brane, one has a solution of
the full brane-bulk system and not a truncation. For example, in any
conformally-flat bulk, by definition @xmath and therefore @xmath on all
hypersurfaces. Thus any of these could be identified as a brane to form
a genuine (rather than truncated) @xmath braneworld. From this, we can
see that the SMS formulation is particularly well adapted for the study
of conformally-flat bulks such as pure AdS . This motivates SMS’s
formulation as regards this common application. However, also consider
repeating the above procedure with some @xmath . This would correspond
to a genuine (rather than truncated) braneworld model with distinct
braneworld physics from that given by SMS’s particular quadratic term.
Note that given a model with some @xmath , the BEFE formulation for
which @xmath is the bulk term is particularly well adapted for the study
of that model. Thus different formulations may facilitate the study of
braneworlds with different braneworld physics. In the context of
conformally-flat spacetimes, it is probably true that the @xmath
braneworlds outnumber the braneworlds for which any other (or even all
other) @xmath since these other conditions are not automatically
satisfied on all embedded hypersurfaces. Rather, each of these other
conditions constitutes a difficult geometrical problem, somewhat
reminiscent of the question of which spacetimes contain a maximal or CMC
slice [ 268 ] . However, generic spacetimes are not conformally-flat.
For a generic spacetime, we see no difference between the status of the
condition ‘ @xmath on some hypersurface’ and the condition ‘any other
particular @xmath on some hypersurface’. Because braneworlds constructed
in each of these cases have a different residual quadratic term and thus
a propensity to have distinct braneworld physics, and because we do not
know how frequently each of these cases occur, we question whether
anything inferred from conformally-flat models with the SMS quadratic
term need be typical of the full SMS brane-bulk system. Confirmation of
this would require study of the full range of difficult geometrical
problems @xmath , and the construction of concrete examples of non-SMS
quadratic term braneworld models together with the assessment of whether
their braneworld physics is conceptually and observationally acceptable.

For the moment we study what is the available range of reformulations
and thus of @xmath . To convince the reader that such reformulations
exist, we provide a first example before listing all the steps which are
available for reformulating the BEFE’s.

Assume we do not perform all the steps implicit within SMS’s work but
rather just the Israel steps to obtain the j.c and then use it in the
field equation ( 739 ) that gave rise to it (as done in [ 16 ] ), or (as
done below) use it in the “GR CP” field equation following from ( 736 ).
In other words, why not apply the braneworld ansatz to e.g the Israel or
“GR CP” formulations rather than to the SMS formulation? In the “GR CP”
case we then obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (747)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (748)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (749)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (750)
  -- -------- -- -------

This example serves to illustrate that choosing to use a different
formulation can cause the ‘brane’ quadratic term @xmath to be different.
Also note that this formulation makes no explicit use of the Weyl term.
Thus this BEFE, along with the Gauss and Codazzi constraints, forms a
small second-order system, in contrast with the much larger third-order
SMS system.

Now we further study the list of steps [ 16 ] which may be applied in
the construction of BEFE’s.

Steps S1 and 3 together mean that the Weyl ‘bulk’ term @xmath is
equivalent to the Riemann ‘bulk’ term together with matter terms. This
swap by itself involves no terms which are quadratic in the extrinsic
curvature.

Step 1 says that the Riemann ‘bulk’ term is equivalent to the
hypersurface derivative of the extrinsic curvature together with a
@xmath term.

Steps S1 and 3 together say that the hypersurface derivative of the
trace of the extrinsic curvature is equivalent to a matter term together
with a @xmath term.

Furthermore, one can use both Steps 2-3 and Step 1, on arbitrary
proportions

(parameterized by @xmath and @xmath ) of @xmath and of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (751)
  -- -------- -- -------

This introduces freedom in the coefficients of the @xmath and @xmath
contributions to the quadratic term @xmath in the THEFE’s. We next find
further freedom in @xmath by choice of the objects to be regarded as
primary.

We are free to choose a ‘bulk’ term described by hypersurface
derivatives @xmath (which are partial derivatives @xmath in normal
coordinates) of objects related to the extrinsic curvature @xmath by use
of the metric tensor (including its inverse and determinant @xmath ).
The underlying reason for doing this is that it is just as natural to
treat such an object, rather than the extrinsic curvature itself, as
primary (see below for examples).

Upon careful consideration, there are three separate ways such objects
can be related to the extrinsic curvature: raising indices, removing a
portion of the trace by defining @xmath , and densitizing by defining
@xmath . The hypersurface derivatives of these objects are related to
those of the extrinsic curvature by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (752)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (753)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (754)
  -- -------- -- -------

Further useful equations arise from the traces of these:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (755)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (756)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (757)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath in ( 756 ) and ( 757 ) has been obtained via ( 755 ).

The following examples of @xmath illustrate that the use of such objects
is entirely natural: @xmath is the @xmath commonly used in the IVP
literature, and @xmath appears in the guise of forming the complete
normal derivative in the Israel procedure. Also, the “gravitational
momenta” are @xmath .

The above thorough consideration of possible ‘bulk’ terms permits all
four THEFE terms homogeneously quadratic in the extrinsic curvature to
be changed independently. One may think that we have a redundancy in
providing 8 ways to change only 4 coefficients. However, one can afford
then to lose some of the freedoms by making extra demands, of which we
now provide four relevant examples. First, one could further demand that
there is no Weyl term in the THEFE’s (as discussed in B.2.4). Second,
unequal densitization of @xmath and @xmath (i.e @xmath ) corresponds to
interpreting the fundamental variable to be some densitization of the
metric rather than the metric itself. Whereas this is again a common
practice (for example the scale-free metric of the IVP literature is
@xmath in dimension @xmath ), the use of such an object as fundamental
variable does appear to complicate the isolation of the (3, 1) Einstein
tensor truly corresponding to this fundamental variable. Thus this
option is not pursued in this thesis. Third, one may start by declaring
that one is to use particular well-known primary objects (such as the
“gravitational momenta”) and still desire to be left with much freedom
of formulation. Fourth, one could declare that one is to use the raised
objects given by ( 755 ), in which case the further ability to change
coefficients by use of ( 753 ) is lost, since moving a Kronecker delta
rather than a metric through the derivative clearly generates no terms
quadratic in the extrinsic curvature.

2.4 Examples of formulations of BEFE’s with no quadratic terms

As a consequence of the above freedoms, there are many formulations in
which all four coefficients vanish, and hence @xmath . From this it
follows that @xmath is zero [and it is easy to show that all instances
of @xmath follow from @xmath ]. Thus it suffices to seek for cases of
THEFE’s with @xmath to obtain all cases of BEFE formulations that have
no quadratic term. We now motivate these formulations and then choose to
exhibit three that comply with some of the extra demands in the previous
paragraph.

The diversity of ‘brane’-‘bulk’ splits ensures that truncations such as
Step 4 produce all possible combinations of quadratic terms as residual
‘braneworld physics’. Alternatively, one may suspect that there might be
solutions to the full brane-bulk system that just happen to have a
particular @xmath on some hypersurface which is then identified as a
brane. We speculate that each of these situations will often lead to
different answers to questions of physical interest. Whereas most FLRW
perfect fluid models with equation of state @xmath arising thus will be
similar, differences will be more salient in models with more
complicated equations of state, in perturbations about FLRW (as started
in [ 263 , 249 , 67 ] in the SMS-adapted case) and in anisotropic models
(as started by [ 73 , 264 , 190 , 89 ] in the SMS-adapted case). These
in turn constitute natural frameworks to seriously justify the late-time
emergence of FLRW behaviour and the likelihood of inflation [ 92 , 322 ,
210 ] as well as the study of singularities [ 89 , 67 ] on the brane. We
emphasize that, for a satisfactory study of whether any particular full
brane-bulk (as opposed to truncated) case leads to any differences from
the hitherto-studied @xmath case, one would require a full brane-bulk
solution explicitly constructed to satisfy some @xmath on some
hypersurface within a particular given bulk spacetime. Since we
currently have no such example, our arguments currently only support the
far simpler idea that truncation should be avoided.

We illustrate that in different formulations, the truncation of the
corresponding ‘bulk’ terms can lead to big differences in the residual
‘braneworld physics’, without any of the above lengthy calculations. We
do this by formulating the ‘bulk’ part so that there is no corresponding
@xmath term at all. Thus these truncations give the ‘ @xmath ’ of
standard FLRW cosmology rather than the ‘ @xmath and @xmath ’ of brane
cosmology [ 54 , 265 , 263 ] . As a result whether we have a ‘ @xmath
and @xmath ’ brane cosmology depends on the choice of formulation. So we
argue that since the SMS procedure followed by truncating the Weyl term
is a hitherto unaccounted-for choice out of many possible procedures,
then adopting the particular homogeneous quadratic term of SMS (often
taken as the starting-point of brane cosmology) appears to be
unjustified. Rather, we conclude that no particular truncation should be
privileged as the act of truncation imprints undesirable arbitrariness
into the study of the truncated system. Whereas the (3, 1)-d trace of
@xmath is zero and thus might ¹⁰⁹ ¹⁰⁹ 109 This is if one treats the
geometric content of the Weyl tensor as an effective or ‘induced’
energy–momentum. People often also assume that this ought to behave like
a perfect fluid, although Maartens’ decomposition of @xmath [ 263 ] ,
permits a more general treatment. phenomenologically look like pure
radiation fluid to observers on the brane, other bulk characterizations
would typically not look like a pure radiative fluid. This may open up
phenomenological possibilities.

Also, before further study of SMS’s full (untruncated, third-order)
system is undertaken, some of the reformulations along the lines
suggested in B.2.3 might turn out to be more tractable. In particular
those reformulations which fully eliminate @xmath by the early use of
the Ricci equation are already closed as second-order systems. These
include the Israel formulation in [ 16 ] , the “GR CP” formulation ( 747
– 750 ), and our second and third examples below, which contain neither
a Weyl term nor a quadratic term.

For our first example, we take as the primary object the antidensitized
extrinsic curvature @xmath so that the ‘bulk’ term is (partly) a
combination of this object’s normal derivatives. The corresponding
BEFE’s are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (758)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (759)
  -- -------- -- -------

(where we have chosen to remove all projections of @xmath by the EFE’s).

To derive this, take ( 751 ) in normal coordinates. Choose to convert
all of the

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (760)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now choosing the primary object to be some densitized @xmath by ( 754 )
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (761)
  -- -------- -- -------

so clearly @xmath , @xmath and the antidensitization choice of weighting
@xmath ensure that @xmath

The following examples arose from asking if it is possible to find
examples in which neither @xmath nor @xmath feature. We found the
following BEFE’s:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (762)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (763)
  -- -------- -- -------

by considering as our primary object the densitized extrinsic curvature
with one index raised, @xmath .

We obtained these BEFE’s by arguing as follows. In order for the BEFE’s
to contain no Weyl term, @xmath is fixed

to be @xmath . Then the only control over @xmath is from raising by (
752 ). It is easy to show that this raising must be applied to the whole
@xmath in order for the coefficient of @xmath to be zero. Then using
@xmath does not change any terms quadratic in the extrinsic curvature.
Also, use of distinct densities for @xmath and @xmath does not appear to
make sense since both quantities are related to @xmath by a single use
of the inverse metric. Although all these restrictions make the outcome
unlikely, the use of ( 754 ) and ( 757 ) alone suffices to obtain the
above example:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (764)
  -- -------- -- -------

which has no quadratic terms if @xmath and @xmath (‘densitization’
weight).

Another possibility is to replace @xmath by @xmath . Although this does
not immediately do anything about the quadratic terms, if we also
convert a portion @xmath of @xmath into @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (765)
  -- -------- -- -------

which requires @xmath , whereupon the two remaining equations become
identical:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (766)
  -- -------- -- -------

which clearly has many solutions. A particularly neat one is to take
@xmath so that the primary objects are ‘gravitational momenta’ and
@xmath so that only two normal derivative terms appear in the ‘bulk’
term. Then @xmath so the BEFE’s read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (767)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (768)
  -- -------- -- -------

Of course, it would make sense to particularly investigate the difficult
geometrical problem ‘ @xmath on some embedded hypersurface’ for such
@xmath corresponding to no quadratic terms, since by the same arguments
as above, such a model would be sure to give braneworld physics
distinguishable from that hitherto studied.

2.5 Two further comments about building SMS-type braneworlds

First, so far we have talked in terms of the @xmath split of the matter
contribution to relate our work as clearly as possible to its
predecessors in the literature. However, from the outset [ 333 ] it was
pointed out that this split is not unique. On these grounds we would
prefer to work with the unique trace-tracefree split in which all the
@xmath contributes to the trace part. The (4, 0) version of this split
is used in B.3.

Second, given a fixed type of bulk energy-momentum such as the @xmath of
‘noncompact KK theory’ or the @xmath , then establishing an embedding
requires the existence of a suitable compensatory characterization of
the bulk geometry. The GR line of thought would be to only take results
within such schemes seriously if they are robust to the addition of bulk
matter fields. Of course privileged choices of bulk could arise from
further theoretical input. We argue below that the theoretical arguments
behind some privileged choices in the literature for the bulk
energy-momentum are not convincing enough to anchor strongly credible
physical predictions. One would rather require rigorous and general
theoretical input following directly from some fundamental theory such
as string theory.

We now argue about the @xmath choice of bulk (an example of which is
pure AdS). This is clearly also always possible given the premises of a
particular case of the generalized Campbell–Magaard result, but we have
argued that this is not significant. We rather discuss the argument for
pure AdS bulks from string theory. This is not generally justifiable
since firstly, bulk gravitons are permitted so the bulk geometry would
generically contain gravity waves. Secondly, bulk scalars ought to be
permitted since they occur along with the graviton in the closed string
spectrum [ 300 ] . The content of the closed string spectrum thus places
interesting restrictions on bulk matter rather than completely
abolishing it. From the perspective of 5–d GR, evidence for the
stability of vacuum or AdS bulks (and of any resulting physical
predictions) to the introduction of suitable bulk fields would
constitute important necessary support for such models and their
predictions.

Finally note that use of arbitrary smooth bulk @xmath does not affect
the form of the junction conditions since only the thin matter sheet
contribution to @xmath enters these. The conclusion of our second point
is that there is no good reason not to explore at least certain kinds of
bulk matter in order to have a more general feel for how these thin
matter sheet models behave [ 211 ] .

2.6 Sideways York and thin-sandwich schemes with thin matter sheets

Although (3, 1; 1) methods which build higher-d bulks about the
privileged (3, 1) worlds by “z-dynamics” look tempting at the simplest
level, the more advanced issues from B.1 (of causality, and of
well-posedness not being known) hold regardless of the presence of thin
matter sheets. The issue of rough function spaces will become
particularly relevant in the study of sufficiently general situations
involving the evolution of thin matter sheets (see B.3.1).

Beyond the objections in B.1.3, the Campbell–Magaard scheme is
furthermore of limited use in models with thin matter sheets because the
junction condition imposes restrictions on @xmath which prevents these
being subdivided into the knowns and unknowns of Magaard’s method.

We next consider the (3, 1) version of the York method applied on the
thin matter sheet, but recall that even if this does provide data sets,
one is next confronted with the difficulties of the (3, 1; 1)
“evolution” scheme. To date (4, 1) worlds built from (3, 1) ones have
relied on very simple specialized ansätze, such as

A) @xmath -symmetric surfaces @xmath with known metric @xmath ,
whereupon the vacuum Codazzi equation is automatically satisfied and
then @xmath is required from the Gauss constraint.

B) @xmath with known @xmath , for example to obtain the Randall–Sundrum
bulk [ 308 ] or slightly more general solutions [ 14 ] . Now the maximal
subcase @xmath of the CMC condition is a generalization of A), whereas
the full CMC condition itself is a generalization of B). Moreover, now
the metric is to be treated as only known up to scale. Thus one would
generally only know the full metric of each model’s (3, 1) world once
the ‘wave Lichnerowicz equation’ for the embedding of this world into
the (4, 1) world is solved. So one loses the hold from the outset on
whether each model will turn out to contain an interesting (3, 1) world.
Nevertheless, some of the (3, 1) worlds will turn out to be of interest.
Furthermore, one should question the sensibleness of any ideas involving
the prescription of full (3, 1) metrics if the most general technique
available fails to respect such a prescription. This point is more
significant for (3, 1) data than for (3, 0) data because
conformally-related metrics have different non-null geodesics. For (3,
0) data no physical significance is attached to spatial geodesics, but
for (3, 1) there are timelike geodesics which are physically interpreted
as paths of free motion of massive particles. So a @xmath spacetime
which is conformally related to @xmath is different physically (for
example one could violate energy conditions the other one does not
violate). One can get out of this difficulty by either attaching no
physical significance to one’s inspired guesses for @xmath or by hoping
for unobservably tiny deviations between the geodesic curves of the two
geometries.

In the specific case of thin matter sheets, by the j.c’s, A) implies
that @xmath , whilst B) implies that @xmath is a hypersurface constant.
The maximal condition implies that @xmath whilst the CMC one implies
that @xmath is a hypersurface constant. So whereas the maximal and CMC
ans @xmath tze are more general than A) and B) respectively, they are
nevertheless restricted in this braneworld application. Notice, however,
that a number of interesting cases are included: vacuum, radiative
matter and electromagnetic matter are all among the @xmath spacetimes.

It is important to note that unlike the usual GR application, the choice
of a hypersurface to be a brane is not a choice of slicing because
localized energy–momentum is to be pinned on it. Almost all reslicings
would fail to isolate this energy-momentum on a single slice. We know of
no good reason why the brane should be CMC nor what value the CMC should
take on it. However, at least this is a well-defined notion and it is
substantially simpler to solve for than in general because of the
decoupling of the Gauss and Codazzi constraints.

As regards possible use of either thin or thick forms of the thin
sandwich conjecture to treat branes, we first distinguish between thin
sandwiches between 2 nearby branes and thin sandwiches which have a
brane on one side and an undistinguished hypersurface on the other. One
should be aware that non-intersection requirements may be different in
these two cases, and also different from that of the original thin
sandwich setting of 2 unprivileged spacelike hypersurfaces. Second, one
would have to take @xmath as unknown until it can be deduced from the
@xmath evaluated from the thin sandwich procedure. Finally we caution
that thin sandwich schemes need not always exist. They require the
“lapse” to be algebraically-eliminable, which for example is not the
case for the analogous @xmath of the KK split.

2.7 (n, 1; 1) singularity removal and thin matter sheets

First, there is less scope for it occurring along the lines of ( 727 ).
For, as it is the energy-momentum on the brane, @xmath is presumably
finite for a nonsingular (4, 1) world so @xmath is finite and so cannot
cause blowups in @xmath . However, blowups in this quantity can still
occur if the inverse metric is badly-behaved (corresponding to @xmath =
0). Note however that the application of the Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem
to GR requires this not to be the case everywhere within the region of
applicability.

Second, one would of course require the investigation of more elaborate
(e.g ‘warped’) embeddings than the example discussed above in order to
investigate whether some embeddings lead to 5-d geodesics that exit the
brane. If the (3, 1)-d geodesics on the brane are not included among
those of the (4, 1)-d bulk, it is not clear at all what is meant by
‘singular’ since one then would have to simultaneously consider some
notion of extendibility for two congruences of privileged curves of
different dimensionality.

Under the decomposition ( 136 ), the geodesic equation ( 12 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (769)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (770)
  -- -------- -- -------

if one upholds the use of normal coordinates. In order for ( 769 ) to
reduce in all cases to the (3, 1) geodesic equation on the brane, one
requires @xmath or @xmath everywhere on the brane. By ( 770 ),
maintenance of @xmath along all geodesics is impossible unless @xmath .
Thus in all cases @xmath is required on the brane. But this means that
@xmath or equivalently @xmath i.e the absence of a brane. Thus in
SMS-type braneworlds the

(3, 1) geodesics need not be among the (4, 1) geodesics.

One is trying to model confined matter. But the presence of
brane-confined fields then means that brane-field particles fall off the
brane if these follow (4, 1) geodesics, which cannot be a healthy state
of affairs. If one rather postulates that these follow (3, 1) geodesics,
then

A) there is POE violation going on: bulk-traversable and brane-confined
matter test-bodies undergo distinct free fall, which might have
observable consequences.

B) the on-brane causal structures due to brane-confined photons and due
to bulk-traversable gravitons would generally be distinct. Thus the new,
serious conceptual difficulties in B.1.6.3 about the definition of
singularities are indeed relevant to brane cosmology.

3 (n, 0; –1) methods with thin matter sheets

3.1 Hierarchy of problems and their difficulties

We are here concerned with the study of ( @xmath + 1)-d GR models with
thin matter sheets using only well–studied, well–behaved mathematical
techniques which also make good physical sense and are applicable to the
full EFE’s. In our view a good way of achieving this is via the ( @xmath
, 0) IVP, followed where possible by the heavily-protected ( @xmath , 0;
–1) CP.

We provide a hierarchy of modelling assumptions together with associated
difficulties, and argue that evolution is more problematic than data
construction. We concentrate on the latter, making use of attractive
features of the usual-signature York method in the new thin mater sheet
setting. The differences between this setting and that of numerical
relativity (c.f I.2.9–11, App C) lead to the following difficulties.
Firstly, certain thin matter sheet models require particularly rough
mathematics. Secondly, they require novel asymptotics and boundary
conditions (b.c’s).

Note that the increase in dimensionality itself does not affect much the
data construction nor the study of well-posedness and stability of the
GR CP, although there is some dimensional dependence when the rougher
function spaces come into use, due to the contrast between the
Hughes–Kato–Marsden theorem’s requirement that the Sobolev class of the
metric to be no rougher than @xmath (p 37) and that in all dimensions,
the presence of thin matter sheets means that the metric is rougher than
@xmath (the functions with continuous second derivatives) because of the
jump in the Riemann tensor at the sheet. This corresponds to the metric
being too rough to belong to the Sobolev class @xmath . Thus HKM’s
mathematics, the strongest used to date for both the GR IVP and CP [ 85
] , is not generally powerful enough to deal with thin matter sheets.

More powerful mathematics is thus desirable, and more may well appear
over the next few years (see the program starting with [ 218 ] ).
Realizations of part of the hierarchy of models below would be an
interesting application for this sort of mathematics, which further
motivates the study of increasingly rough Sobolev spaces, since the
higher the dimension the greater the improvement to the established HKM
mathematics is required for a full study of thin matter sheets. We must
also mention that in spaces rougher than @xmath there is no guarantee of
geodesic uniqueness [ 178 ] , so complete conventional physical
sensibleness is generally lost no matter what rougher Sobolev class
results are proved. This shortcoming is clearly dimension-independent
(from the dimension-independence of the form of the geodesic equation).

The asymptotics difficulty [ 182 ] follows from supposing that ‘AdS’
bulks are desirable for string-inspired scenarios. The study of ‘AdS’
bulks by relativists would entail the study of asymptotically AdS bulks
, to permit a more general study of disturbances close to the thin
matter sheet. Whereas we will for the moment seek to avoid the function
space difficulty, the asymptotics difficulty will remain in the
‘tractable scenarios’. In the usual GR, the use of AdS asymptotics for
the application of the York method to small-scale astrophysics was
neglected because of the negligible effect of a cosmological constant on
such small scales and because of DOD arguments. The braneworld
application is however substantially different, so one might in this
case have to study the York method with ‘AdS asymptotics’. This could
affect the tractability of the Lichnerowicz equation, and also whether
the existence of the crucial maximal or CMC slices is as commonplace for
these new spacetimes as it was for the (3, 1) GR ones. Furthermore,
because of the interest in infinite planar branes, the asymptotics is
directional , ‘perpendicular’ to the brane. However, in general there is
no such notion of perpendicularity in GR. Whereas one can locally define
geodesics and draw hypersurfaces perpendicular to them, this procedure
in general eventually breaks down, for example due to (spatial) caustic
formation.

We start our hierarchy by envisaging the most general situation possible
for thin matter sheets within the framework of GR. It is entirely
legitimate to construct a (4, 0) initial data snapshot with whatever
shape of thin matter sheet, but it is not legitimate to assume that any
features of this are maintained over time unless it can be shown that
the full evolution equations robustly maintain these features. Strictly,
this is an initial-boundary problem , such as occurs for water waves or
for the surface of a star. This is a very hard and quite new problem in
GR [ 146 , 145 ] . Thus the evolution step is particularly hard both in
its full generality and in the justifiability of simplifications such as
a fixed boundary.

Consider a thin matter sheet in an asymmetric (not @xmath symmetric)
bulk. One would ideally want to follow objects that crash into and
possibly disrupt the thin matter sheet. One can then imagine asymmetric
crashes which might punch though the thin matter sheet. The sheet could
thicken or disperse with time. It could emit a significant amount of
gravitational radiation, which could moreover include gravitational
shock waves that spread out the @xmath character that initially
pertained only to the thin matter sheet and not to the smooth
surrounding bulk. That is, the @xmath character of a thin matter sheet
data set @xmath could typically spread to the whole of its causal future
@xmath (fig 19).

In simple words, why should the junction remain unscathed? Why should
the bulk in the immediate vicinity of the junction at later times be
simple, smooth or known? Addressing these questions goes beyond the
reach of present-day techniques. Rather we note that some usually-tacit
assumptions are used to definitely avoid these difficulties, and that we
do not know whether any of these are justifiable in the physics governed
by the GR evolution equations. One can presuppose a thin matter sheet
exists at all times to prevent it being created or destroyed. One can
allow only bulks with regular thin matter sheet boundaries to preclude
shock waves. One could also preclude asymmetric crashes by presupposing
@xmath symmetry.

Even if discontinuous emissions are precluded, one can imagine smooth
emissions and absorptions (symmetric or asymmetric) whereby the bulk
interacts with the thin matter sheet. This would entail material leaking
off or onto each side of the thin matter sheet. This can be precluded by
the presupposition that the thin matter sheet’s energy-momentum resides
at all times on the sheet, which is encapsulated by the well-known
‘equation of motion’ of the thin matter sheet [ 206 , 274 ] . This is a
significant restriction on the dynamics of thin matter sheets in GR,
often carried out in the name of tractability but which may not be
realistic.

In the Randall–Sundrum scenario, the brane can be placed anywhere in the
bulk without affecting it. We strongly suspect that this is not a
typical feature in GR-based braneworlds, nor is it desirable since it
dangerously marginalizes the ontological status of the bulk. We take
this feature to be too specialized to be included in the developments
below.

We close this section by briefly discussing modelling assumptions which
avoid some of the above difficulties. We then implement these in two
particular classes of tractable problems. The desirability of each
modelling assumption strategy and of other modelling assumptions from a
string-theoretic perspective is discussed in B.3.4.

I) The choice of @xmath symmetry may well look and indeed be arbitrary
from a GR point of view and indeed from a string-theoretic point of view
(see the end of this section). But without such a choice one simply
cannot establish any specific embeddings if there are thin matter sheets
(in the GR study of stars one requires the absence of surface layers to
perform matchings). Thus one studies the restricted case with @xmath
symmetry, in which one integrates only up to the b.c provided by the
j.c. In the IVP part one can assume whatever configuration of thin
matter sheets. Thus this step is more justifiable than the subsequent
evolution, which may require some of the above ad hoc assumptions as to
the existence and good behaviour of the thin matter sheet at all future
times. So for the moment we are merely after the construction of (4, 0)
initial data up to the junction. By themselves these data are useful in
addressing issues such as the shape of the extensions of black hole
horizons into the bulk, but the staticity and stability of these
configurations remain unaddressed in the as-yet intractable evolutionary
step of the problem [ 334 ] .

II) One could choose instead to work with thick matter sheets i.e ones
that are finitely rather than infinitely thin [ 58 ] . Then the above
troubles with the function spaces need not occur, since the walls would
then not be rough in the above sense, although they could still have the
tractable level of roughness that is able to accommodate astrophysical
objects just as in ordinary GR. It is then easier to envisage the study
of the evolutionary step of the thick matter sheet problem quite high up
our hierarchy, since this more closely resembles the stellar surface
problem.

III) One could investigate closed shells rather than open sheets in
order not to require directional asymptotics.

3.2 Thin matter sheet IVP

We consider the @xmath case. Then by definition an extrinsic curvature
@xmath suffices in order to solve the Codazzi constraint. We begin by
considering the (4, 0) case of the Lichnerowicz–York equation ( 246 ).
The @xmath case, while important, lies beyond the scope of this thesis.

We work with the unphysical line element @xmath for some known trial
function @xmath , so as to model a @xmath -symmetric object such as a
black hole or a star on the brane. For the @xmath case, the IVP
essentially reduces to the solution of the Lichnerowicz equation for
some @xmath . We begin with the @xmath case of (the spatial projection
of) ( 742 ). We first find the b.c’s for the Lichnerowicz equation, then
provide algorithms and then comment on the underlying mathematical
physics.

Note that the b.c’s are to be imposed on the physical metric and then
written in terms of the unphysical quantities to have b.c’s in terms of
the objects we start off with and the unknown conformal factor @xmath .

The inner radial b.c is commonly established using an isometry (c.f
C.2.3). The Neumann reflection b.c case appropriate for a stellar source
holds just as well here as in C.2.3. The case appropriate for a black
hole is however distinct. Now, part of @xmath is singular and is
approached by excision and an inversion-in-the-sphere isometry about
some throat at radius @xmath of the black hole within the apparent
horizon [see fig 20a)]. But for braneworld black holes one does not know
how far the black hole extends into the bulk. Indeed, the main point of
the study is to find this out (pancakes versus cigars). Our idea is then
to guess a profile @xmath along which to excise. About each point on
@xmath an isometry in the corresponding 2-sphere may be applied [fig 20
b)], leading to an

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (771)
  -- -------- -- -------

The profile could be chosen so that it matches up smoothly with the
@xmath and @xmath boundaries. Once the problem is solved, one can find
out whether this profile was a good choice or not [fig 20 c)]. By
picking a 1-parameter family of @xmath curves, one could then iterate
until a satisfactory profile is found.

For the new inner- @xmath ( @xmath ) b.c, we impose the j.c’s ( 733 )
and ( 741 ), which now read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (772)
  -- -------- -- -------

(N.B these are imposed on the physical quantities). Imposing @xmath
symmetry, the second of these becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (773)
  -- -------- -- -------

by use of the definition of the physical @xmath in normal coordinates
and then factorizing out the @xmath . This @xmath isometry b.c is more
complicated than usual because of the presence of the thin matter sheet.

That the @xmath symmetry is termed a reflection appears to generate a
certain amount of confusion. This is because there is also the reflected
wave notion of reflection, taken to give a Neumann b.c (such as in for
the inner-radius b.c for a stellar source). In the case of Shiromizu and
Shibata (SS) [ 334 ] (see also [ 278 ] ), who furthermore treat our
known @xmath as their unknown, and our unknown @xmath as the perfect AdS
@xmath , it has the nice feature that the other 2 terms in ( 773 )
cancel leaving a Neumann b.c

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (774)
  -- -------- -- -------

which might look like a reflection in both of the above senses. However,
this is only possible for @xmath which may be somewhat restrictive. Note
also that ( 774 ) is an unusual notion of reflection in this context,
since it is of the conformally-untransformed (3, 0)-metric, whereas the
natural notion of reflection isometry would be for the
conformally-transformed (4, 0)-metric. Thus we conclude that the
presence of the notion of reflection ( 774 ) in SS’s work is
happenstance: it is separate from the @xmath notion of reflection
encapsulated in ( 772 ) and no analogue of it need hold in more general
situations.

Our b.c. ( 773 ) contains a reflection part @xmath ; the other part
being a (nonlinear) absorption. This has the following implications.
First, the presence of absorption terms is interesting since pure
reflection is the boundary condition of a perfect insulator in the
potential theory of heat. This suggests that pure reflection b.c’s such
as for pure AdS have built-in non-interaction of the bulk with its
bounding brane, whereas our b.c may lead to (evolution models) with
brane-bulk interactions. Whereas neither the planar symmetry in (4, 1)
spacetime of the underlying thin matter sheet nor the @xmath symmetry
within the (3, 1) thin matter sheet of a simple astrophysical object
generate gravity waves, we expect that spherical bumps on approximately
planar branes in (4, 1) spacetimes to admit gravity waves, potentially
giving rise to instabilities in the approximately AdS bulk braneworlds
in which the branes contain astrophysical objects. Our b.c could permit
the modelling of such interactions. Second the nonlinear absorption
(much as arises in the theory of heat with temperature-dependent
conductivity) is likely to complicate both analytic and numerical
treatments of our b.v.p.

The first point above is one reason to favour our approach over that of
SS (subject to overcoming the complications due to the second point).
Here is a further reason why our approach should be favoured on the long
run. Whereas one could try to generalize SS’s work by keeping the notion
that @xmath be unknown and @xmath known but not @xmath , whereupon our
b.c ( 773 ) is interpreted as an inhomogeneous Neumann b.c in @xmath ,
the main trouble with SS’s work is that there is no good reason for
their method to be directly generalizable away from its restrictive
assumption @xmath . Whereas treating @xmath not @xmath as the unknown
may give nicer b.c’s, it is not tied to a method known to be amenable to
less trivial solutions of the Codazzi equation than @xmath . Our
proposed method seeks a workable extension to the significantly more
general case @xmath , and speculatively to completely general @xmath .

Another nice feature in SS’s work is that the matter is scaled so that
the linearized p.d.e obtained is a Poisson equation. This p.d.e is
simply invertible to obtain detailed asymptotics [ 149 , 334 ] . For our
scheme, the linearized equation ( 794 ) is of Helmholtz-type rather than
Poisson, complicating such a procedure. We merely demand instead that
@xmath for @xmath large wherever possible so that our models are
‘directionally asymptotically AdS’. As for large @xmath , at least on
the brane, one can impose asymptotic flatness as @xmath . It is less
clear what one should prescribe in this respect off the brane. A more
detailed study of the asymptotics for our b.v.p’s should be required as
part of the actual construction of examples of data sets. ¹¹⁰ ¹¹⁰ 110
Particularly because numerical integration is done on large but finite
grids, subleading order asymptotics are helpful.

Our proposed b.v.p is thus the mixed, nonlinear problem

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (775)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can use simplifications i) and/or ii) of C.2.2 on this and still
have a more general case than that of SS. Simplification i) might be
plausible because 5-d AdS clearly admits conformally-flat spatial
sections [ @xmath )] or maybe not, since it is regarded with suspicion
in the (3, 1) GR 2-body problem [ 46 ] . The trick at the end of C.2.2
cannot be used to obtain particularly simple examples due to the
following argument. Unless one puts @xmath (constant) and has this
maintained by non-scaling (i.e @xmath ), it is overwhelmingly probable
that the emergent @xmath is not constant. Thus our freedom in @xmath is
used up to ensure that @xmath is constant. Contrary to what York assumes
in the ordinary GR context, we must permit @xmath since our application
requires a negative bulk cosmological constant, which further
complicates the analysis of which cases are guaranteed to be
well-behaved and renders @xmath cancellation with @xmath unavailable.

Our algorithm for solving this problem is as follows:

i) Prescribe the following unphysical quantities: the metric @xmath and
matter density @xmath .

ii) Pick any suitable @xmath to solve the Codazzi constraint. It follows
that @xmath is known.

iii) Thus we can attempt to solve our b.v.p for the Lichnerowicz
equation to obtain @xmath .

iv) Then we can compute the physical bulk metric @xmath and induced
brane metric @xmath of our snapshot.

This assumes that we have correctly guessed the profile. One would now
check whether this is the case by solving for the apparent horizon. If
this is unsatisfactory [fig 20c)] then one would repeat the algorithm
with adjusted profile.

For nonvacuum branes ( @xmath ), a similar argument enforcing @xmath
holds. The j.c may now be split into a trace b.c part,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (776)
  -- -------- -- -------

and a restriction on the tracefree part of the matter on the brane,
which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (777)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the metric ansatz and coordinate choice used. Our algorithm now
becomes

i) One now requires the prescription of @xmath everywhere and of @xmath
.

ii) Pick any suitable @xmath ; hence @xmath is known.

iii)Attempt to solve our b.v.p for the Lichnerowicz equation.

iv) Then we can compute @xmath and @xmath . In this particular case, the
simultaneous imposition of normal coordinates and an isotropic line
element forces the restriction ( 777 ) on the braneworld matter. This is
because one is applying too many coordinate restrictions; in this light
the habitual practice of working in braneworlds using normal coordinates
may be seen as a poor choice of gauge. If the above coordinate choices
are not simultaneously made, the algorithm would contain further
nontrivial equations [in place of ( 777 )] to solve before the
braneworld matter content can be deduced.

We assume that this nonvacuum application is for a star or clump of dust
on the brane in which case there is no need to excise a corner with a
profile as was done above to deal with the black hole singularity.

Notice the lack of control of the physical metrics characteristic of
theoretical numerical relativity. Our non-scaling of the matter at least
gives visible control over the matter. The sensibleness of doing this is
in fact tied to the negativity of the bulk @xmath : for @xmath and
@xmath , Lin receives a negative contribution with its tendency to
encourage ill-posedness, whereas for predominantly @xmath , the danger [
85 ] lies in @xmath .

A simpler example of b.v.p set up along the lines we suggest is that of
Nakamura, Nakao and Mishima [ 278 ] . Their metric is cylindrical not
spherical and they have a slightly simpler version of ( 773 ). Their
case is still time-symmetric. The linearized equation is then precisely
Helmholtz, facilitating its inversion and the consequent more detailed
knowledge of the asymptotics.

We also propose the 2-brane version of the above, in which the @xmath
condition is replaced by another ‘parallel’ brane boundary at @xmath .
This problem is close to that considered by Piran and Sorkin [ 340 ] .
In contrast however, their study involves a periodically-identified
fifth dimension to which there does correspond an isometry-based

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (778)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can provide a local (in function space) uniqueness proof for our
proposed type of b.v.p, at the same level as that for standard GR black
hole data in [ 394 ] . In the conformally-flat case, suppose that @xmath
for @xmath small. Then the homogeneous linearized b.v.p in @xmath is
applicable. We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (779)
  -- -------- -- -------

by Green’s theorem. For @xmath at least as fast as @xmath , the first
surface integral tends to zero. For @xmath at least as fast as @xmath
the second surface integral tends to zero. The fourth integral is zero
by the Neumann reflection b.c. Upon applying the linearization of the
nonlinear b.c ( 773 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (780)
  -- -------- -- -------

the third surface integral is non-positive provided that the restriction
@xmath holds. Thus since Lin @xmath , u must be zero. For the
non-conformally flat case, this argument requires @xmath . The argument
is not seriously changed in the black hole case when a corner is excised
by a profile with a Robin condition on it.

Stronger existence and uniqueness proofs for our proposed problems are
complicated by four factors: unboundedness, (albeit of the most benign
kind), the boundary having corners, mixed b.c’s (i.e a piecewise
prescription on the boundary) and a portion of these being nonlinear.
The first is however of the simplest kind and the second and third are
commonplace. The last is less usual but perhaps not so bad either
because by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (781)
  -- -------- -- -------

the problem can be written in divergence form, for which b.v.p’s with
nonlinear b.c’s are treated in Ch. 10.2 of [ 244 ] . The trouble is that
the treatment there, unlike here, is neither for mixed b.c’s nor for an
unbounded region with corners. Thus, the strongest point we can make at
present is that there is good hope of obtaining existence and uniqueness
results even for quite rough function spaces by more-or-less
conventional, entirely rigorous mathematics for our proposed problem.
This should be contrasted with the hopeless state of affairs with
sideways prescriptions! Once one begins to get good numerical results,
it becomes worthwhile to explicitly prove the well-posedness of the
method used, in order to support those results and the ongoing
production of more such results. In this particular case, these results
would serve to support and understand the crucial numerical step iii) in
the above algorithms.

To permit the even greater generality required to have momentum flows (
@xmath ), by our route one is forced to forfeit the DEC control over the
matter. This is because at least the @xmath part of @xmath cannot scale
in accord with the scaling of @xmath . We leave this further
development, which additionally requires posing and solving the b.v.p
following from the Codazzi equation, for a future project.

3.3 Thick matter sheet IVP

Many of the difficulties with evolution discussed above stem from the
thinness of the matter sheets causing function-space-related problems.
But ordinary physics should not be sensitive to which function space is
used. One would hope that models with thick matter sheets would be more
amenable to study, be good approximations to the thin matter sheets and
in any case could be closer to reality than thin matter sheets.

Bonjour, Charmousis and Gregory [ 58 ] have used the (2, 1; 1) version
of the general split ( 148 ), ( 149 ), ( 150 ) with scalar matter and
consider both thick walls and the thin-wall limit perturbatively in the
presence of gravity. They further specialize to the case of a spherical
domain wall, which they show collapses. It would be worthwhile if this
sort of example, which combines the modelling assumptions II) and III),
is investigated using the

( @xmath , 0; –1) split subject to flat and to AdS asymptotics.

For the particular example mentioned above, the matter profile is
sigmoidal. However, to approximate a thin brane, one would want instead
a hump profile, as indicated in fig 21. One could still use an inner b.c
at @xmath , where now @xmath so that the linear Robin b.c

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (782)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds. One could in fact consider 2 problems: the flat sheet with
directional asymptotics and the spherical sheet with a suitable
inversion-in-the-sphere in place of the above inner b.c. Both of these
problems avoid the main obstacles to existence and uniqueness proofs by
possessing linear b.c’s. The second problem is also invertible to an
inner problem which is on a bounded region with no corners, for which
results in [ 244 ] apply.

These problems are for ‘plain’ thick branes as opposed to branes
containing spherically-symmetric objects. The first problem ought to
more easily admit this extension. One might wish to study ‘plain’ thin
branes too, e.g in the context of branes in relative motion.

Finally, suppose instead one attempted to use something like Magaard’s
method to construct (4, 0) thin-matter-sheet data. Then one benefits
from @xmath and the identification of @xmath with the @xmath brane
prescribes the topology, removes some of the sources of nonuniqueness
and the brane’s energy-momentum endows physical significance upon the
(3, 0) covariance of the elimination procedure. In the thin matter sheet
case, one is blocked by the nonanalyticity of @xmath , but at least some
thick matter sheet models could be built in this way.

3.4 Discussion: modelling assumptions and stringy features

We did not consider the possibility of a higher codimension [ 162 ]
which could substantially alter the nature of the embeddings used. For
models with 2 or more times, it is simply not possible to stick entirely
to our suggestion to build on established mathematical physics. Finally,
our study could be complicated by having more than the Einstein tensor
in the bulk. For example, one can have a nontrivial Lovelock tensor term
[ 260 , 84 ] , or one could have genuine higher-derivative terms. ¹¹¹
¹¹¹ 111 A starting-point for this study might be the case-by-case 4-d
work of [ 68 ] . Whilst our incipient results – the correspondence
between ( @xmath , 0; –1) and ( @xmath – 1, 1; 1) schemes at the
simplest level, or our BEFE ambiguity – will have counterparts in these
theories, these theories’ equations are much larger than the EFE’s, and
their CP/IVP is much less well-studied than that of GR. Higher
derivatives or non-standard bulk matter might lead to the violation of
the energy conditions assumed in this thesis.

We next discuss which features of GR-based braneworld models are
desirable for string theory. First for some caveats. We introduced the
SMS braneworld as a GR generalization of the Randall–Sundrum scenario,
moreover one that was as yet not sufficiently general for the purposes
of GR in which the nature and existence of thin matter sheets at all
times might not be a representative presupposition. It could be that it
is other aspects of the Randall–Sundrum scenario that are of interest in
string theory since it also has particle physics aspects to it and
because it is a toy model of Hořava–Witten theory. One may prefer to
consider only these stringy scenarios rather than Randall–Sundrum or
SMS. Also a great source of tension between string theorists and
relativists is that the latter believe GR is suggestive of the
importance of background–independent theories, whilst there is as yet no
background–independent formulation of string theory available. Such
ideas as conserved charges, flat sheets and simple bulks arise from
assuming Minkowski or AdS backgrounds. Since GR is
background-independent, one is interested there in generic solutions to
the full field equations. This makes the notion of asymptotics necessary
and subtle, and not necessarily compatible with flat sheets nor
conserved charges. From a general perspective it is doubtful whether
highly-specialized solutions such as Minkowski or AdS are likely to
reflect the gravitational physics of the universe, unless it can be
shown that large classes of generic solutions behave likewise or are
attracted toward such solutions.

String theory conventionally favours many extra dimensions, although it
is not clear how many of these should be large and how many
compactified. Among the corrections to the Einstein tensor mentioned
above, string theorists might favour the Lovelock correction, since this
is the only first-order correction for a heterotic string [ 168 ] ; an
infinite series of further such correction terms is predicted. String
theorists might favour very flat walls on the grounds that these could
be stabilized by being the lowest-energy carriers of BPS charge [ 300 ,
214 ] . These arguments would rule against the use of highly symmetric
bulk manifolds/orbifolds, although string theorists might try to invoke
them as fixed backgrounds so as to perturb about them. There may be
different reasons for stability in GR and string theory. For example, in
contrast to string-theoretic arguments favouring reflection-symmetric
orbifolds, a GR domain wall could be stable precisely because the (3, 1)
bulk is different on each side, as the wall separates domains in which
symmetry is differently broken. On the whole, the string theorist would
agree that bulks could be complicated by the presence of bulk matter
from the closed string multiplet (I.3.3.5). At least in some models,
gauge fields would be expected to occur only as fields confined to
branes since they belong to the open string multiplet and some branes
are where open strings end [ 300 ] . As strictly, the branes are of
Planckian thickness, so it is not a disaster that thick branes are
favourable toward rigorous mathematics for GR-based scenarios (this is
recycling the argument in footnote 32). Of course, one could worry that
they are thin enough for quantum gravitational effects to be important.

Finally, we summarize the aspects of question 2 that should be asked as
the partial answers to question 1 begin to be built up. Does the
introduction of stringy features change the outcome to any of issues?
And so, are GR-based braneworlds adequate or typical frameworks for
string theory? What scenarios should one explore in order to furnish
string theory with reasonably unique predictions?

C Appendix on elliptic equations

Let @xmath take 1 to @xmath , @xmath take 1 to @xmath and @xmath take 1
to @xmath . Let @xmath be a multi-index running over the integers @xmath
to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The system of @xmath p.d.e’s for @xmath
unknowns @xmath of @xmath variables ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (783)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (784)
  -- -------- -- -------

is positive-definite and invertible.

Many elliptic equations are associated with the GR IVP. Below I build up
to these starting from the simplest elliptic equations, which emerge
anyway as special cases in the GR IVP. The purpose of using elliptic
formulations is that they lend themselves well to general well-posedness
proofs. But one may need to bear in mind in practice that they are
computationally expensive (since, being instantaneous equations, their
solution involves the whole numerical grid).

1 Linear elliptic equations

The Poisson equation in flat space (e.g Newtonian gravity or
electrostatics) @xmath is typically considered in a region @xmath and
supplemented by b.c’s on @xmath . Typical b.c choices include

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (785)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (786)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (787)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (788)
  -- -------- -- -------

These easily have good existence and uniqueness properties via Green’s
theorems It is profitable also to prove uniqueness for these from the
maximum principle (see e.g [ 93 ] ), a method which affords substantial
generalization. Whereas the above problems are furthermore well-posed,
the Cauchy data choice

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (789)
  -- -------- -- -------

includes Hadamard’s example , which fails to exhibit continuous
dependence on the data. Solution methods for the b.v.p’s ( 785 – 788 )
include fundamental solution techniques and the method of images.

The above treatment can straightforwardly be extended to (generalized
inhomogeneous Helmholtz) equations of form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (790)
  -- -------- -- -------

A case of this is the following curved space equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (791)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is regarded as some inverse @xmath -space metric and @xmath
. These typically appear in this thesis for the CWB case. Then, the
above types of proof benefit from the additional fact that all surface
integrals vanish:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (792)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the last step, suppose there is some point @xmath at which the
integrand @xmath . Then for @xmath continuous, @xmath , so @xmath , so
@xmath , where @xmath is some positive constant, which is a
contradiction.

The above nonexistence is the integral inconsistency of III.2. A
well-known case is non-maintainability of maximal slicing in CWB GR,
tied to the LFE @xmath . This works out because @xmath is
positive-definite from @xmath and the lapse @xmath is strictly positive
by definition, so the integrand is positive and hence cannot vanish.

This is bypassed in GR by using CMC slicing instead. Then the LFE is
rather

@xmath , and @xmath may be taken to be negative to ruin the above
argument. This is also the means by which CS+V theory and Newton–York
absolute time theory work. Conformal gravity and Kelleher’s theory work
instead by having LFE’s of a special integro-differential form @xmath
arising from adopting volume-divided actions. Then as @xmath is
trivially 0, the integral inconsistency becomes irrelevant by
construction. Finally, note that if both tricks are applied
simultaneously, @xmath so the CMC resolution is not then possible (this
is why volume-divided Newton–York absolute time theory is just
Kelleher’s theory again).

2 Lichnerowicz–York equation

The arbitrary-dimensional (but most definitely @xmath !)
Lichnerowicz–York equation is a nonlinear elliptic p.d.e

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (793)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the nonlinearity is of the relatively mild form known as
quasilinearity [ 244 ] since @xmath does not appear (due to the artful
construction on p 47). A number of theorems apply to equations of this
form.

2.1 Linearization

First linearize it by setting @xmath , @xmath in ( 793 ) and equate the
@xmath terms to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (794)
  -- -------- -- -------

If asymptotically @xmath and @xmath one obtains @xmath from which the
asymptotic behaviour of @xmath for the full equation may be obtained.

NB this is an equation of the form ( 790 ). Many b.v.p’s for such
equations are well-studied [ 93 , 305 , 244 ] . To give an idea of the
techniques available, consider the Dirichlet problem: ( 790 ) in @xmath
together with b.c @xmath on @xmath . One then proves existence from
uniqueness [ 244 ] , by setting up a sequence of problems interpolating
between the flat-space Laplace equation and ( 790 ). ¹¹² ¹¹² 112 A word
of caution as regards the applicability of this to ( 791 ) equations: as
@xmath and @xmath have geometrical significance, ( 791 ) equation is on
an underlying @xmath -manifold @xmath (generally with boundary). I thus
caution that if @xmath cannot be deformed to flat space, the
interpolation methods between the @xmath Laplacian on a portion of
@xmath and our operator cannot apply. To avoid this trouble, one could
study a sufficiently small region of @xmath (as @xmath is a manifold and
hence locally @xmath or restrict the allowed topology of @xmath to be
the same as that of a portion of @xmath .

2.2 The full equation and its simplifications

One can then interpolate between quasilinear elliptic equations such as
the full Lichnerowicz equation and their linearizations. Then one has
topological theorems about the fixed points of suitable maps, such as
Leray–Schauder degree theory [ 244 ] , to prove existence of the
solutions to the quasilinear elliptic equation’s Dirichlet problem.
Similar techniques are available for further b.v.p’s [ 244 ] .

Thus in handling the Lichnerowicz equation, one has an enhanced chance
of having a well-behaved b.v.p if the corresponding Lin @xmath . To this
end, notice that @xmath and @xmath are always positive whereas the
troublesome @xmath is of variable sign.

One may furthermore try three simplifications:

i) Conformal flatness, which replaces @xmath by the flat-space @xmath
and wipes out the arbitrary-sign @xmath term.

ii) Maximality: @xmath removes the highest-order term of Nonlin( @xmath
).

iii) Setting @xmath . If this is combined with ii), one has moment of
time symmetry @xmath , which is regarded as overly simple in the
standard applications of numerical relativity as it corresponds to the
absence of gravitational momentum on the slice @xmath .

One can sometimes also use a trick: to scale @xmath like @xmath , @xmath
or @xmath and then fix it so as to cancel with this term.

In the @xmath case, the cancellation trick above is not available if one
wishes the procedure to respect the DEC. Simplification i) is convenient
in this case.

2.3 Boundary conditions

I consider these here for 3-d single spherical compact object data, in
support of the braneworld black hole application in B.3.

The inner radial b.c, is commonly established using an isometry. For
example, for a stellar source, one could use @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath leading component-by-component to the homogeneous Neumann b.c
(the so-called reflection b.c)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (795)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the restriction @xmath on the valid form of the known function.

For a black hole, @xmath is singular. One excises this by use of an
inversion-in-the-sphere isometry about some throat at radius @xmath of
the black hole within the apparent horizon [see fig 20a)]. ¹¹³ ¹¹³ 113
One has no choice but to work with apparent horizons rather than event
horizons if one is given a single spatial slice. At least the apparent
horizon lies within the event horizon in GR. This gives an inner Robin
condition [ 394 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (796)
  -- -------- -- -------

Asymptotic flatness provides a natural outer radius ( @xmath ) Dirichlet
b.c. Would like subleading terms because of working on a finite grid in
practice. Sophisticated analysis might rather use a mode-selecting outer
Robin condition.

3 Techniques for solving the momentum constraint

The moment of time symmetry simplification @xmath means no momentum
constraint need be considered. This alongside conformal flatness and
vacuum assumptions gives the simplest conformal method IVP: the
remaining Lichnerowicz equation reduces to a flat-space Laplace
equation, while its electrovacuum counterpart is two Laplace equations
(the above and the electrostatic one). But moment of time symmetry
corresponds to absence of gravitational momentum. More general data are
thus desirable. In order to have a nonzero @xmath , one furthermore
requires @xmath to have a longitudinal part. The simplest longitudinal
method is when the metric is conformally-flat. Then the ‘Hodge
decomposition’ @xmath of the vector potential reduces the momentum
constraint to @xmath + 1 linear scalar Poisson

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (797)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are what is solved for e.g Bowen–York data.

The full momentum constraint is a well behaved vector elliptic equation.
Recollect that it is decoupled from the Lichnerowicz equation by virtue
of the CMC slicing. The conformal thin sandwich method requires all the
constraints and the LFE to be treated together as a system. In both
these cases the momentum constraint’s good elliptic properties help
ensure the whole system works out.

In contrast to these fortunately elliptic formulations for the momentum
constraint, its traditional sandwich counterpart ( 229 ) is only
elliptic in small regions, so the traditional thin sandwich is not
thereby furbished with powerful theorems. The Einstein–Maxwell extension
of this system (including coupling to the electromagnetic Gauss
constraint) is interesting, since the overall symbol becomes somewhat
different [ 158 ] .

I note that my ‘Codazzi equation’ ( 258 ) is more complicated than
usual. I do not expect this equation will be more than elliptic in small
regions. The involvement of various values of @xmath in theories in this
thesis will directly affect the ellipticity properties of their thin
sandwich formulations. That this alters the nature of the principal
symbol may be easily inferred from [ 393 ] .