such abstract spaces (configuration spaces, phase spaces and relative
configuration spaces) for a wide range of accepted physical theories.
Both the arena aspect and the dynamical aspect play an important role in
attempting to provide competing physical theories, often by extending or
generalizing the geometrical structure of accepted theories. III.2 and
Part B provide two very different examples of this. Geometry may both be
used to provide single all-encompassing formulations of the accepted
laws of nature, and to attempt to supplant current formulations by more
unified schemes.

0.2 Intrinsic geometry of the 2-sphere

Consider the surface of a 2-sphere. Some of its properties happen to be
independent of the conventional visualization’s surrounding @xmath .
These are the intrinsic properties of the sphere itself, which would be
noted by beings whose motions and perceptions are restricted to the
surface of the sphere only. Geometers among such beings could in
principle notice that although their world is locally @xmath , it has
curiously non-Euclidean properties on sufficiently large scales. For
example (Fig 1) a) if they fixed one end of a taut thread of sufficient
length @xmath and traced out the locus of the other end, they would find
that its circumference @xmath . b) Angles made between three of the
straightest possible lines might not add up to @xmath e.g octants
contain 3 right angles. c) Gyroscopes moved between two fixed points may
have a path-dependent final orientation of the precession axis. d)
Initially-parallel straightest possible lines may converge. It turns out
that all these symptoms can be characterized in terms of a single
quantity: the intrinsic curvature . I next investigate this more
formally, as required for general higher-d surfaces.

0.3 Differential geometry

Begin with as little structure as possible. Consider a real topological
manifold M i.e a particular kind of topological space that is everywhere
locally @xmath . Since one wishes to study tensorial differential
equations that represent physical law, one would normally require the
manifold to be sufficiently smooth. Tricks used are [ 347 , 364 , 345 ]
: 1) to work with manifolds that are locally @xmath and consider a
collection of charts (mappings from an open set in M @xmath ) that cover
the whole manifold, moreover for which the notion of nearby points in
all the overlaps between charts is consistent. Then one can establish a
differential structure on the manifold. 2) To introduce vectors on the
manifold as the tangents to curves (mappings I @xmath M for I an
interval of @xmath ). 3) To then compose these maps to make use of the
ordinary @xmath calculus of @xmath to @xmath , and moreover show that
all the notions involved are chart-independent.

4) To use the machinery of linear algebra to form the dual vector and
all the higher-rank tensors on the manifold. From the perspective here,
a dual vector at a point p on the manifold is a linear map @xmath where
@xmath is the tangent space at p, a vector at p is a linear map @xmath
where @xmath is the cotangent space at p (the dual of the tangent
space), and a rank ( @xmath , @xmath ) tensor at p is a multilinear map
from the product of @xmath copies of @xmath and @xmath copies of @xmath
to @xmath . A collection of vectors, one at each p @xmath , constitutes
a vector field over M , and tensor fields are similarly defined. The
more old-fashioned equivalent definition of a ( @xmath , @xmath ) tensor
is in terms of components: that these

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

in passing between unprimed and primed coordinate systems, where @xmath
is the general curvilinear coordinate transformation.

5) It is not straightforward to introduce derivatives acting on vector
fields fields because derivatives involve taking the limit of the
difference between vectors at different points. So then these vectors
belong to different tangent spaces. Whereas in @xmath one can just move
the vectors to the same point, this is not a straightforward procedure
on a curved surface [c.f fig 1c)]. The usual partial derivation is
undesirable since it does not map tensors to tensors. However, it
suffices to construct such a derivation acting on vectors and acting
trivially on scalars, since then one can easily obtain its action on all
the other tensors by the Leibniz rule.

Lie derivation does map tensors to tensors, but is directional because
it is with respect to some additional vector field @xmath along which
the tensors are dragged. I denote this derivative by @xmath . It is
established from dragging first principles [ 347 ] to act on scalars and
vectors as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

To have a non-directional derivative that maps tensors to tensors, one
corrects the partial derivative by introducing an extra structure: the
affine connection , which is a rank (1, 2) non-tensorial object with
components denoted by @xmath , transforming not like ( 3 ) but rather

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

The non-tensoriality of the connection compensates for that of the
partial derivative so that tensors are mapped to tensors. The derivative
obtained thus is the covariant derivative . I denote it by @xmath or
@xmath . It is just the partial derivative when acting on scalars, but
is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

when acting on vectors. For later use, note that Lie derivatives can be
re-expressed in terms

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

when the manifold happens to have affine structure.

A consequence of the non-tensorial transformation law of the affine
connection is that coordinates may be found in which the affine
connection is zero at any particular point, which is crucial in the
development of GR. The affine connection may be interpreted as giving a
notion of straightest possible transport of vectors along curves. Now,
one finds that such parallel transport along two paths generally depends
on the order in which the two paths are traversed (Fig 2). One finds
that a combination of derivatives and squares of the affine connection,
the Riemann curvature tensor :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

can be associated with this property of the transport of a vector @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

Instead one can define the Riemann curvature tensor from the ‘Ricci
lemma’

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

In affine geometry the ‘locally straightest paths’ or affine geodesics
may be parameterized

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

where a dot denotes @xmath . If one considers two neighbouring geodesics
with initially-parallel tangent vectors @xmath , then one can arrive at
the Riemann curvature tensor by considering the relative acceleration
@xmath of two neighbouring geodesics with connecting vector @xmath (fig
3)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that this is a nonlocal effect.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

for formulae ( 10 ),( 11 ) and ( 13 ) to hold and for it to be true that
it is necessarily curvature that underlies these symptoms (since the
torsion corrections to the formulae by themselves produce similar
symptoms).

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

Another structure is required in order to have a notion of distance (in
the spacetime or space application this is desirable to model how
observers perform measurements of length-duration). A metric tensor
@xmath is brought in for this purpose. It is usually taken to be
symmetric, nondegenerate and a function of the coordinates alone. Then
@xmath is a (semi-)Riemannian manifold. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Genuine Riemannian metrics
are those which are positive-definite; those which are indefinite are
termed semi-Riemannian . I also refer to these as Euclidean- and
Lorentzian-signature metrics. I use @xmath and @xmath for metrics when
simultaneously treating higher- and lower-d manifolds, with
corresponding covariant derivatives @xmath and @xmath . Higher-d objects
are generally distinguished with checks. All the formulae of this
section should be transcribed accordingly prior to their application.
Round brackets surrounding more than one index of any type denote
symmetrization and square brackets denote antisymmetrization; indices
which are not part of this (anti)symmetrization are set between vertical
lines. I denote the determinant of the metric by @xmath and its inverse

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Semi-)Riemannian geometry has a metric connection (Christoffel symbol)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

with corresponding metric geodesics (paths locally of extremal length)
parameterizable as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

In (semi-)Riemannian geometry all intrinsic properties follow from the
metric: one assumes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

so then geodesics and the Riemann tensor are expressible in terms of the
metric. Einstein assumed this simple geometry for GR, which has so far
been consistent with observation. If however one does not assume the
above equality, then the difference of the two connections would
constitute an additional tensor generally composed of torsion and
nonmetricity parts. Apart from allowing these, other ways of having more
complicated geometry are for the metric to be non-symmetric, or
degenerate, or to depend on the velocities as well as the coordinates
(as in Finslerian geometry ). These will not be considered as options
for the geometrization of space(time), but the last two occur in my
dynamical study.

The metric and its inverse may be used to lower and raise indices on
other tensors. Thus one can define the Riemann tensor with all its
indices downstairs by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

The curvature tensors contain the following numbers of independent
pieces of information:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

This establishes which tensor suffices to describe intrinsic curvature
in each dimension: @xmath suffices in 2-d, @xmath in 3-d and all of
@xmath is required in all higher-d. It also establishes whether the
numbers of equations and unknowns make sense in different possible
physical theories based on such geometrical objects. The (irreducible)
part of @xmath not in @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

which inherits all the symmetry properties of the Riemann tensor.

The Einstein tensor (used in the construction of the Einstein field
equations),

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

has the important properties of being divergenceless by the contracted
Bianchi identity

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

and a symmetric (0, 2) tensor like the metric.

App 0.A Densities and Integration

A @xmath tensor density of weight @xmath is an object which transforms
like

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

I denote @xmath and @xmath objects by overlines and underlines
respectively. In particular, the square root of the metric determinant
is a scalar density of weight 1. I need the following

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

For integration to make sense on a manifold, integrands must be weight-1
scalars (since it does not make sense to add higher-rank tensors at
distinct points). Furthermore, ( 32 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath a (1, 0) vector density of weight 1 and where @xmath and
@xmath are the obvious (hyper)surface and (hyper)volume elements.
