In this doctoral thesis a model of many orthogonally commonly
intersecting delocalized branes with neither harmonic gauge nor any
other extra conditions is discussed. Further a method of solving
equations of motion of the model is given. It is proved that the model
reduces to the so called Toda-like system which is solvable at least in
several cases relevant for realistic brane configurations. The solutions
generally can break supersymmetry. Examples of the solutions are given
and some their properties are considered in more detail. Especially the
presence and interpretation of singularities is discussed and the
relation between energy and charge density of the solution. A certain
duality in the space of solutions is described connecting two seemingly
different elements of the space. It is shown that the solution dual to
the supersymmetric one breaks supersymmetry, but it still possesses some
features usually attributed only to solutions preserving supersymmetry.
In particular for the dual solution equality between energy and charge
density holds.

hep-th/0410237

Nonsupersymmetric intersecting

branes in supergravity

Marcin P. Flak

Marcin.Flak@fuw.edu.pl

Institute of Theoretical Physics, Department of Physics, Warsaw
University

Ho≈ºa 69, 00-681 Warsaw, Poland

Ph.D. thesis written under supervision of

prof. Krzysztof A. Meissner

presented to the faculty of Warsaw University Physics Department

and recommended for acceptance

.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Krzysztof Meissner, for
providing me a guidance during the long journey through the amazing
world of elementary particle physics. Not only did he make me familiar
with secrets of this world but also supported me in overcoming
difficulties which I often encountered in the course of my studies. I am
very grateful for having him for a mentor.
