##

Este trabalho foi financiado pela Fundação Para a Ciência e Tecnologia
(FCT),
sob o contrato Praxis XXI/BD/21282/99 (01/01/2000 - 31/12/2003).

This work was supported by Fundação Para a Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT),
under the grant Praxis XXI/BD/21282/99 (01/01/2000 - 31/12/2003).

### Acknowledgements

In a PhD thesis an acknowledgement must be addressed to the
corresponding supervisor. My first acknowledgement goes indeed to my
supervisor, José P. S. Lemos, not simply because I have to do it but
specially because I am really profoundly grateful to him. This friend of
mine taught me how research work is done, and when difficulties appeared
he was always present with his scientific help, with his suggestions in
the right direction, and with his motivating word. I cannot avoid
feeling that this acknowledgement cannot express all my gratitude to
him.

Almost fifteen years ago, a clever boy appeared in my high school class.
What begun as a stimulating loyal struggle for a good school result,
revealed to be some time later a very good friendship. We have passed
through a lot during this common path. I have learned a lot with you my
good friend Vitor Cardoso; I hope I have given back something to you.
Thank you also to you Ricardo Marques, for the good moments during the
high school.

My PhD research was done at Centro Multidisciplinar de Astrofísica
(CENTRA). I particularly acknowledge Ana Mourão, Alfredo Barbosa
Henriques, Dulce, and Jorge Dias de Deus for the excellent environment
that you have proportionated to me, and for being present in the moments
I needed you.

Thank you to you Carlos Herdeiro for the nice discussions we had.
Although they occurred in a short period of time, I have learned a lot
with them. A special acknowledgement also to you Shijun Yoshida for your
friendship and for our clever comments and discussions.

When I was in my fourth year of graduation, I started giving practical
lessons. I will never forget all the support received from the
professors to whom I first worked. Ana Branquinho, Pedro Brogueira,
Teresa Peña, and later, Mário Pimenta, thank you indeed for all the
respect, for the care, and specially for the advises you always gave to
me. Unfortunately, a sincerely thanks is probably all I have to give to
you. I wish I could give more.

Thank you to you mother and father, specially for having supported
always my options, for your education and for your love. Thank you also
to you my brother, specially because you have taught me that when we
fight for something we really want, we can reach it.

Thank you my friends Alexandre Mestre, Álvaro Santos, Elisa Vaz, Maria
Rui, Miguel Meira, Nuno Cristino, Patrícia Maldito, Pedro Rego, and
Tiago Gomes. I have always counted on you. A warm thank to you my good
friend Miguel Quintas. I hope you know how important you are to me.

Four years ago I decided not to go abroad because of you Ana Mei Lin.
Now, more than ever, I know I have taken the right decision. Thank you
for these beautiful years. Everything else, I tell you personally.

] ]

###### Contents

-    Acknowledgements
-    1 Overview
    -    1.1 Overview on black holes
    -    1.2 Black holes in 3-dimensional spacetimes
        -    1.2.1 Exact solutions
        -    1.2.2 Pair creation of black holes in 3-dimensions
    -    1.3 Black holes in 4-dimensional spacetimes
        -    1.3.1 Exact single black hole solutions
        -    1.3.2 Pair of accelerated black holes: the C-metric and the
            Ernst solution
        -    1.3.3 Quantum pair creation of black holes in external
            fields
        -    1.3.4 Energy released during black hole pair creation in an
            external field
    -    1.4 Black holes in higher dimensional spacetimes
        -    1.4.1 Exact black hole solutions
        -    1.4.2 Quantum pair creation of higher dimensional black
            holes
        -    1.4.3 Gravitational radiation in higher dimensional
            spacetimes. Energy released during black hole production
    -    1.5 Organization of the thesis
-    I Black holes and pair creation in 3 dimensions
    -    2 The BTZ family of black holes
        -    2.1 Properties of three dimensional general relativity
        -    2.2 The neutral BTZ black hole
            -    2.2.1 Identifications in @xmath
            -    2.2.2 The construction leading to the BTZ black hole
        -    2.3 The electric BTZ solutions
            -    2.3.1 The BTZ black hole with a radial electric field
                -    2.3.1.a Static black hole with a radial electric
                    field
                -    2.3.1.b Rotating black hole with a radial electric
                    field
            -    2.3.2 The BTZ solution with an azimuthal electric field
        -    2.4 The magnetic BTZ solution
            -    2.4.1 Static solution. Analysis of its general
                structure
                -    2.4.1.a Static solution
                -    2.4.1.b Geodesic structure
            -    2.4.2 Rotating magnetic solution
                -    2.4.2.a Addition of angular momentum
                -    2.4.2.b Mass, angular momentum and electric charge
                    of the solutions
                -    2.4.2.c Relations between the conserved charges
                -    2.4.2.d The rotating magnetic solution
                -    2.4.2.e Geodesic structure
            -    2.4.3 Physical interpretation of the magnetic source
        -    2.5 Summary and discussion
    -    3 Three dimensional dilaton black holes of the Brans-Dicke type
        -    3.1 Neutral Brans-Dicke dilaton black holes
        -    3.2 Electric Brans-Dicke dilaton black holes
            -    3.2.1 Field equations of Brans-Dicke @xmath Maxwell
                theory
            -    3.2.2 The general static solution
            -    3.2.3 The general rotating solution
            -    3.2.4 Mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the
                solutions
            -    3.2.5 Causal and geodesic structure of the charged
                black holes
                -    3.2.5.a Analysis of the causal structure
                -    3.2.5.b Analysis of the geodesic structure
                -    3.2.5.c Penrose diagrams and geodesics for each
                    range of @xmath
            -    3.2.6 Hawking temperature of the charged black holes
        -    3.3 Magnetic Brans-Dicke dilaton solutions
            -    3.3.1 Field equations of Brans-Dicke @xmath Maxwell
                theory
            -    3.3.2 General static solution. Analysis of its
                structure
                -    3.3.2.a Field equations
                -    3.3.2.b The general static solution. Causal
                    structure
                -    3.3.2.c Geodesic structure
            -    3.3.3 The general rotating solution
                -    3.3.3.a The generating technique
                -    3.3.3.b Mass, angular momentum and charge of the
                    solutions
                -    3.3.3.c The rotating magnetic solution in final
                    form
                -    3.3.3.d Geodesic structure
            -    3.3.4 Physical interpretation of the magnetic source
        -    3.4 Summary and discussion
    -    4 Pair creation of black holes in three dimensions
-    II Black holes and pair creation in 4 dimensions
    -    5 Black holes in a generalized @xmath background
        -    5.1 Black holes in an anti-de Sitter background
            -    5.1.1 Black holes with spherical topology
            -    5.1.2 Black holes with toroidal or cylindrical topology
                -    5.1.2.a Neutral and electric charged black holes
                -    5.1.2.b Magnetic solutions
            -    5.1.3 Black holes with hyperbolic topology
        -    5.2 Black holes in a flat background
        -    5.3 Black holes in a de Sitter background
    -    6 Pair of accelerated black holes: the C-metric in a
        generalized @xmath background
        -    6.1 Pair of accelerated black holes in an anti-de Sitter
            background: the AdS C-metric
            -    6.1.1 General properties of the AdS C-metric
                -    6.1.1.a The AdS C-metric
                -    6.1.1.b Radial Coordinate. Curvature Singularities
                -    6.1.1.c Angular Surfaces. Conical Singularities
                -    6.1.1.d Coordinate ranges
                -    6.1.1.e Mass and charge parameters
            -    6.1.2 Causal Structure of the AdS C-metric
                -    6.1.2.a Causal Structure of the @xmath solutions
                -    6.1.2.b Causal Structure of the @xmath solutions
                -    6.1.2.c Causal Structure of the @xmath solutions
            -    6.1.3 Physical interpretation of the AdS C-metric
                -    6.1.3.a @xmath . Pair of accelerated black holes
                -    6.1.3.b @xmath . Single accelerated black hole
                -    6.1.3.c @xmath . Single accelerated black hole
        -    6.2 Pair of accelerated black holes in a flat background:
            the flat C-metric and Ernst solution
            -    6.2.1 General properties of the flat C-metric and Ernst
                solution
                -    6.2.1.a The flat C-metric
                -    6.2.1.b The Ernst solution
            -    6.2.2 Causal Structure of the flat C-metric
                -    6.2.2.a Massless uncharged solution ( @xmath ,
                    @xmath )
                -    6.2.2.b Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath ,
                    @xmath )
                -    6.2.2.c Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath
                    )
            -    6.2.3 Physical interpretation of the flat C-metric
                -    6.2.3.a Description of the @xmath , @xmath solution
                -    6.2.3.b Pair of accelerated black holes ( @xmath ,
                    @xmath )
        -    6.3 Pair of accelerated black holes in a de Sitter
            background: the dS C-metric
            -    6.3.1 General properties of the dS C-metric
                -    6.3.1.a The dS C-metric
                -    6.3.1.b Mass and charge parameters
            -    6.3.2 Causal Structure of the dS C-metric
                -    6.3.2.a Massless uncharged solution ( @xmath ,
                    @xmath )
                -    6.3.2.b Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath ,
                    @xmath )
                -    6.3.2.c Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath
                    )
            -    6.3.3 Physical interpretation of the dS C-metric
                -    6.3.3.a Description of the @xmath , @xmath solution
                -    6.3.3.b Pair of accelerated black holes ( @xmath ,
                    @xmath )
                -    6.3.3.c Source of acceleration and radiative
                    properties
        -    6.4 Summary and concluding remarks
    -    7 The extremal limits of the C-metric: Nariai,
        Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai C-metrics
        -    7.1 Extremal limits of black hole solutions in dS, flat,
            and AdS spacetimes: The Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and
            anti-Nariai solutions
            -    7.1.1 The Nariai solution
            -    7.1.2 The Bertotti-Robinson solution
            -    7.1.3 The anti-Nariai solution
            -    7.1.4 @xmath limit of the Nariai and anti-Nariai
                solutions
        -    7.2 Extremal limits of the dS C-metric
            -    7.2.1 The Nariai C-metric
            -    7.2.2 The Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric
            -    7.2.3 The Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric
        -    7.3 Extremal limits of the flat C-metric and of the Ernst
            solution
            -    7.3.1 The “Nariai” flat C-metric
            -    7.3.2 The Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric
            -    7.3.3 The “Nariai” Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric
        -    7.4 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric
            -    7.4.1 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric with
                spherical horizons
            -    7.4.2 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric with toroidal
                horizons
            -    7.4.3 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric with
                hyperbolic horizons
                -    7.4.3.a The anti-Nariai C-metric
                -    7.4.3.b Other extremal limits
        -    7.5 Determination of the north and south poles
        -    7.6 Summary and discussion
    -    8 False vacuum decay: effective one-loop action for pair
        creation of domain walls
        -    8.1 The false vacuum decay process
        -    8.2 Effective one-loop action
        -    8.3 Pair production rate
        -    8.4 Summary and discussion
    -    9 Pair creation of black holes on a cosmic string background
        -    9.1 Pair creation of anti-de Sitter black holes on a cosmic
            string background
            -    9.1.1 The AdS C-metric instantons
                -    9.1.1.a The nonextreme AdS instanton with @xmath
                -    9.1.1.b The extreme AdS instanton with @xmath
                -    9.1.1.c The nonextreme AdS instanton with @xmath
                -    9.1.1.d Initial system: AdS background with a
                    string
            -    9.1.2 Calculation of the black hole pair creation rates
                -    9.1.2.a Pair creation rate in the nonextreme case
                    with @xmath
                -    9.1.2.b Pair creation rate in the extreme case (
                    @xmath )
                -    9.1.2.c Pair creation rate in the nonextreme case
                    with @xmath
            -    9.1.3 Heuristic derivation of the nucleation rates
            -    9.1.4 Summary and discussion
        -    9.2 Pair creation of flat black holes on a cosmic string
            background
        -    9.3 Pair creation of de Sitter black holes on a cosmic
            string background
            -    9.3.1 Black hole pair creation rate: the instanton
                method
            -    9.3.2 The dS C-metric instantons
                -    9.3.2.a The lukewarm C instanton
                -    9.3.2.b The cold C instanton
                -    9.3.2.c The Nariai C instanton
                -    9.3.2.d The ultracold C instanton
            -    9.3.3 Calculation of the black hole pair creation rates
                -    9.3.3.a The lukewarm C pair creation rate
                -    9.3.3.b The cold C pair creation rate
                -    9.3.3.c The Nariai C pair creation rate
                -    9.3.3.d The ultracold C pair creation rate
                -    9.3.3.e Pair creation rate of nonextreme
                    sub-maximal black holes
            -    9.3.4 Entropy, area and pair creation rate
                -    9.3.4.a The lukewarm C case. Entropy and area
                -    9.3.4.b The cold C case. Entropy and area
                -    9.3.4.c The Nariai C case. Entropy and area
                -    9.3.4.d The ultracold C case. Entropy and area
                -    9.3.4.e The nonextreme sub-maximal case. Entropy
                    and area
            -    9.3.5 Heuristic derivation of the nucleation rates
            -    9.3.6 Summary and discussion
        -    9.4 Pair creation in AdS, flat and dS backgrounds: a
            comparing discussion
-    III Black holes and pair creation in higher dimensions
    -    10 Black holes in higher dimensional spacetimes
        -    10.1 Higher dimensional black holes in a flat background
        -    10.2 Higher dimensional exact solutions in a dS background
            -    10.2.1 Higher dimensional black holes in an
                asymptotically dS background
            -    10.2.2 Extremal limits of the higher dimensional dS
                black holes
                -    10.2.2.a Higher dimensional Nariai solution
                -    10.2.2.b Higher dimensional dS Bertotti-Robinson
                    solution
                -    10.2.2.c Higher dimensional flat Bertotti-Robinson
                    solution
                -    10.2.2.d Higher dimensional Nariai @xmath
                    Bertotti-Robinson solution
        -    10.3 Higher dimensional exact solutions in an AdS
            background
            -    10.3.1 Higher dimensional black holes in an
                asymptotically AdS background
                -    10.3.1.a Higher dimensional AdS black holes with
                    spherical topology
                -    10.3.1.b Higher dimensional AdS black holes with
                    toroidal or cylindrical topology
                -    10.3.1.c Higher dimensional AdS black holes with
                    hyperbolic topology
            -    10.3.2 Extremal limits of the higher dimensional AdS
                black holes
    -    11 Pair creation of black holes in higher dimensional
        spacetimes
        -    11.1 The higher dimensional dS instantons
            -    11.1.1 The higher dimensional cold instanton
            -    11.1.2 The higher dimensional Nariai instanton
            -    11.1.3 The higher dimensional ultracold instanton
            -    11.1.4 The higher dimensional lukewarm instanton
        -    11.2 Calculation of the black hole pair creation rates
            -    11.2.1 The higher dimensional cold pair creation rate
            -    11.2.2 The higher dimensional Nariai pair creation rate
            -    11.2.3 The higher dimensional ultracold pair creation
                rate
            -    11.2.4 The higher dimensional lukewarm pair creation
                rate
            -    11.2.5 Pair creation rate of higher dimensional
                nonextreme sub-maximal black holes
        -    11.3 Discussion of the results
    -    12 Gravitational radiation in higher dimensional spacetimes and
        energy released during black hole creation
        -    12.1 Linearized @xmath -dimensional Einstein’s equations
            -    12.1.1 The inhomogeneous wave equation
            -    12.1.2 The plane wave solutions
            -    12.1.3 The @xmath -dimensional retarded Green’s
                function
            -    12.1.4 The even @xmath -dimensional retarded solution
                in the wave zone
        -    12.2 The even @xmath -dimensional quadrupole formula
            -    12.2.1 Derivation of the even @xmath -dimensional
                quadrupole formula
            -    12.2.2 Applications of the quadrupole formula: test
                particles in a background geometry
                -    12.2.2.a A particle in circular orbit
                -    12.2.2.b A particle falling radially into a higher
                    dimensional Schwarzschild black hole
        -    12.3 Instantaneous collisions in even @xmath -dimensions.
            Energy released during black hole pair creation
            -    12.3.1 Derivation of the Radiation Formula in terms of
                a cutoff for a head-on collision. Energy released during
                formation of black hole at LHC
            -    12.3.2 Applications: The cutoff frequency when one of
                the particles is a black hole and radiation from black
                hole pair creation
                -    12.3.2.a The cutoff frequency when one of the
                    head-on colliding particles is a black hole
                -    12.3.2.b The gravitational energy radiated during
                    black hole pair creation
        -    12.4 Summary and discussion

] ]

Preface

The research included in this thesis has been carried out at Centro
Multidisciplinar de Astrofísica (CENTRA) in the Physics Department of
Instituto Superior Técnico. I declare that this thesis is not
substantially the same as any that I have submitted for a degree or
diploma or other qualification at any other University and that no part
of it has already been or is being concurrently submitted for any such
degree or diploma or any other qualification.

Chapter 2 was done in collaboration with Professor José Lemos and Dr.
Carlos Herdeiro. Chapters 3 - 9 are the outcome of collaborations with
Professor José Lemos. Chapter 10 was done in collaboration with
Professor José Lemos, Vitor Cardoso and Nuno Santos. Chapters 11 and 12
were done in collaboration with Professor José Lemos and Vitor Cardoso.
All these chapters have been submitted with minor modifications for
publication.

A list of the works published included in this thesis are listed below.

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Rotating magnetic solution in three
dimensional Einstein gravity , JHEP 0201 : 006 (2002); [hep-th/0201058]
(Chapter 2).

- V. Cardoso, S. Yoshida, O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Late-time tails
of wave propagation in higher dimensional spacetimes , Phys. Rev. D 68 ,
061503 (2003) [Rapid Communications]; [hep-th/0307122] (mentioned in
Chapter 2).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Static and rotating electrically
charged black holes in three-dimensional Brans-Dicke gravity theories ,
Phys. Rev. D 64 , 064001 (2001); [hep-th/0105183] (Chapter 3).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Magnetic point sources in three
dimensional Brans-Dicke gravity theories , Phys. Rev. D 66 , 024034
(2002); [hep-th/0206085] (Chapter 3).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Magnetic strings in anti-de Sitter
general relativity , Class. Quantum Grav. 19 , 2265 (2002);
[hep-th/0110202] (mentioned in Chapter 4).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Pair of accelerated black holes in a
anti-de Sitter background: the AdS C-metric , Phys. Rev. D 67 , 064001
(2003); [hep-th/0210065] (Chapter 6).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Pair of accelerated black holes in a de
Sitter background: the dS C-metric , Phys. Rev. D 67 , 084018 (2003);
[hep-th/0301046] (Chapter 6).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, The extremal limits of the C-metric:
Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai C-metrics , Phys. Rev. D 68
(2003) 104010; [hep-th/0306194] (Chapter 7).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, False vacuum decay: Effective one-loop
action for pair creation of domain walls , J. Math. Phys. 42 , 3292
(2001); [hep-ph/0103193] (Chapter 8).

- O. J. C. Dias, Pair creation of particles and black holes in external
fields , [gr-qc/0106081] (Chapter 8).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Pair creation of de Sitter black holes
on a cosmic string background , Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 084006;
[hep-ph/0310068] (Chapter 9).

- O. J. C. Dias, Pair creation of anti-de Sitter black holes on a cosmic
string background , Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 024007 (Chapter 9).

- V. Cardoso, O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson
and anti-Nariai solutions in higher dimensions , Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004)
024002 (Chapter 10).

- N. L. Santos, O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Global embedding
Minkowskian spacetime procedure in higher dimensional black holes:
Matching between Hawking temperature and Unruh temperature , Phys. Rev.
D, in press (2004) (mentioned in Chapter 10).

- O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Pair creation of higher dimensional
black holes on a de Sitter background , Phys. Rev. D, submitted (2004);
[hep-th/0410279] (Chapter 11).

- V. Cardoso, O. J. C. Dias, J. P. S. Lemos, Gravitational radiation in
D-dimensional spacetimes , Phys. Rev. D 67 , 064026 (2003);
[hep-th/0212168] (Chapter 12).

### Chapter 1 Overview

] ] \minitoc

#### 1.1 Overview on black holes

Black holes have begun to be entities of theoretical interest when they
have been found as exact solutions of the Einstein equations with
peculiar features. Although the actual universal name ‘‘black hole” has
been introduced only in 1968 by Wheeler ^(a) ^(a) a In this overview
section when we refer to a work we will only specify the author and the
year of publication. Being reference works they can easily be found in
the books. For this purpose we suggest, e.g., the book of Frolov and
Novikov [ 1 ] . , the first black hole solution has been found by
Schwarzschild in 1916, just a few months after the publication of
General Relativity by Einstein. As proved by Birkhoff in 1923, the
Schwarzschild solution describes the external gravitational field
generated by a static spherical mass. It was much later found that one
is in the presence of a black hole when the mass @xmath is inside a
critical radius, @xmath (where @xmath is Newton’s constant and @xmath is
the light velocity), known as the event horizon of the black hole. This
horizon acts like an one-way membrane: particles and radiation can cross
it from outside, but they cannot escape from its interior. An observer
that is at rest at infinity sees an infalling observer taking an
infinite amount of time to approach the horizon but, according to the
infalling observer, his crossing through the horizon is done in a finite
amount of time and, once he has done this fatal step, he is unavoidably
pushed into the central curvature singularity at @xmath where he suffers
an infinite tidal force. These properties of the Schwarzschild black
hole are best synthesized in its Carter-Penrose diagram, Fig. 1.1 .
These kind of causal diagrams have been progressively developed by works
of Eddington, Finkelstein, Kruskal, Carter and Penrose, and we will make
a first contact with them here since they will be very useful along this
thesis.

In the Carter-Penrose diagrams, a null particle (e.g., a light ray)
moves necessarily towards the top along @xmath lines, while timelike
particles can move into the top of the diagrams only along a curve whose
tangent vector must do an angle less than @xmath with the vertical line.
The curvature singularity, @xmath , of the Schwarzschild black hole is
represented by a zigzag line in Fig. 1.1 . Region IV is equivalent to
region I, and both represent the region outside the black hole horizon,
@xmath . A null ray that is sent from a point @xmath in these regions
can move towards @xmath , after crossing @xmath , but it is also free to
move into the future infinity @xmath [see Fig. 1.1 .(b)]. Note that
regions I and IV are casually disconnected: no null or timelike particle
can start in region I and reach region IV. Region II is interpreted as
the interior of the black hole horizon, since a null ray emitted from a
point in its interior [e.g., point @xmath in Fig. 1.1 .(b)] necessarily
hits the future curvature singularity, and cannot cross the horizon
towards region I or IV (the discussion also applies to timelike
particles). Region III is interpreted as the interior of the white hole,
since any particle, e.g. the light ray that is emitted from point @xmath
in Fig. 1.1 .(b), is necessarily expelled out from region III, i.e., it
necessarily crosses the horizon towards region I or IV. We remark that
regions III and IV were not present in the original solution of
Schwarzschild. They appear after the realization that this original
solution could be extended.

The inclusion of an electric charge @xmath also yields an exact static
spherical solution which is known as the Reissner-Nordström black hole
(1918) when @xmath . Finally, an angular momentum @xmath can be added to
the system yielding a stationary, axisymmetric solution which when
@xmath is known as the Kerr solution (1963), and when @xmath is called
Kerr-Newman solution (1965). These solutions describe a black hole when
the condition @xmath is satisfied. When the equality holds in the above
relations we have the extreme black hole solutions which have zero
temperature. When the above constraints are violated we have a naked
singularity, a visible singularity not surrounded by a horizon. The
uniqueness theorems (whose proofs have been given by Israel, Robinson
and Carter, among others in 1968 and in the following decade) state that
the only static or stationary solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell
equations that are asymptotically flat and have regular horizons are the
above solutions characterized only by the parameters @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . All the other parameters that specified the initial state
before the formation of the black hole are radiated away during the
creation process. This simple description of a black hole is well
summarized by the well-known metaphoric statement of Wheeler: “a black
hole has no hair”. The construction of a formalism to compute these
hairs @xmath , @xmath and @xmath has been carried by Arnowitt, Deser and
Misner (1963), by Regge and Teiltelboim (1974), and by Brown and York
(1993), among others. In the seventies, Price, Wald, Chandrasekhar and
Detweiler have also proven that the above black holes are stable with
respect to small perturbations [ 2 ] .

The theory of black holes has been strongly connected to the theory of
gravitational collapse after the work of Oppenheimer and Snyder (1939)
and Penrose’s theorem (1965): a realistic, slightly non-spherical
complete collapse leads unavoidably to the formation of a black hole and
a singularity (for a detailed description of the theory of gravitational
collapse see the work of Harrison, Thorne, Wakano and Wheeler [ 3 ] ).
Oppenheimer and Volkoff (1939) have shown that when a neutron star
(first predicted by Zwicky in 1934) forms, after the explosion of the
massive progenitor star, its mass must be smaller than @xmath (in fact
Oppenheimer and Volkoff first found the value @xmath , but a more
accurate account on the nuclear processes yields the value @xmath ).
This is the maximum mass that the pressure of neutron degenerate matter
can support against further gravitational collapse. The existence of a
maximum mass for degenerate matter had been realized previously by
Chandrasekhar (1935), in the case of electron degenerate matter. He has
shown that white dwarfs must have a mass smaller than @xmath . Thus,
black holes formed thought the gravitational collapse of stellar matter
have necessarily a mass @xmath . In the context of gravitational
collapse towards a black hole, two important conjectures have been
formulated, the cosmic censorship and the hoop conjectures. The cosmic
censorship conjecture (Penrose, 1969) forbids the existence of naked
singularities, while the hoop conjecture (Thorne, 1972) states that
black holes form when and only when a mass @xmath gets compacted into a
region whose circumference in every direction is less than its
Schwarzschild circumference @xmath . During the last decade, a great
effort has been initiated in order to detect the energetic astrophysical
processes predicted to be powered by black holes. Mainly, the
astrophysics are looking into the X-ray emitting sources that can be
found in the accretion of matter into a binary stellar system and into
an active galactic nuclei. These efforts have by now already provided a
set of serious black hole candidates in a binary system with masses that
belong to the range @xmath (where @xmath is the solar mass), and in an
active galactic nuclei with masses that belong to the supermassive range
@xmath .

Black holes have entered in the domain of physics during the 1970s when
it has been shown that they are thermodynamic objects. Indeed Bardeen,
Carter and Hawking (1973), supported by previous work of Christodoulou
(1970) and Penrose (1971), have shown that black holes obey the so
called four laws of black hole mechanics. The first one is known as the
zero law and states that the surface gravity is constant along the
horizon of the black hole, even when this is not spherically symmetric
as occurs with the Kerr solution. The surface gravity, @xmath , can be
interpreted as the force that must be exerted on a rope at infinite to
hold a unit mass at rest near the horizon of the black hole. The first
law (an energy conservation law) states that when one throws an
infinitesimal amount of matter into a stationary black hole described by
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , it will evolve into a new stationary black
hole in such a way that the change in the hairs of the system satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the surface area of the horizon, @xmath is the angular
velocity at the horizon, and @xmath is the electric potential at the
horizon. The second law states that the area of the black hole horizon
cannot decrease during any physical process, @xmath (this classical law
was later replaced by the generalized second law which states that the
sum of the black hole entropy plus the exterior matter entropy can never
decrease). Finally, the third law states that it is impossible to reduce
the surface gravity to zero by a finite number of processes. The surface
gravity of the Kerr-Newman black hole is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus @xmath implies @xmath , which as we saw above is the condition
for an extreme black hole. If the state @xmath could be reached we would
have a naked singularity. Hence, the cosmic censorship conjecture stated
by Penrose plays the role of the third law.

These laws are purely classical and resemble the usual four laws of
thermodynamics, if one admits that @xmath is proportional to the
entropy, as suggested by Bekenstein (1973,1974), and that @xmath is
proportional to the black hole temperature. At first, this resemblance
was only an analogy since if the black hole had a temperature it would
have to radiate, in a clear contradiction with the known classical fact
that nothing could escape from the black hole horizon. However, in a
revolutionary work, Hawking (1975), using a semiclassical treatment in
which the gravitational field of the black hole is treated classically
but the matter is treated quantum mechanically, has shown that the black
holes do indeed radiate a spectrum characteristic of a blackbody with a
Hawking temperature given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Planck constant, @xmath is the Boltzmann constant,
and the associated Bekenstein-Hawking entropy is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Actually, the spectrum is not a perfect blackbody one due to the so
called greybody factor: the emission rate of particles is proportional
to the cross-section for a particle to be absorbed by the black hole and
this cross-section is not constant, which leads to deviations from the
pure blackbody emission spectrum. For a Schwarzschild back hole we have
@xmath and @xmath . At this point some remarks are justified. First note
that the four fundamental constants of nature, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath (that are the fingerprints of relativity, gravitation,
statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics) are, for the first time,
unified in a single formula. Second, in standard statistical mechanics,
the entropy of a system originates in the counting of quantum states
which are macroscopically indistinguishable. Now, the Bekenstein-Hawking
entropy of a black hole has not yet been fully explained as a
consequence of such state counting. Third, note that the Hawking
temperature of the Schwarzschild back hole is inversely proportional to
the mass. Thus its heat capacity is negative and the black hole is
quantum mechanically unstable since as it loses mass, its temperature
grows and the particle emission rate grows (the black hole evaporates).
The rate of mass loss per unit time can be estimated using the
Stefan-Boltzmann law, @xmath with @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

to which corresponds an evaporation lifetime given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Third, note that although the Hawking evaporation would constitute a
definite proof of the black hole nature of a compact object, it will be
very difficult to be ever observed by astronomical means. Indeed, an
astrophysical black hole with a mass @xmath has a Hawking temperature of
only @xmath to which corresponds a total dissipating power of @xmath .

If one has some hope in observing the Hawking evaporation one must then
look for possible physical processes that lead to the formation of
mini-black holes with Planck sizes ( @xmath , @xmath ). For example, a
black hole with @xmath would have a temperature @xmath and a total
dissipating power of @xmath , and thus the Hawking evaporating process
would be extremely energetic and passible of being observed. A process
that might lead to the formation of such Planckian black holes has been
proposed by Zel’dovich and Novikov (1967), and by Hawking (1971). These
black holes are called primordial since they can have been produced only
in the very early universe when very large local deviations from
homogeneity were possible. Let @xmath be the time elapsed since the Big
Bang and @xmath the size of a fluctuation in the metric, i.e., of an
inhomogeneity in the metric that describes the universe. Then, when
@xmath is of the order of @xmath , the gravitational forces can locally
stop the cosmic expansion of an agglomerate of matter and reverse it
into complete collapse if the self gravitational potential energy of the
matter exceeds the internal energy: @xmath , where @xmath is the
pressure. Now, during the radiation era the relation between the
pressure and the density is @xmath and, according to the Einstein-de
Sitter model of the early universe, the density and the time are related
by @xmath . From these relations one finds that the mass of the
primordial black hole is related to the cosmic time by @xmath . Thus, at
the Planck time, @xmath , mini-black holes may form with the Planck mass
@xmath , at time @xmath , black holes with @xmath may be produced, and
at the time of nucleosynthesis, @xmath , supermassive black holes with
@xmath may be created. Now, some primordial mini-black holes should by
now be in the last stage of the Hawking evaporation process, and thus we
should be detecting the highly energetic @xmath -ray bursts released
during this exploding process. These events have not been observed,
which indicates that the average density of the primordial black holes
is low or zero. On the other side the hypothesis that the active
galactic nuclei are feeded by the accretion of matter into central
supermassive black holes with masses @xmath , as suggested by
Lynden-Bell (1969), may favor the rapid formation of supermassive black
holes in the early universe.

Another process that allows the formation of mini-black holes is the
gravitational analogue of the Schwinger (1951) quantum process of pair
creation of particles in an external electric field. Recall that this
Schwinger process is based on the fact that virtual, short-lived,
particles are constantly being created and rapidly annihilated in the
physical vacuum, so that it is stable. However, in the presence of an
external electric field, some of these particle-antiparticle pairs may
receive enough energy to materialize and become real. This leads to the
quantum creation of the pair that is then accelerated away also by the
external Lorentz force. At the heuristic level one can estimate the
probability of this pair creation process as follows. Let @xmath be the
external field strength, and @xmath and @xmath the charge and mass of
the particle, respectively. A pair separated by a distance @xmath can be
created if @xmath is of the order of the Compton length of the particle,
@xmath , and if the work done by the field along this distance, @xmath ,
is at least equal to the energy needed to materialize the pair, @xmath .
An estimate for the probability of pair creation is then given by the
Boltzmann factor @xmath . Unfortunately, in order to observe this effect
one must have a huge external critical field, @xmath . So, at @xmath
(say), a pair is materialized at @xmath . Now, one can go further and
analyze the subsequent evolution of the pair. It is accelerated apart by
the Lorentz force describing the uniformly accelerated hyperbolic motion
(the Rindler motion), @xmath . Differentiating this relation one obtains
the velocity and thus, the energy of the particle, @xmath . Hence, after
the creation, the work done by the field along the distance between the
pair, @xmath , is used to accelerate the pair. The complete process is
schematically represented in Fig. 1.2 .

This Schwinger process also holds for other particles and background
fields. One example is the pair creation of solitons and domain walls
that accompany the decay of a false vacuum. We will discuss this process
in chapter 8 . The gravitational analogue of the Schwinger process, that
leads to the pair creation of black holes in an external field, has
proposed by Gibbons (1986). In order to turn a pair of virtual black
holes into a real one, we also need a background field that provides the
energy needed to materialize the pair, and that furnishes the force
necessary to accelerate away the black holes once they are created. This
background field can be: (i) an external electromagnetic field with its
Lorentz force, (ii) the positive cosmological constant @xmath , or
inflation, (iii) a cosmic string with its tension, (iv) a combination of
the above fields, or (v) a domain wall with its gravitational repulsive
energy. We will make an overview of these processes in section 1.3.3 ,
and we will analyze some of these processes in great detail in chapter 9
. To study these processes we must have exact solutions of the Einstein
equations that describe the pair of uniformly accelerated black holes in
the external field, after they are created. Fortunately, these solutions
exist and we will make a historical presentation of them in section
1.3.2 , and we will discuss them in detail in chapter 6 . Finally, an
important process that accompanies the production of the black hole pair
is the emission of electromagnetic and gravitational radiation. An
estimate for the amount of gravitational radiation released during the
pair creation period will be given in section 1.3.4 and explicitly
computed in chapter 12 .

Nowadays, it is important to study black holes not only in an
asymptotically flat spacetime, but also in spacetimes with a negative
cosmological constant ( @xmath ), i.e., asymptotically anti-de Sitter
(AdS) spacetimes, and in spacetimes with a positive cosmological
constant ( @xmath ), i.e., asymptotically de Sitter (dS) spacetimes. One
of the motivations to study AdS solutions, as we shall see in section
1.2 , comes from the fact that the only black holes that 3-dimensional
gravity can provide live in an AdS background. Another motivation is
related to supergravities in @xmath dimensions, that provide a dynamic
mechanism that spontaneously compactifies 7 of the 11 dimensions and
yields a vacuum state with topology @xmath , with an energy density
given by @xmath , where @xmath is the coupling constant of the theory.
Thus, its vacuum is described by an AdS spacetime. If such theory is
correct, it means that AdS should be considered as a symmetric phase of
the theory that must have been broken to yield our actual background.
String theory provides a further motivation to analyze AdS backgrounds,
through the AdS/CFT correspondence conjecture of Maldacena [ 4 ] . This
duality conjecture states a correspondence between supergravity on an
AdS space and a conformal field theory (CFT) on the boundary of that
space. The connection bridge between the string theory on AdS and the
gauge theory is supported by the large N limit of t’Hooft, where N is
the number of charged colors of the theory. This relationship has been
motivated by the studies on higher dimensional black holes ( @xmath
-branes), and by their full string theory description as @xmath -branes
of Polchinski. In addition, AdS spacetimes have other interesting
features: (i) it is one of the rare backgrounds yielding a consistent
interaction with massless higher spins, (ii) it allows a consistent
string theory in any dimension, not only at the critical ones, and (iii)
it permits a clear definition of mass, charge and angular momentum (a
property that is shared with the asymptotically flat case).

The properties of the dS solutions also deserve a detailed
investigation. The main motivation to study them comes from recent
astronomical observations that seem to indicate that our universe is
filled by a @xmath background. The dS background plays also a crucial
role in the inflationary era undergone by the early universe, and
supergravities theories in a dS space have also been connected to a
conformal field theory (CFT) in the boundary of the space, through the
dS/CFT duality conjecture of Strominger.

Both the de Sitter and anti-de Sitter spacetimes allow the existence of
spherically symmetric black hole solutions that are the direct
counterparts of the asymptotically flat Schwarzschild,
Reissner-Nordström, Kerr and Kerr-Newman black holes, and in chapter 5
we will make a brief comparison between these black holes in the @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath backgrounds. In this aspect, the AdS spacetime has a
richer structure than the other two. Indeed, the 4-dimensional AdS
background also allows black holes with a non-spherical topology. This
has been an unexpected result since a topological theorem of Hawking [ 5
] states that if the spacetime is asymptotically flat and globally
hyperbolic, and the dominant energy condition holds, then the topology
of the black holes must be spherical. At the time of its formulation,
this theorem was supported by the spherical topology of the know black
holes. The reason why in the AdS background one can have black holes
with non-spherical horizons is obviously due to the presence of a
negative @xmath . So, besides the spherical solutions, the AdS case
allows two other families of solutions, namely, solutions with
cylindrical, toroidal, or planar topology [ 6 ] - [ 10 ] , and solutions
with hyperbolic topology [ 11 ] (these are usually called topological).

The first non-spherical AdS black hole, that we will discuss in chapter
5 , has been found by Lemos [ 6 ] . These solutions have a planar
symmetry, i.e., they include black holes with cylindrical, toroidal, and
planar horizons, and can be formed through gravitational collapse as
shown by Lemos [ 12 ] . The interest on these spacetimes, and in AdS in
general, relies also in the fact that they can be used to test the
cosmic censorship and hoop conjectures. Indeed, as shown in [ 12 ] , (i)
spherical collapse with @xmath may lead to massless naked singularities
(in contradiction with the cosmic censorship conjecture), (ii)
cylindrical, toroidal or planar collapse with @xmath does not produce
naked singularities (in accordance with the cosmic censorship
conjecture), and (iii) cylindrical, toroidal or planar collapse with
@xmath leads to the formation of the black holes with cylindrical,
toroidal, and planar horizons found in [ 6 ] , which gives a clear
counter-example to the hoop conjecture. Static and rotating electric
charged black holes that are the electric counterparts of the black
holes found in [ 13 ] have been obtained by Lemos and Zanchin [ 7 ] ,
and magnetic solutions with cylindrical or toroidal topology have been
constructed by Dias, and Lemos [ 8 ] (see chapter 5 ).

#### 1.2 Black holes in 3-dimensional spacetimes

##### 1.2.1 Exact solutions

Einstein gravity in a 3-dimensional background has some unusual features
that clearly differentiate it from the 4-dimensional Einstein gravity
(see Gott and Alpert [ 14 ] , Giddings, Abbot and Kuchař [ 15 ] , Deser,
Jackiw and t’ Hooft [ 16 ] , and Barrow, Burd and Lancaster [ 17 ] ).
Any vacuum solution with @xmath is flat, and any vacuum solution with
non-vanishing cosmological constant has constant curvature. This follows
from the fact that the Weyl tensor in 3 dimensions is identically zero.
The 3-dimensional spacetime has no local degrees of freedom, and thus
its dynamics is substantially different from the one of the
4-dimensional case. In particular, there are no gravitational waves, and
no gravitons. Moreover, there is no Newtonian limit, that is, there is
no gravitational force between masses. Note, however, that the absence
of gravitational dynamics in general relativity by no way means that
3-dimensional spacetimes are trivial and out of interest. Indeed, as we
shall discuss, one can study solutions generated by point sources, one
can construct a time machine, and one can build a topological black hole
solution. Furthermore, quantization of the gravitational field has been
attempted with some successes in a 3-dimensional background.

@xmath Spacetimes generated by point sources in 3-dimensions

The issue of spacetimes generated by point sources (no event horizon) in
3-dimensional Einstein theory has been object of many studies (for
reviews see [ 19 , 20 , 18 ] ). These sources can be viewed as normal
sections of straight cosmic strings. In 1963, Staruszkiewicz [ 21 ] has
begun the analysis of 3-dimensional Einstein gravity without
cosmological constant ( @xmath ) coupled to a static massive point
source. The corresponding space has a conical geometry, i.e., it is
everywhere flat except at the location of the point source. The space
can be obtained from the Minkoswki space by suppressing a wedge and
identifying its edges. The wedge has an opening angle which turns to be
proportional to the source mass. Deser, Jackiw and t’ Hooft [ 16 ] have
generalized the analysis of [ 21 ] in order to find the spacetime
solutions generated by an arbitrary number of static massive point
sources. These static multi-source solutions are possible because of the
absence of gravitational interaction in 3-dimensional general
relativity. Once more the geometry is conical with a wedge angle
suppressed at each source proportional to its mass. They have also
constructed the solution corresponding to a massless spinning point
source in 3-dimensional Einstein gravity with @xmath . The extension to
include massive spinning sources has been achieved by Clément [ 22 ] .
Their results indicate that (besides the conical geometry already
present in the spinless case) the spacetime can be seen as characterized
by a helical structure since a complete loop around the source ends with
a shift in time proportional to the angular momentum. In the context of
Einstein-Maxwell theory but still with @xmath , Deser and Mazur [ 23 ]
and Gott, Simon and Alpert [ 24 ] have found the solutions produced by
electric charged point sources. These spacetimes once more have a
conical geometry with a helical structure. Due to the slow fall off of
the electric field in 3-dimensions, the system has infinite total
energy. That is, asymptotically the electric field goes as @xmath (while
in 4-dimensions it falls as @xmath ), the energy density behaves as
@xmath (while in 4-dimensions it goes as @xmath ), and therefore the
spatial integral of the electric field diverges not only at the origin
but also at infinity. Static charged multi-source solutions are not
possible because, due the absence of gravitational interaction, the
electric repulsion cannot be balanced by a gravitational attraction.
Barrow, Burd and Lancaster [ 17 ] found the horizonless spacetime
generated by a magnetic charged point source in a @xmath background.
Melvin [ 25 ] also describes the exterior solution of electric and
magnetic stars in the above theory. 3-dimensional static spacetimes
generated by open or closed one-dimensional string sources with or
without tension (in a @xmath background) have been constructed by Deser
and Jackiw [ 26 ] . The extension to the rotating string source has been
done by Grignani and Lee [ 27 ] and by Clément [ 28 ] . Other exact
solutions in 3-dimensional Einstein gravity theory produced by extended
and stationary sources have been found by Menotti and Seminara [ 29 ] .

The spacetimes generated by point sources in 3-dimensional Einstein
gravity with non-vanishing cosmological constant ( @xmath ) have been
obtained by Deser and Jackiw [ 30 ] and by Brown and Henneaux [ 31 ] .
In the de Sitter case ( @xmath ) there is no one-particle solution. The
simplest solution describes a pair of antipodal particles on a sphere
with a wedge removed between poles and with points on its great circle
boundaries identified. In the anti-de Sitter case ( @xmath ), the
simplest solution describes a hyperboloid with a wedge removed
proportional to the source mass located at the vertex of the wedge.

@xmath Time machines in 3-dimensional spacetimes

In a clear example of the richness of 3-dimensional Einstein gravity,
Gott [ 32 ] , in 1991, has shown that it is possible to construct a time
machine (see also Cutler [ 33 ] ), i.e., a solution that allows the
existence of closed timelike curves (regions that violate causality and
that allow an observer to travel backwards in time). All that is needed
is two particles in a flat background passing through each other with a
velocity greater than a certain critical value, that is related with the
deficit angle (discussed above) associated with the particles. However,
Deser, Jackiw and t’ Hooft [ 16 ] , and Carrol, Fahri and Guth [ 34 ]
soon proved that Gott’s construction was tachyonic, i.e., the mass
system that leads to the appearance of closed timelike curves
corresponds to an effective mass travelling faster than light. Moreover,
Carrol, Fahri, Guth and Olum [ 35 ] , and Menotti and Seminara [ 36 ]
have shown that the total momentum of Gott universe is spacelike. Holst
[ 37 ] has constructed the AdS analogue of Gott universe, and concluded
that it still is tachyonic. Moreover, for closed universes, t’Hooft [ 38
] has shown that if one starts with a spacetime without closed timelike
curves and tries to insert them through Gott’s construction, then the
universe will always collapse before they have an opportunity to appear.
Thus, the analysis of 3-dimensional Einstein gravity has been important
to show that nature prevents the creation of time machines.

@xmath Black holes in 3-dimensional Einstein gravity

In what concerns black hole solutions in 3-dimensional Einstein gravity,
quite surprisingly (since the 3-dimensional spacetime is quite poor at
the dynamical level), Bañados, Teitelboim and Zanelli [ 39 ] have found
a black hole solution (the BTZ black hole), with mass and angular
momentum, that is asymptotically AdS. The existence of this black hole
gets even more remarkable when one realizes that the BTZ metric has
constant curvature and thus there can be no curvature singularity at the
origin. As discussed in detail by Bañados, Henneaux, Teitelboim, and
Zanelli [ 40 ] , the BTZ black hole can be expressed as a topological
quotient of @xmath by a group of isometries. This is, the BTZ black hole
can be obtained through identifications along an isometry of the @xmath
spacetime, and in order to avoid closed timelike curves, the origin must
be a topological singularity (a boundary of the spacetime).
Qualitatively, the reason why the black hole exists only in an AdS
background can be understood as follows. The radius of an event horizon
( @xmath ) in a @xmath -dimensional spacetime is expected to be
proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional
Newton’s constant. Now, in mass units @xmath has dimension @xmath .
Thus, @xmath (and @xmath ) is dimensionless in @xmath , and there is no
length scale in @xmath . The cosmological constant provides this length
scale for the horizon, but only when @xmath (AdS case). One may argue
that this is due to the fact that the AdS background is attractive,
i.e., an analysis of the geodesic equations indicates that particles in
this background are subjected to a potential well that attracts them
(and so it is possible to concentrate matter into a small region), while
the dS background is repulsive (in practice, if we try to construct a dS
black hole through identifications along an isometry of the @xmath
spacetime, we verify that the possible horizon is inside the region that
contains closed timelike curves). In many ways, the BTZ black hole has
properties similar to the ones of the 4-dimensional black holes. For
example, it has an event horizon and, in the rotating case, it has an
inner horizon and the angular momentum has a maximum bound. It can also
be formed through the collapse of matter as shown by Mann and Ross [ 41
] . Matschull [ 42 ] , Holst and Matschull [ 43 ] , and Birmingham and
Sen [ 44 ] have shown that the BTZ black hole can be created when two
point particles with sufficient energy collide in the AdS background. We
must however be careful with some clear differences that exist between
the BTZ black hole and the 4-dimensional black holes, specially in what
concerns thermodynamic properties (see Carlip and Teitelboim [ 45 ] ).
Indeed, the temperature of the BTZ black hole goes as @xmath and tends
to zero when @xmath decreases. The BTZ black hole then has positive heat
capacity, and complete evaporation of it takes an infinite amount of
time. Stellar equilibrium in 3-dimensions has been discussed by Cruz and
Zanelli [ 46 ] , and by Lubo, Rooman and Spindel [ 47 ] .

The extension to include a radial electric field in the BTZ black hole
has been done by Clément [ 48 ] and Martínez, Teitelboim and Zanelli [
49 ] (this solution reduces to those of [ 23 , 24 ] when @xmath ).
Again, due to the slow fall off of the electric field in 3-dimensions,
the system has infinite total energy. The presence of the electric
energy-momentum tensor implies that the spacetime has no longer constant
curvature, and the electric BTZ black hole cannot be expressed as a
topological quotient of @xmath by a group of isometries. The rotating
charged black hole is generated from the static charged solution
(already found in [ 39 ] ) through the application of a rotation Lorentz
boost. A BTZ solution with an azimuthal electric field was found by
Cataldo [ 50 ] . This solution is horizonless, and reduces to empty
@xmath spacetime when the charge vanishes. Pure magnetic solutions with
@xmath , that reduce to the neutral BTZ black hole solution when the
magnetic source vanishes, also exist. Notice that, in oppose to what
occurs in 4-dimensions where the the Maxwell tensor and its dual are
2-forms, in 3-dimensions the Maxwell tensor is still a 2-form, but its
dual is a 1-form (in practice, the Maxwell tensor has only three
independent components: two for the electric vector field, and one for
the scalar magnetic field). As a consequence, the magnetic solutions are
radically different from the electric solutions in 3-dimensions. The
static magnetic solution has been found by Clément [ 48 ] , Hirschmann
and Welch [ 51 ] and Cataldo and Salgado [ 52 ] . This spacetime
generated by a static magnetic point source is horizonless and has a
conical singularity at the origin. The extension to include rotation and
a new interpretation for the source of magnetic field has been made by
Dias and Lemos [ 53 ] . Other black hole solutions of 3-dimensional
Einstein-Maxwell theory have also been found by Kamata and Koikawa [ 54
, 55 ] , Cataldo and Salgado [ 56 ] and Chan [ 57 ] , assuming self dual
or anti-self dual conditions between the electromagnetic fields. In
chapter 2 we will analyze in detail the BTZ family of solutions, with a
special focus on the topological construction leading to the rotating
massive BTZ black hole, and on the magnetic BTZ solution.

@xmath Other 3-dimensional gravities and their black holes

In order to turn the 3-dimensional dynamics more similar with the
realistic 4-dimensional one, we can manage a way by which we introduce
local degrees of freedom. This is done by coupling an extra field to the
Einstein general relativity. One way to do this, as proposed by Deser,
Jackiw and Templeton [ 58 ] in 1982, is to add a Chern-Simmons term
yielding an alternative theory to Einstein gravity called topological
massive gravity. The new term appears as a counterterm in the
renormalization of quantum field theory in a 3-dimensional gravitational
background [ 59 ] . The attractive interaction between masses is
Yukawa-like, and is mediated by a massive scalar graviton. This theory
is perturbatively renormalizable [ 60 ] . Spacetimes generated by point
sources in this theory have been obtained by Carlip [ 61 ] , by Gerbert
[ 62 ] , and by Deser and Steif [ 63 ] . Clément [ 64 ] , Fernando and
Mansouri [ 65 ] and Dereli and Obukhov [ 66 ] have analyzed self-dual
solutions for the Einstein-Maxwell-Chern-Simons theory in 3-dimensions.

Another generalization can be obtained by coupling a scalar field to
Einstein gravity, yielding a so called dilaton gravity. The most general
form of this kind of gravity was proposed by Wagoner [ 67 ] in 1970. The
scalar field provides a local dynamical degree of freedom to the theory,
and models of this kind (i.e., under certain choices of the parameters)
appear naturally in string theory. Some choices of the parameters of the
theory yield dilaton gravities that have black hole solutions. One of
these theories, that we will study in this thesis, is an
Einstein-dilaton gravity of the Brans-Dicke type in a @xmath background,
first discussed by Lemos [ 6 ] . This theory is specified by a
Brans-Dicke parameter, @xmath , and contains seven different cases. Each
@xmath can be viewed as yielding a different dilaton gravity theory,
with some of these being related with other known special theories. For
instance, for @xmath one gets the simplest low-energy string action [ 68
] , and for @xmath one gets a theory related (through dimensional
reduction) to 4-dimensional general relativity with one Killing vector [
6 , 7 , 8 ] . This is, the @xmath black holes are the direct
counterparts of the 4-dimensional AdS black holes with toroidal or
cylindrical topology first discussed by Lemos, in the same way that a
point source in 3-dimensions is the direct cousin of a cosmic string in
4-dimensions. For @xmath the theory reduces to the pure 3-dimensional
general relativity. This is, the @xmath black holes are the BTZ ones.
Moreover, the case @xmath yields gravities whose black holes have a
structure and properties similar to the BTZ black hole, but with a
feature that might be useful: the @xmath black holes have dynamical
degrees of freedom, which implies for example that the origin has a
curvature singularity and that gravitational waves can propagate in the
spacetime. The neutral black holes of this Brans-Dicke theory were found
and analyzed by Sá, Kleber and Lemos [ 69 , 70 ] . The pure electric
charged black holes have been analysed by Dias and Lemos [ 71 ] , and
the pure magnetic solutions have been discussed by Dias and Lemos [ 72 ]
. We will analyze in detail these black holes in chapter 3 . Other
examples of dilaton black holes include the electric black hole
solutions of Chan and Mann [ 73 ] , the self dual solutions of Fernando
[ 74 ] , the magnetic solutions of Kiem and Park [ 75 ] , Park and Kim [
76 ] and Koikawa, Maki and Nakamula [ 77 ] , and the solutions found by
Chen [ 78 ] . For a detailed discussion on classical and quantum aspects
of 3-dimensional gravity we refer the reader to Carlip’s book [ 79 ] ,
Jackiw’s book [ 19 ] , Brown’s book [ 20 ] , and to the reviews [ 80 ] .

##### 1.2.2 Pair creation of black holes in 3-dimensions

In chapters 9 and 11 we will analyze in detail the pair creation process
of 4-dimensional black holes and of higher dimensional black holes,
respectively. The process of quantum pair creation of black holes in an
external field in a 3-dimensional background has not been analyzed yet,
as far as we know. In chapter 4 , we will try to understand the
difficulties associated with this issue, and we will also propose a
possible background in which the pair creation process in 3-dimensions
might be analyzed.

#### 1.3 Black holes in 4-dimensional spacetimes

##### 1.3.1 Exact single black hole solutions

In a 4-dimensional asymptotically flat background there four well-known
solutions that represent a single black hole, namely the Schwarzschild
black hole ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ), the Reissner-Nordström black
hole ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ), the Kerr black hole ( @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath ) and the Kerr-Newman black hole ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ).
In an asymptotically AdS or dS background the above solutions are also
present, and in the AdS case there are also black hole solutions with
non-spherical topology (see the end of section 1.1 ). In this thesis we
will deal essentially with the static solutions. For a review on some of
the properties of these black holes see, e.g., chapter 5 of this thesis.

##### 1.3.2 Pair of accelerated black holes: the C-metric and the Ernst
solution

In 4-dimensional spacetime the Einstein equation (in vacuum or in the
presence of matter fields) allow a wide variety of solutions and, in
particular, of black hole solutions, as displayed in [ 81 ] . The main
difficulty is then the appropriate physical interpretation of these
solutions, with many of them being left apparently without known
physical interest. One of the best examples of this statement is the
C-metric solution, found by Levi-Civita [ 82 ] and by Weyl [ 83 ] in
1918-1919, that has been interpreted only fifty years after its
discovery by Kinnersley and Walker [ 84 ] , although some works during
this gap period have dealt with it. From this solution one can construct
another exact solution known as Ernst solution [ 85 ] . The C-metric and
the Ernst solution describe two uniformly accelerated black holes in
opposite directions, and the acceleration source is perfectly
identified. We can better understand these solutions going back to the
pair of oppositely charged particles (without a horizon) that are
created in the Schwinger process, and then describe an uniformly
accelerated hyperbolic motion approaching asymptotically the velocity of
light. This accelerated 2-particle system is represented in Fig. 1.3 ,
which is simply an extension to negative values of @xmath of the @xmath
plane of Fig. 1.2 . During the negative time the two particles approach
each other until they come at rest at @xmath , and then they reverse
their motion driving away from each other. In Fig. 1.4 .(a), one
represents schematically the C-metric. To construct it, each particle of
Fig. 1.2 has been replaced by a black hole with its horizons ( @xmath
and @xmath ) that describes a hyperbolic motion due to the string
tension, @xmath . When the black holes are charged, their acceleration
can also be furnished by an external electromagnetic field, and this
solution is exactly described by the Ernst solution. The schematic
figure representing this last solution is sketched in Fig. 1.4 .(b).

It is important to note that the C-metric and the Ernst solution are one
of the few exact solutions that contain already a radiative term. This
means, being accelerated, the black holes necessarily release radiation
and the information concerning the radiative properties are already
included in the metrics that describe these solutions. Moreover, as we
shall discuss in subsection 1.3.3 these solutions also describe
appropriately the quantum process of black hole pair creation in an
external field and the consequent motion of the created pair.

The extension of the Levi-Civita @xmath Weyl solution [ 82 , 83 ] to the
@xmath case has been done by Plebański and Demiański [ 86 ] in 1976. In
this thesis (see chapter 6 ), we analyze in detail the properties, and
physical interpretation of the C-metric in an AdS background [ 87 ] ,
and in a dS background [ 88 ] . We have thus extended for the
cosmological constant case the physical interpretation of the flat case
[ 84 ] . In particular we have concluded that while the flat C-metric
and dS C-metric describe a pair of accelerated black holes with any
acceleration, the AdS C-metric only describes a pair of accelerated
black holes if their acceleration satisfies @xmath . We can interpret
this as due to the fact that the AdS background is attractive, i.e., an
analysis of the geodesic equations indicates that particles in this
background are subjected to a potential well that attracts them.
Therefore, if we want to have a pair of black holes accelerating apart,
we will have to furnish a sufficient force that overcomes this
cosmological constant background attraction. We then expect that a pair
of accelerated black holes is possible only if acceleration @xmath is
higher than a critical value. Our analysis in [ 87 , 88 ] is essentially
based on the geometric description of the solution in the cosmological
constant 4-hyperboloid embedded in a 5-dimensional Minkowski spacetime,
and on the study of the causal structure of the solution (Carter-Penrose
diagrams). The information provided by the geometric description of the
C-metric on the 4-hyperboloid is displayed in Fig. 1.5 . More precisely,
in Fig. 1.5 .(a), the dS spacetime is represented by the 4-hyperboloid
@xmath ( @xmath ) embedded in a 5-dimensional Minkowski spacetime. The
directions @xmath and @xmath are suppressed, @xmath is a time
coordinate, and @xmath and @xmath are space coordinates. In the pure dS
spacetime (acceleration @xmath ), its origin describes the two
hyperbolic trajectories that result from the intersection of the
hyperboloid surface with the @xmath plane. Basically, this indicates
that the dS solution already represents two black holes being
accelerated by the cosmological constant. In the dS C-metric case (
@xmath ), its origin describes the two hyperbolic lines lying on the dS
hyperboloid that result from the intersection of the hyperboloid surface
with the @xmath =constant @xmath plane. This indicates that the solution
represents two black holes being accelerated by the cosmological
constant and, in addition, by the string tension that provides the extra
acceleration @xmath . In Fig. 1.5 .(b), the AdS spacetime ( @xmath ) is
represented by the 4-hyperboloid @xmath ( @xmath ) embedded in a
5-dimensional Minkowski spacetime, but this time with two timelike
coordinates, @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , see Fig. 1.5 .(b.i), the
origin of the AdS C-metric moves in the hyperboloid along the circle
with @xmath =constant @xmath . When @xmath this circle is at the plane
@xmath and has a radius @xmath . In both cases this indicates that we
have a single black hole. If @xmath , see Fig. 1.5 .(b.ii), the origin
of the AdS C-metric moves along the two hyperbolic lines, that result
from the intersection of the hyperboloid surface with the @xmath
=constant @xmath plane. These hyperbolic lines indicate that in this
case the solution represents two black holes being accelerated.

An example of the information provided by the Carter-Penrose diagrams of
the C-metric, that leads to the physical interpretation given to the
C-metric, is schematically displayed in Fig. 1.6 . More precisely, in
Fig. 1.6 .(a), we show again two particles describing an uniformly
accelerated hyperbolic motion. In Fig. 1.6 .(b), the dashed lines
represent the two particles, and each one of these is now replaced by a
black hole represented here by its Carter-Penrose diagram, which was
sketched before in Fig. 1.1 . Finally, in Fig. 1.6 .(c), the result of
this operation is shown. It yields the Carter-Penrose diagram of the
C-metric, where one identifies two accelerated black holes approaching
asymptotically the velocity of light, i.e., two black holes separated by
an acceleration horizon, @xmath .

At this point, a remark is relevant. Israel and Khan [ 90 ] have found a
@xmath solution that represents two (or more) collinear Schwarzschild
black holes interacting with each other in such a way that allows
dynamical equilibrium. In this solution, the two black holes are
connected by a strut that exerts an outward pressure which cancels the
inward gravitational attraction, and so the distance between the two
black holes remains fixed, and they are held in equilibrium (see also
Bach and Weyl [ 91 ] , Aryal, Ford and Vilenkin [ 92 ] , and Costa and
Perry [ 93 ] ). Now, the flat C-metric solution reduces to a single
non-accelerated black hole free of struts or strings when the
acceleration parameter @xmath vanishes. Thus, when we take the limit
@xmath , the flat C-metric does not reduce to the static solution of
Israel and Khan. The reason for this behavior can be found in the causal
diagrams of the two solutions (see Fig. 1.7 ).

In particular, the black holes described by the C-metric do not interact
gravitationally. Their acceleration is provided only by the tension of
the strings or of the strut, without opposition from gravitational
attraction. A similar discussion applies in an external background
field. Indeed, Tomimatsu [ 94 ] has found a solution, that is the
charged counterpart of the neutral Israel-Khan solution [ 90 ] , in
which two Reissner-Nordtröm black holes are held in equilibrium. In this
case the gravitational attraction between the black holes is cancelled
by the electric repulsion, and this occurs only when the black holes are
extreme, @xmath . Tomimatsu has generalized for the black hole case, the
relativistic treatment used by Bonnor [ 95 ] and Ohta and Kimura [ 96 ]
to study the equilibrium system of two charged particles. The Ernst
solution does not reduce to [ 94 ] when @xmath , once again because
there is no gravitational force between the two Reissner-Nordtröm black
holes.

Now, an exact solution that exists in a dS background is the Nariai
solution, which can be connected with the near-extreme Schwarzschild-dS
solution by taking an appropriate extremal limit introduced by Ginsparg
and Perry [ 97 ] . Following the procedure of [ 97 ] , we have further
generated new solutions [ 89 ] that are the C-metric counterparts of the
already known Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions. These
solutions are conformal to the direct topological product of two
2-dimensional manifolds of constant curvature. We also give a physical
interpretation to these solutions, e.g., in the Nariai C-metric (with
topology @xmath ) to each point in the deformed 2-sphere @xmath
corresponds a @xmath spacetime, except for one point which corresponds a
@xmath spacetime with an infinite straight strut or string. It is
unstable and decays into a slightly non-extreme black hole pair
accelerated by a strut or by strings.

In what follows we give a historical overview on the C-metric, Ernst
solution and Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions. But
first we give a brief description of the properties of strings, struts
and domain walls.

@xmath Strings, struts and domain walls

We have already made reference (and we will do it again) to
gravitational objects other than black holes, namely strings/struts and
domain walls. Here we briefly comment on their main properties. We work
at the level of the Newtonian limit, but the full general relativity
analysis yields the same result.

Consider a static distribution of matter with an energy-momentum tensor
given by @xmath , where @xmath is the mass density of the system and
@xmath are the pressures along the three directions. The Newtonian limit
of Einstein equations for this distribution is given by @xmath , where
@xmath is the gravitational potential. For non-relativistic matter,
@xmath , and we recover the classical Poisson equation, @xmath . For a
straight string along the @xmath -axis one has @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath , and thus one gets @xmath . So, a straight string produces no
gravitational potential in its vicinity, and suffers a tension along the
@xmath -axis that points inward. A general relativity analysis carried
by Vilenkin [ 98 ] , and by Ipser and Sikivie [ 99 ] shows that the
geometry around the straight string is conical, i.e., it can be obtained
from the Minkoswki space by suppressing a wedge (with a deficit angle
proportional to the line mass density, @xmath ) and identifying its
edges. So its line element is equal to the Minkowski one but the angle
in the plane normal to the string varies in the range @xmath [see Fig.
1.8 .(a)]. A straight strut has similar properties, the only difference
being the fact that its line mass density is negative and its tension
along the @xmath -axis points outward. Thus, instead of a deficit angle
( @xmath ), it produces an excess angle ( @xmath ) [see Fig. 1.8 .(b)].

In what concerns a domain wall, its properties are much different from
those of an usual massive wall. Indeed, a domain wall lying in the
@xmath -plane has a wall tension in the @xmath and @xmath directions
that is equal to the surface mass density of the domain wall, @xmath and
@xmath . Its Newtonian limit is @xmath and thus it produces a repulsive
gravitational field. The general relativity analysis [ 98 , 99 ]
confirms these properties.

@xmath Historical overview on the C-metric and on the Ernst solution

The original C-metric has been found Levi-Civita [ 82 ] and by Weyl [ 83
] in 1918-1919. During the following decades, many authors have
rediscovered it and studied its mathematical properties (see [ 81 ] for
references). In 1963 Ehlers and Kundt [ 100 ] have classified
degenerated static vacuum fields and put this Levi-Civita solution into
the C slot of the table they constructed. From then onwards this
solution has been called C-metric. This spacetime is stationary, axially
symmetric, Petrov type D, and is an exact solution which includes a
radiative term. Although the C-metric had been studied from a
mathematical point of view along the years, its physical interpretation
remained unknown until 1970 when Kinnersley and Walker [ 84 ] , in a
pathbreaking work, have shown that the solution describes two uniformly
accelerated black holes in opposite directions. Indeed, they noticed
that the original solution was geodesically incomplete, and by defining
new suitable coordinates they have analytically extended it and studied
its causal structure. The solution has a conical singularity in one of
its angular poles that was interpreted by them as due to the presence of
a strut in between pushing the black holes away, or as two strings from
infinity pulling in each one of the black holes. The strut or the
strings lie along the symmetry axis and cause the acceleration of the
black hole pair. This work also included for the first time the charged
version of the C-metric. In an important development, Ernst in 1976 [ 85
] , through the employment of an appropriate transformation, has removed
all the conical singularities of the charged C-metric by appending an
external electromagnetic field (the magnetic solution is written in [ 85
] , while the explicit electric solution can be found in Brown [ 101 ]
). Asymptotically, the Ernst solution reduces to the Melvin universe [
102 ] . In the Ernst solution the acceleration of the pair of oppositely
charged black holes is provided by the Lorentz force associated to the
external field. The geometrical properties of the C-metric were further
investigated by Farhoosh and Zimmerman [ 103 ] , and the asymptotic
properties of the C-metric were analyzed by Ashtekar and Dray [ 104 ]
who have shown that null infinity admits a conformal completion, has a
spherical section, and moreover that the causal diagrams drawn in [ 84 ]
were not quite accurate. The issue of physical interpretation of the
C-metric has been recovered by Bonnor [ 105 ] , but now following a
different approach. He transformed the C-metric into the Weyl form in
which the solution represents a finite line source (that corresponds to
the horizon of the black hole), a semi-infinite line mass (corresponding
to a horizon associated with uniform accelerated motion) and a strut
keeping the line sources apart. By applying a further transformation
that enlarges this solution, Bonnor confirmed the physical
interpretation given in [ 84 ] . Bonnor’s procedure has been simplified
by Cornish and Uttley and extended to include the massive charged
solution [ 106 ] . More recently, Yongcheng [ 107 ] , starting from the
metric of two superposed Schwarzschild black holes, has derived the
C-metric under appropriate conditions. The black hole uniqueness theorem
for the C-metric has been proven by Wells [ 108 ] and the geodesic
structure of the C-metric has been studied by Pravda and Pravdova [ 109
] . The limit when the acceleration goes to infinity has been analyzed
by Podolský and Griffiths [ 110 ] who have shown that in this limit the
solution is analogous to the one which describes a spherical impulsive
gravitational wave generated by a snapping string. We note that the
C-metric is an important and explicit example of a general class of
asymptotically flat radiative spacetimes with boost-rotation symmetry
and with hypersurface orthogonal axial and boost Killing vectors. The
geometric properties of this general class of spacetimes have been
investigated by Bičák and Schmidt [ 111 ] and the radiative features
were analyzed by Bičák [ 112 ] (see the recent review of Pravda and
Pravdova [ 113 ] on this class of spacetimes and the role of the
C-metric).

Relevant generalizations to the C-metric were made by Plebański and
Demiański in 1976 [ 86 ] and by Dowker, Gauntlett, Kastor and Traschen
in 1994 [ 114 ] . Plebański and Demiański, in addition to the mass (
@xmath ) and electromagnetic charge ( @xmath ), have included into the
solution a NUT parameter, a rotation and a cosmological constant term (
@xmath ), and Dowker et al have further included a dilaton field
non-minimally coupled. Thus, the most general C-metric has eight
parameters, so far, namely, acceleration, mass, electric and magnetic
charges, NUT parameter, rotation, cosmological constant and dilaton
field. The C-metric with mass and electromagnetic charges alone have
been extensively studied as shown above, and from now on we will refer
to it as the flat C-metric (i.e., C-metric with @xmath ). The C-metric
with a NUT parameter has not been studied, as far as we know. The flat
spinning C-metric has been studied by Farhoosh and Zimmerman [ 115 ] ,
Letelier and Oliveira [ 116 ] and by Bičák and Pravda [ 117 ] . In
particular, in [ 117 ] the flat spinning C-metric has been transformed
into the Weyl form and interpreted as two uniformly accelerated spinning
black holes connected by a strut. This solution constitutes an example
of a spacetime with an axial and boost Killing vectors which are not
hypersurface orthogonal. Dowker et al generalized the flat C-metric and
flat Ernst solution to include a dilaton field and applied these
solutions for the first time in the context of quantum pair creation of
black holes, that once created accelerate apart. Dowker and
Thambyahpillai [ 118 ] have found a C-metric family that describes
multi-black holes being accelerated apart, and Hong and Teo [ 272 ] have
rewritten the C-metric in a new form that, among other advantages,
facilitates the computations that deal with the C-metric.

Our contribution in this field is related with the physical
interpretation of the cosmological constant C-metric introduced by
Plebański and Demiański [ 86 ] . The de Sitter (dS) case ( @xmath ) has
been analyzed by Podolský and Griffiths [ 120 ] , and discussed in
detail by Dias and Lemos [ 88 ] . The anti-de Sitter (AdS) case ( @xmath
) has been studied, in special instances, by Emparan, Horowitz and Myers
[ 121 ] and by Podolský [ 122 ] , and in its most general case by Dias
and Lemos [ 87 ] . In general the C-metric (either flat, dS or AdS)
describes a pair of accelerated black holes. Indeed, in the flat and dS
backgrounds this is always the case. However, in an AdS background the
situation is not so simple and depends on the relation between the
acceleration @xmath of the black holes and the cosmological length
@xmath . One can divide the AdS study into three cases, namely, @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The @xmath case was the one analyzed by Podolský [
122 ] , and the @xmath case has been investigated by Emparan, Horowitz
and Myers [ 121 ] , which has acquired an important role since the
authors have shown that, in the context of a lower dimensional
Randall-Sundrum model, it describes the final state of gravitational
collapse on the brane-world. The geodesic structure of this solution has
been studied by Chamblin [ 123 ] . Both cases, @xmath and @xmath ,
represent one single accelerated black hole. The @xmath AdS C-metric
describes a pair of accelerated black holes in an AdS background. The
analysis performed in [ 87 , 88 ] was supported on a thorough analysis
of the causal structure of the solution, together with the description
of the solution in the 4-hyperboloid that describe the AdS and dS
solutions, and with the study of the physics of the strut or string.
When the acceleration is zero the C-metric in any cosmological constant
background reduces to a single non-accelerated black hole with the usual
properties.

We remark that in a cosmological constant background we cannot remove
the conical singularities through the application of the Harrison
transformation [ 124 ] used by Ernst in the flat case. Indeed, the
Harrison transformation applied by Ernst does not leave invariant the
cosmological term in the action. Therefore, applying the Harrison
transformation to the cosmological constant C-metric solutions does not
yield a new solution of the Einstein-Maxwell theory in a cosmological
constant background.

@xmath The extremal limits of the C-metric:
Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai C-metrics

There are other very interesting solutions of general relativity with
generic cosmological constant, that are neither pure (like the AdS,
Minkowski and dS) nor contain a black hole (like the Schwarzschild,
Reissner-Nordström, Kerr, and Kerr-Newman), and somehow can be
considered intermediate type solutions. These are the Nariai,
Bertotti-Robinson, and anti-Nariai solutions. The Nariai solution [ 125
, 126 ] solves exactly the Einstein equations with @xmath , without or
with a Maxwell field, and has been discovered by Nariai in 1951 [ 125 ]
. It is the direct topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a
(1+1)-dimensional dS spacetime with a round 2-sphere of fixed radius.
The Bertotti-Robinson solution [ 127 ] is an exact solution of the
Einstein-Maxwell equations with any @xmath , and was found independently
by Bertotti and Robinson in 1959. It is the direct topological product
of @xmath , i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional AdS spacetime with a round
2-sphere of fixed radius. The anti-Nariai solution, i.e., the AdS
counterpart of the Nariai solution, also exists [ 128 ] and is an exact
solution of the Einstein equations with @xmath , without or with a
Maxwell field. It is the direct topological product of @xmath , with
@xmath being a 2-hyperboloid.

Three decades after Nariai’s paper, Ginsparg and Perry [ 97 ] connected
the Nariai solution with the Schwarzschild-dS solution. They showed that
the Nariai solution can be generated from a near-extreme dS black hole,
through an appropriate limiting procedure in which the black hole
horizon approaches the cosmological horizon. A similar extremal limit
generates the Bertotti-Robinson solution and the anti-Nariai solution
from an appropriate near extreme black hole (see, e.g. [ 128 ] ). One of
the aims of Ginsparg and Perry was to study the quantum stability of the
Nariai and the Schwarzschild-dS solutions [ 97 ] . It was shown that the
Nariai solution is in general unstable and, once created, decays through
a quantum tunnelling process into a slightly non-extreme black hole pair
(for a complete review and references on this subject see, e.g., Bousso
[ 129 ] , and later discussions on chapter 7 of this thesis). The same
kind of process happens for the Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai
solutions.

As we just saw, there is yet another class of related metrics, the
C-metric class, which represent not one, but two black holes, being
accelerate apart from each other. These black holes can also inhabit a
dS, flat or AdS background. It is therefore of great interest to apply
the Ginsparg-Perry procedure to these metrics in order to find a new set
of exact solutions with a clear physical and geometrical interpretation.
This has been done by Dias and Lemos [ 89 ] (and will be recovered in
chapter 7 ), where we addressed the issue of the extremal limits of the
C-metric with a generic @xmath following [ 97 ] , in order to generate
the C-metric counterparts ( @xmath ) of the Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson
and anti-Nariai solutions ( @xmath ), among others.

##### 1.3.3 Quantum pair creation of black holes in external fields

In nature there are few known processes that allow the production of
black holes. The most well known and better studied is the gravitational
collapse of a massive star or cluster of stars. Due to the fermionic
degeneracy pressure these black holes cannot have a mass below the
Oppenheimer-Volkoff limiting mass. Another one, as we already mentioned
in subsection 1.1 , is the quantum Schwinger-like process [ 130 ] of
black hole pair creation in an external field. These black holes can
have Plank dimensions and thus their evolution is ruled by quantum
effects. Moreover, gravitational pair creation involves topology
changing processes, and allows a study of the statistical properties of
black holes, namely: it favors the conjecture that the number of
internal microstates of a black hole is given by the exponential of
one-quarter of the area of the event horizon, and it gives useful clues
to the discussion of the black hole information paradox.

In this thesis we study in detail the quantum process in which a cosmic
string breaks in an AdS background and in a dS background, and a pair of
black holes is created at the ends of the string [ 131 , 132 ] . The
energy to materialize and accelerate the black holes comes from the
strings tension, and we have explicitly computed the pair creation
rates. In Fig. 1.9 , we show a schematic description of the process. We
start, as indicated in Fig. 1.9 .(a), with a straight string that is
going to be broken. When the string breaks, as sketched in Fig. 1.9
.(b), two black holes are created at the ends of the string, and the
strings tension @xmath immediately accelerate apart the black hole pair.
The black holes described by the C-metric have non-spherical horizons,
due to the presence of a conical singularity in at least one of their
poles that signals the presence of the string.

In the dS case the cosmological constant background acceleration makes a
positive contribution to the process, while in the AdS case the
cosmological constant background acceleration contributes negatively. In
particular, in the AdS case, pair creation of black holes is possible
only when the acceleration provided by the string tension is higher than
@xmath . We have thus extended for the cosmological constant case a pair
creation process that in the flat case had been discussed in [ 133 ] - [
136 ] . We remark that in principle our explicit values for the pair
creation rates [ 131 , 132 ] also apply to the process of pair creation
in an external electromagnetic field, with the acceleration being
provided in this case by the Lorentz force instead of being furnished by
the string tension. There is no Ernst solution in a cosmological
constant background, and thus we cannot discuss analytically the
process. However, physically we could in principle consider an external
electromagnetic field that supplies the same energy and acceleration as
our strings and, from the results of the @xmath case (where the pair
creation rates in the string and electromagnetic cases agree), we expect
that the results found in [ 131 , 132 ] do not depend on whether the
energy is being provided by an external electromagnetic field or by
strings.

As an example of our results and to understand the physical
interpretation that is associated with the process, we give the pair
creation rates @xmath of nonextreme black holes with @xmath when a
string breaks in the dS, flat and AdS backgrounds, respectively:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the acceleration, @xmath , and the mass parameter @xmath of the
black holes must satisfy @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the acceleration, @xmath , and the mass parameter @xmath of the
black holes must satisfy @xmath ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the acceleration @xmath and the mass @xmath of the black holes
must satisfy the conditions @xmath and @xmath , and we have @xmath and
@xmath . In the three cases, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we conclude
that for a fixed @xmath and @xmath as the mass and charge of the black
holes increase, the probability they have to be pair created decreases
monotonically. This is the expected result since the materialization of
a higher mass implies the need of a higher energy.

We can also discuss the behavior of the pair creation rate as a function
of the acceleration @xmath provided by the strings, for a fixed @xmath
and @xmath . This evolution is schematically represented in Fig. 9.9 ,
in the three cosmological constant backgrounds. In general, for any
@xmath background, the pair creation rate increases monotonically with
@xmath . The physical interpretation of this result is clear: the
acceleration @xmath of the black hole pair is provided by the string.
When the energy of the string is higher (i.e., when its mass density or
the acceleration that it provides is higher), the probability that it
breaks and produces a black hole pair with a given mass is also higher.
This behavior is better understood if we make a analogy with a
thermodynamical system, with the mass density of the string being the
analogue of the temperature @xmath . Indeed, from the Boltzmann factor,
@xmath (where @xmath is the Boltzmann constant), one knows that a higher
background temperature @xmath turns the nucleation of a particle with
energy @xmath more probable. Similarly, a background string with a
higher mass density turns the creation of a black hole pair with mass
@xmath more probable. In a flat background [see Fig. 1.10 .(a)], the
pair creation rate is zero when @xmath [ 133 ] . In this case, the flat
C-metric reduces to a single black hole, and since we are studying the
probability of pair creation, the corresponding rate is naturally zero.
This does not mean that a single black hole cannot be materialized from
the quantum vacuum, it only means that this latter process is not
described by the C-metric. The creation probability of a single black
hole in a hot bath has been considered in [ 138 ] . In a dS background
[see Fig. 1.10 .(b)], the pair creation rate is not zero when @xmath [
131 ] . This means that even in the absence of the string, the positive
cosmological constant is enough to provide the energy to materialize the
black hole pair [ 169 ] . If in addition one has an extra energy
provided by the string, the process becomes more favorable [ 131 ] . In
the AdS case [see Fig. 1.10 .(c)], the negative cosmological constant
makes a negative contribution to the process, and black hole pair
creation is possible only when the acceleration provided by the strings
overcomes the AdS background attraction. The branch @xmath represents
the creation probability of a single black hole when the acceleration
provided by the broken string is not enough to overcome the AdS
attraction, and was not studied in this thesis.

Strictly speaking, the domain of validity of the pair creation rates
displayed above is @xmath , for which the radius of the black hole,
@xmath , is much smaller than the typical distance between the black
holes at the creation moment, @xmath (this value follows from the
Rindler motion @xmath that describes the uniformly accelerated motion of
the black holes). So, for @xmath one has @xmath and the black holes
start interacting with each other.

@xmath Historical overview on quantum pair creation of particles in
external fields

The evaluation of the black hole pair creation rate has been done at the
semiclassical level using the instanton method (this method is also
called saddle point approximation). An instanton is an Euclidean
solution that interpolates between the initial and final states of a
classicaly forbidden transitation, and is a saddle point for the
Euclidean Feynmann path integral that describes the pair creation rate.
This instanton method has been introduced by Langer in his work about
decay of metastable termodynamical states [ 139 ] , and in the absence
of gravity, it has been applied to several different studies. For
example, Coleman and Callan [ 140 , 141 ] , Coleman and Luccia [ 142 ] ,
and Voloshin [ 143 ] have computed the bubble production rate that
accompanies the cosmological phase transitions in a (3+1) dimensional
scalar theory. Stone [ 144 ] , Kiselev and Selivanov [ 145 , 146 , 147 ]
, and Voloshin [ 148 , 149 ] have discussed the soliton pair production
that accompanies the decay of false vacuum in a (1+1)-dimensional scalar
theory, and in Dias, Lemos [ 150 ] the study of this process has been
recovered, in the spirit of an effective one-loop action approach, and
extended to include domain wall pair creation (see Miller, Cardenas,
Garcia-Perez, More, Beckwith, and McCarten [ 151 ] for experimental
evidence of this process). Affleck and Manton [ 152 ] , in the
Yang-Mills-Higgs theory, have studied monopole pair production in a weak
external magnetic field, and Affleck, Alvarez and Manton [ 153 ] , have
studied @xmath boson pair production in a weak external electric field.

@xmath Historical overview on quantum pair creation of black holes in
external fields

The instanton method has been also introduced also as a framework of
quantum gravity, with successful results in the analysis of
gravitational thermodynamic issues and black hole pair production
processes, among others (see [ 154 ] ). The regular instantons that
describe the process we are interested in - the pair creation of black
holes in an external field - can be obtained by analytically continuing
(i) a solution found by Ernst [ 85 ] , (ii) the de Sitter black hole
solutions, (iii) the C-metric [ 84 ] , (iv) a combination of the above
solutions, or (v) the domain wall solution [ 98 , 99 ] . To each one of
these five families of instantons corresponds a different way by which
energy can be furnished in order to materialize the pair of black holes
and then to accelerate them apart. In case (i) the energy is provided by
the electromagnetic Lorentz force, in case (ii) the strings tension
furnishes this energy, in case (iii) the energy is provided by the rapid
cosmological expansion associated to the positive cosmological constant
@xmath , in case (iv) the energy is provided by a combination of the
above fields, and finally in case (v) the energy is given by the
repulsive gravitational field of the domain wall.

It was believed that the only black hole pairs that could be nucleated
were those whose Euclidean sector was free of conical singularities
(instantons). This regularity condition restricted the mass and charge
of the black holes that could be produced, and physically it meant that
the only black holes that could be pair produced were those that are in
thermodynamic equilibrium. However, Wu [ 155 ] , and Bousso and Hawking
[ 156 ] have shown that Euclidean solutions with conical singularities
(sub-maximal instantons) may also be used as saddle points for the pair
creation process, as long as the spacelike boundary of the manifold is
chosen in order to contain the conical singularity and the metric is
specified there. In this way, pair creation of black holes whose
horizons are not in thermodynamic equilibrium is also allowed.

We will now describe the studies that have been done on pair creation of
black holes in an external field.

(i) The suggestion that the pair creation of black holes could occur in
quantized Einstein-Maxwell theory has been given by Gibbons [ 157 ] in
1986, who has proposed that extremal black holes could be produced in a
background magnetic field and that the appropriate instanton describing
the process could be obtained by euclideanizing the extremal Ernst
solution. This idea has been recovered by Giddings and Garfinkle [ 158 ]
who confirmed the expectation of [ 157 ] and, in addition, they have
constructed an Ernst instanton that describes pair creation of
non-extremal black holes. The explicit calculation of the rate for this
last process has lead Garfinkle, Giddings and Strominger [ 159 ] to
conclude that the pair creation rate of non-extremal black holes is
enhanced relative to the pair creation of monopoles and extremal black
holes by a factor @xmath , where @xmath is the Hawking-Bekenstein
entropy of the black hole and @xmath is the area of the black hole event
horizon. This issue of black hole pair creation in a background magnetic
field and the above relation between the pair creation rate and the
entropy has been further investigated by Dowker, Gaunlett, Kastor and
Traschen [ 114 ] , by Dowker, Gaunlett, Giddings and Horowitz [ 160 ] ,
and by Ross [ 161 ] , but now in the context of the low energy limit of
string theory and in the context of five-dimensional Kaluza-Klein
theory. To achieve their aim they have worked with an effective dilaton
theory which, for particular values of the dilaton parameter, reduces to
the above theories, and they have explicitly constructed the dilaton
Ernst instantons that describe the process. The one-loop contribution to
the magnetic black hole pair creation problem has been given by Yi [ 162
] . Brown [ 101 , 163 ] has analyzed the pair creation of charged black
holes in an electric external field. Hawking, Horowitz and Ross [ 164 ]
(see also Hawking and Horowitz [ 165 ] ) have related the action that
governs the rate of pair creation of extremal black holes with the area
of the acceleration horizon. In the non-extremal case, the action has an
additional contribution from the area of the black hole horizon. From
these relations emerges an explanation for the fact, mentioned above,
that the pair creation rate of non-extremal black holes is enhanced
relative to the pair creation of extremal black holes by precisely the
factor @xmath . For a detailed discussion concerning the reason why this
factor involves only @xmath and not two times this value see also
Emparan [ 166 ] . It has to do with the fact that the internal
microstates of two members of the black hole pair are correlated.

(ii) The pair creation process of de Sitter (dS) black holes has been
also investigated. Notice that the dS black hole solution can be
interpreted as a pair of dS black holes that are being accelerated apart
by the positive cosmological constant. The cosmological horizon can be
seen as an acceleration horizon that impedes the causal contact between
the two black holes, and this analogy is perfectly identified for
example when we compare the Carter-Penrose diagrams of the C-metric and
of the dS black holes. The study on pair creation of black holes in a dS
background has begun in 1989 by Mellor and Moss [ 167 ] , who have
identified the gravitational instantons that describe the process (see
also Romans [ 168 ] for a detailed construction of these instantons).
The explicit evaluation of the pair creation rates of neutral and
charged black holes accelerated by a cosmological constant has been done
by Mann and Ross [ 169 ] . This process has also been discussed in the
context of the inflationary era undergone by the universe by Bousso and
Hawking [ 170 ] . Garattini [ 171 ] , and Volkov and Wipf [ 172 ] have
computed the one-loop factor for this pair creation process, something
that at the gravity quantum level is not an easy task. Booth and Mann [
173 ] have analyzed the cosmological pair production of charged and
rotating black holes. Pair creation of dilaton black holes in a dS
background has also been discussed by Bousso [ 174 ] .

(iii) In 1995, Hawking and Ross [ 133 ] and Eardley, Horowitz, Kastor
and Traschen [ 134 ] have discussed a process in which a cosmic string
breaks and a pair of black holes is produced at the ends of the string.
The string tension then pulls the black holes away, and the C-metric
provides the appropriate instantons to describe their creation. In order
to ensure that this process is physically consistent Achúcarro, Gregory
and Kuijken [ 135 ] , and Gregory and Hindmarsh [ 136 ] have shown that
a conical singularity can be replaced by a Nielson-Olesen vortex. This
vortex can then pierce a black hole [ 135 ] , or end at it [ 136 ] .
Moreover, it has been suggested that even topologically stable strings
can end at a black hole [ 133 ] - [ 137 ] .

(iv) We can also consider a pair creation process, analyzed by Emparan [
175 ] , involving cosmic string breaking in a background magnetic field.
In this case the Lorentz force is in excess or in deficit relative to
the net force necessary to furnish the right acceleration to the black
holes, and this discrepancy is eliminated by the string tension. The
instantons describing this process are a combination of the Ernst and
C-metric intantons. Another processes that involve black hole pair
creation in a combination of background fields are the ones, already
discussed above, in which a cosmic string breaks in a dS background [
131 ] , and in an AdS background [ 132 ] .

(v) The gravitational repulsive energy of a domain wall provides another
mechanism for black hole pair creation. This process has been analyzed
by Caldwell, Chamblin and Gibbons [ 176 ] , and by Bousso and Chamblin [
177 ] in a flat background, while in an anti-de Sitter background the
pair creation of topological black holes (with hyperbolic topology) has
been analyzed in by Mann [ 178 ] .

Other studies concerning the process of pair creation in a generalized
background is done in [ 179 , 180 ] .

@xmath Pair creation of magnetic @xmath electric black holes

During a while it has been noticed that the pair creation of electric
black holes was apparently enhanced relative to the pair creation of
magnetic black holes. This was a consequence of the fact that the
Maxwell action has opposite signs in the two cases. Now, this
discrepancy between the two pair creation rates was not consistent with
the idea that electric and magnetic black holes should have identical
quantum properties. This issue has been properly and definitively
clarified by Hawking and Ross [ 181 ] and by Brown [ 163 ] , who have
shown that the magnetic and electric solutions differ not only in their
actions, but also in the nature of the boundaries conditions that can be
imposed on them. More precisely, one can impose the magnetic charge as a
boundary condition at infinity but, in the electric case, one instead
imposes the chemical potential as a boundary condition. As a consequence
they proposed that the electric action should contain an extra Maxwell
boundary term. This term cancels the opposite signs of the Maxwell
action, and the pair creation rate of magnetic and electric black holes
is equal.

@xmath Pair creation of black holes and the information loss problem

The process of black hole pair creation gives also useful clues to the
discussion of the black hole information loss problem [ 182 ] . Due to
the thermal Hawking radiation the black holes evaporate. This process
implies that one of the following three scenarios occurs (see [ 183 ]
for nice reviews): (i) the information previously swallowed to the black
hole is destroyed, (ii) this information is recovered to the exterior
through the Hawking radiation, or (iii) the endpoint of the evaporation
is a Plank scale remnant which stores the information. There are serious
difficulties associated to each one of this scenarios. Scenario (i)
implies non-unitarity and violation of energy conservation, scenario
(ii) implies violation of locality and causality, and the main problem
with scenario (iii) is that a huge energy is needed in order to store
all the information that has been swallowed by the black hole, and a
Planck scale remnant has very little energy. Pair creation of black
holes has been used to test these scenarios. Indeed, it has been argued
[ 183 ] that if one demands preservation of unitarity and of locality
then a careful analysis of the one-loop contribution to the pair
creation process indicates that the Hawking process would leave behind a
catastrophic infinite number of remnants. So the remnant hypothesis
seems to be discarded, although some escape solutions can be launched [
183 ] . On the other side, Hawking, Horowitz and Ross [ 164 ] have
called attention to the fact that the same instantons that describe pair
creation can, when reversed in time, describe their pair annihilation,
as long as the black holes have appropriate initial conditions such that
they come to rest at the right critical separation (this annihilation
process was also discussed by Emparan [ 166 ] ). One can then construct
[ 164 ] an argument that favors the information loss scenario: black
holes previously produced as a particle-antiparticle pair can accrete
information and annihilate, with their energy being given off as
electromagnetic and gravitational radiation. Therefore, the information
loss scenario seems to occur at least in this annihilation process.

##### 1.3.4 Energy released during black hole pair creation in an
external field

If one tries to predict the spectrum of radiation coming from pair
creation, one expects of course a spectrum characteristic of accelerated
masses, but one also expects a previous signal indicating pair creation.
In other words, the process of pair creation itself, which involves the
sudden creation of particles that suffer a violent acceleration that
takes them to some final velocity in a very short time, must imply
emission of radiation. The sudden creation of pairs can be viewed for
our purposes as an instantaneous creation of particles, i.e., the time
reverse process of instantaneous collisions. Now, the gravitational
energy released in this last process can be estimated using a technique
developed by Weinberg [ 184 ] , known as the hard collision formalism.
We argue that this formalism also applies to instantaneous creation of
particles (see [ 185 ] ). The total energy, i.e., the energy spectrum
integrated over all frequencies diverges, so one needs a physical cutoff
frequency that can be estimated by the uncertainty principle, @xmath .
We then find that the total gravitational energy released during the
4-dimensional black hole pair creation process is given by [ 185 ] (see
chapter 12 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass of each one of the created black holes and
@xmath is the Lorentz factor. This value can lead, under appropriate
numbers of @xmath and @xmath to huge quantities, and is a very good
candidate to emission of gravitational radiation. For example, for black
holes with 30 times the Planck mass and with @xmath of the velocity of
light, the gravitational energy released is @xmath , which is about 100
times the rest energy of the pair.

This process is quite similar to another pure quantum-mechanical
process, the beta decay. The electromagnetic radiation emitted during
beta decay has been computed classically by Chang and Falkoff [ 186 ]
and is also presented in Jackson [ 187 ] . The classical calculation is
similar in all aspects to the the instantaneous collision formalism,
assuming the sudden acceleration to energies @xmath of a charge
initially at rest, and requires also a cutoff in the frequency, which
has been assumed to be given by the uncertainty principle @xmath .
Assuming this cutoff one finds that the agreement between the classical
calculation and the quantum calculation [ 186 ] is extremely good
(specially in the low frequency regime), and more important, it was
verified experimentally. Hence, we have a good degree of confidence to
believe that our estimate ( 1.7 ) for the black pair creation process is
also good.

After the pair creation and after the emission of radiation according to
( 1.7 ), the created pair of black holes accelerates away and,
consequently, they continue to release gravitational and electromagnetic
energy. In a @xmath background, the gravitational radiative properties
of the accelerated black holes described by the C-metric have been
analyzed by Bičák [ 112 ] , and Pravda and Pravdova [ 113 ] . In a dS
background, the gravitational radiation emitted by uniformly accelerated
sources without horizons has been analyzed by Bičák and Krtouš [ 188 ] ,
and the radiative properties of accelerated black holes have been
studied by Krtouš and Podolský [ 189 ] . In an AdS background the energy
released by a pair of accelerated black holes has been discussed in
detail by Podolský, Ortaggio and Krtouš [ 190 ] .

#### 1.4 Black holes in higher dimensional spacetimes

##### 1.4.1 Exact black hole solutions

By suggesting the existence of an extra dimension, besides the usual
(3+1)-dimensions that our daily experiments realize, Kaluza and Klein in
the 1920s unified for the first time gravity and electromagnetism.
Indeed, they realized that 5-dimensional vacuum general relativity
(i.e., satisfying @xmath with @xmath and @xmath taking the values @xmath
, and @xmath being the usual Einstein tensor), contained 4-dimensional
general relativity in the presence of an electromagnetic field (i.e.,
satisfying @xmath with @xmath and @xmath taking the values @xmath , and
@xmath being the usual Maxwell tensor) together with Maxwell’s laws of
electromagnetism and an equation for a scalar field. The dominant view
is then that the extra dimension is not observed on experimentally
accessible energy scales because it is compactified. The Kaluza-Klein
mechanism has unified also matter and geometry since the photon that is
present in the 4-dimensional spacetime is a manifestation of empty
5-dimensional spacetime. The key point to the Kaluza-Klein unification
is the realization that to a 4-dimensional gauge symmetry [e.g., the
@xmath gauge invariance of Maxwell theory] corresponds a geometric
symmetry (an invariance with respect to coordinate transformations) in
the extra dimension. Thus, the main achievement of Kaluza-Klein proposal
has been the demonstration that different uncorrelated phenomena that
occur in 4-dimensional spacetime can be manifestations of the same
5-dimensional theory. From then onwards the theories of strong and weak
nuclear interactions have been developed, and several attempts to unify
the 4-dimensional theories in a single @xmath higher-dimensional theory
have been tried with some successes (for a nice review see Overduin and
Wesson [ 191 ] ). Among others, two theories emerged, during the decade
of 80, that embodied the Kaluza-Klein compactification idea:
supergravity and superstring theory. Supergravity theories have the new
ingredient of supersymmetry, which states that each boson has a fermion
cousin and vice-versa. Mathematical consistency requires @xmath , and in
these theories the case @xmath plays a very special role due, among
others reasons, to its uniqueness and to its dynamical mechanism that
spontaneously compactifies 7 of the 11 dimensions. However, supergravity
theories also suffer from serious problems, one of them being the fact
that they are non-renormalizable theories. The interest on supergravity
theories shifted to superstring theories, with the former being the low
energy limit of the later. Superstring theories are supersymmetric
generalizations of string theories, in which the notion that particles
are point-like is abandoned and replaced by the assumption that
fundamental objects are excitations of strings. Thus, the study of
physics in higher dimensional spacetimes is of great importance
nowadays.

Now, black holes play their role in this @xmath -dimensional context. We
give two detailed examples. First, the idea that elementary particles
might behave as black holes and vice-versa is a very attractive one. In
principle one might expect such a scenario when the Compton length,
@xmath , associated to a given mass is smaller than the corresponding
Schwarzschild radius, @xmath , i.e., when the mass of the object is
smaller than the Planck mass, @xmath . Since this is a discussion at the
quantum gravity level, superstring theories provide appropriate tools to
analyze the problem. In particular, some superstring states have been
connected to extreme @xmath -dimensional black holes. This is an
encouraging result since if one wants to identify stable elementary
particles with black holes, these later must be extreme. As a second
example, in which we are particularly interested on, we point out to the
recent investigations, by Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos Dvali and Antoniadis
[ 193 ] , that propose the existence of extra large dimensions in our
Universe in order to solve the hierarchy problem, i.e., the huge
difference between the electroweak scale, @xmath , and the 4-dimensional
Planck scale, @xmath . The new main proposal of the so called TeV-scale
gravity (for reviews see, e.g., [ 192 ] ) is that the fundamental Planck
scale, @xmath , has the same size of the electroweak scale, @xmath , but
the 4-dimensional gravity is weak (i.e., the observed apparent Planck
scale @xmath is large) due to dilution of gravity in large or warped
extra dimensions. At this point the most accepted approach introduces a
link to a brane-world scenario. According to this scenario, matter and
fields of Standard Model inhabit our 4-dimensional world, the brane,
whereas the gravitational degrees of freedom would propagate throughout
all dimensions, including the extra ones. By now, experimental
measurements involving submillimiter distances, and studies on
astrophysical and cosmological implications of large extra dimensions,
among others (see, e.g., references on [ 192 ] ), require the existence
of at least three extra dimensions ( @xmath ) in order that @xmath .
More precisely, the actual experimental bounds on the Planck fundamental
mass indicate that @xmath for @xmath to @xmath .

One of the most spectacular consequences of this scenario would be the
production of black holes at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN,
and the consequent experimental data relative to black hole decay. This
possibility has been pointed out by Argyres, Dimopoulos and
March-Russsel [ 194 ] , by Banks and Fischler [ 195 ] , and by Emparan,
Horowitz and Myers [ 196 ] , and has been quantified by Giddings and
Thomas [ 197 ] , and by Dimopoulos and Landsberg [ 198 ] . Now, the LHC
is designed to operate at an center of mass energy of @xmath , so if
@xmath we will indeed be able to produce mini-black holes at LHC through
the collisions of partons (quarks and gluons). One can estimate the
creation rate as follows. Due to the fact that our description is only
known at the semiclassical level, one first sets that the black hole
mass is above the Planck mass, @xmath (say). Then, in the TeV-scale
gravity/brane-world scenario one must work with two approximations.
First, one requires that the black holes are heavy compared with @xmath
in order to ensure that the gravitational field of the brane can be
neglected. The second approximation is to deal with black holes that are
small compared with the size of the extra dimensions. In the context of
these approximations the appropriate @xmath -dimensional black holes are
described by the Tangherlini-Myers-Perry solution [ 202 , 203 ] . To
proceed, one needs to know the parton density in a proton (which is
known with some accuracy), and the cross section @xmath of black hole
production in a parton-parton collision. This cross section can be
estimated from pure geometric arguments following the Thorne’s hoop
conjecture: a black hole is created when the impact parameter, @xmath ,
of the colliding partons is less than the Schwarzschild radius, @xmath ,
associated with the energy involved in the process. Hence @xmath . This
estimate has been further investigated by D’Eath, and Payne [ 199 ] , by
Yoshino and Nambu [ 200 ] , and by Eardley and Giddings [ 201 ] who
generalized a construction by Penrose to find trapped surfaces on the
union of two shock waves, describing boosted Schwarzschild black holes.
Their final conclusion is that the above geometrical estimate for sigma
is sufficiently accurate. Putting everything together, the final result
[ 197 , 198 ] indicates that if the TeV-scale gravity scenario is
correct, then LHC will produce black holes with masses larger than
@xmath at the rate of about 1 per second. One would really be in the
presence of a black hole factory. Moreover, these black holes will decay
leaving definite signatures.

Since black holes in @xmath -dimensions are important one should ask
which are the exact solutions that one can find. The natural higher
dimensional generalization (which contains the @xmath solution as a
special case) of the Schwarzschild black hole and of the
Reissner-Nordström black hole has been obtained by Tangherlini [ 202 ]
(for a AdS, flat and dS background). Myers and Perry [ 203 ] have found
the higher dimensional counterparts of the the Kerr and Kerr-Newman
black holes. The global structure of the non-rotating solutions is
similar to their 4-dimensional counterparts. In particular, the black
hole exists when @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional
Newton’s constant. In what concerns the rotating solutions, the
properties of the higher dimensional black holes are also similar to the
ones of the 4-dimensional case, with two important exceptions: for odd
@xmath there are black hole solutions with negative mass, and for @xmath
the angular momentum is not bounded, i.e., it can have an arbitrary
large value. However, recently Emparan and Myers (2003) have shown that
there is a dynamical decay mechanism that turns these black holes
unstable at large enough rotation. Tangherlini [ 202 ] has also found
the higher dimensional Schwarzschild and Reissner-Nordström black holes
in an asymptotically AdS and dS spacetime. In chapter 10 , we discuss in
detail the extreme cases of the higher dimensional dS black holes, i.e.,
we will give the explicit range of the mass and charge for which one has
an extreme black hole [ 211 ] . Moreover, we will find the higher
dimensional Nariai and Bertotti-Robinson solutions [ 211 ] . Besides the
above black holes, the higher dimensional spacetimes admit a richer
variety of black hole solutions. As examples, we mention the @xmath
-dimensional black holes of Boulware, Deser [ 204 ] , of Callan, Myers
and Perry (1988), Gibbons and Maeda (1988), of Cvetic and Youm [ 205 ] ,
and of Cvetic and Larsen [ 206 ] that are solutions of the string
action. Supersymmetric rotating black holes were found by Gibbons and
Herdeiro [ 207 ] , and by Herdeiro [ 208 ] . With non-spherical
horizons, one has the 5-dimensional rotating black ring solution of
Emparan and Reall [ 209 ] (which has a horizon with topology @xmath ),
and the black @xmath -branes whose horizons have topology @xmath .

##### 1.4.2 Quantum pair creation of higher dimensional black holes

We have already commented on the collision process at LHC that might
lead to the formation of higher dimensional black holes. Another process
that can create black holes in a @xmath -dimensional spacetime is the
Schwinger-like pair creation process in an external field. As we saw in
section 1.3 , in order to study analytically this process one needs an
exact solution that describes a pair of accelerated black holes in the
external field. In a 4-dimensional background, the C-metric, the Ernst
solution and the dS black hole solution, among others, provided such an
exact solution. In spite of some efforts, the higher dimensional
generalization of the C-metric and of the Ernst solution have not been
found yet. However, the @xmath -dimensional dS black hole solution
exists [ 202 ] , and it describes a pair of accelerated black holes. Its
properties are discussed in detail in [ 210 , 211 ] (see chapter 10 ).
We can then analyze analytically the pair creation process of higher
dimensional dS black holes, which are accelerated apart by the
cosmological constant expansion [ 212 ] (see chapter 11 ).

##### 1.4.3 Gravitational radiation in higher dimensional spacetimes.
Energy released during black hole production

Gravitational radiation is an essential feature related to black hole
physics. In 4-dimensional spacetimes there has been a detailed analysis
of the properties of gravitational radiation, due to the possibility of
detecting it from astrophysical sources.

In the context of black holes in @xmath -dimensional spacetimes it is
important to extend the 4-dimensional results to higher dimensional
spacetimes. This has done in [ 185 ] (see also chapter 12 of this
thesis). More concretely, by solving the retarded gravitational
potentials in even D-dimensions, we were able to generalize many of the
results about gravitational waves (in a flat background) to higher
dimensions: we extended the quadrupole formula to higher dimensions, we
extended Weinberg’s ”zero time collision” formalism to higher
dimensions, and we have considered radiation processes in the vicinities
of higher dimensional Tangherlini black holes [ 202 ] .

The analysis of gravitational radiation in higher dimensional spacetimes
is also important in the context of the TeV-scale gravity and its
prediction concerning the production of black holes at the LHC. After
the being produced, the black hole will decay, i.e., it will shed its
extra initial hair until it settles into a Kerr or Schwarzschild black
hole. Afterwards quantum processes take place. In this thesis we are
interested on the first phase that accompanies the black hole
production. One of the experimental signatures of this phase will be a
missing energy, perhaps a large fraction of the center of mass energy [
220 ] . This will happen because when the partons collide to form a
black hole, some of the initial energy will be converted to
gravitational waves, and due to the small amplitudes involved, there is
no gravitational wave detector capable of detecting them, so they will
appear as missing energy. Thus, the collider will in fact serve
indirectly as a gravitational wave detector. This calls for the
calculation of the energy given away as gravitational waves when two
high energy particles collide to form a black hole, which lives in all
the dimensions. In a 4-dimensional background this calculation has been
done by D’Eath and Payne [ 199 ] . In a higher dimensional background,
the calculation has been carried following distinct approaches by
Yoshino and Nambu [ 200 ] (following a formalism developed by [ 201 ] ),
by Cardoso, Dias and Lemos [ 185 ] (see chapter 12 of this thesis), and
by Berti, Cavaglià and Gualtieri [ 221 ] . We find that the energy
spectrum, i.e., the energy per unit of frequency and per unit of solid
angle is [ 185 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (with @xmath ) are, respectively, the
mass, the velocity, and the Lorentz factor of the two colliding
particles, and @xmath is the angle that the line defined by the
colliding particles makes with the direction of the radiation. The
formalism used in [ 185 ] assumes a hard collision, i.e., a collision
lasting zero seconds [ 184 ] .

#### 1.5 Organization of the thesis

This thesis is divided in three parts. Briefly, part I deals with black
holes and pair creation in 3 dimensions. Part II deals with the same
subject but in 4-dimensional spacetimes, and part III is devoted to the
same issue but in higher dimensional black holes.

The plan of the thesis is then as follows:

@xmath Part I . Black holes and pair creation in 3 dimensions

Chapter 2 . The BTZ family of black holes . In this chapter, we review
the main properties of 3-dimensional Einstein gravity, we show the
explicit topological construction that leads to the BTZ black hole, we
briefly mention the electric charged BTZ black hole, and we discuss in
detail the magnetic BTZ solution.

Chapter 3 . Three dimensional dilaton black holes of the Brans-Dicke
type . In this chapter, we analyze in detail the neutral, electric and
magnetic solutions of a 3-dimensional Einstein-dilaton gravity of the
Brans-Dicke type.

Chapter 4 . Pair creation of black holes in three dimensions . The
process of quantum pair creation of black holes in an external field in
a 3-dimensional background has not been analyzed yet. In this chapter,
we will try to understand the difficulties associated with this issue,
and we will also propose a possible background in which the pair
creation process in 3-dimensions might be analyzed.

@xmath Part II . Black holes and pair creation in 4 dimensions

Chapter 5 . Black holes in a generalized @xmath background . In this
chapter, we give an overview of all the static 4-dimensional black holes
that are solutions of the Einstein equations in an AdS, flat, and dS
background. Special attention is dedicated to an AdS magnetic solution
with cylindrical/toroidal symmetry. This chapter introduces also a
description of some tools that will be used in later chapters.

Chapter 6 . Pair of accelerated black holes: the C-metric in a
generalized @xmath background . In this chapter, we make a detailed
discussion on the properties and physical interpretation of the AdS
C-metric, flat C-metric (and Ernst solution), and dS C-metric.

Chapter 7 . The extremal limits of the C-metric: Nariai,
Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai C-metrics . In this chapter, we apply
the Ginsparg-Perry procedure [ 97 ] to the C-metrics in order to find a
new set of exact solutions with a clear physical and geometrical
interpretation. In particular, we generate the C-metric counterparts of
the Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions, among others.

Chapter 8 . False vacuum decay: effective one-loop action for pair
creation of domain walls . This chapter can be seen as an introductory
toy model for the black hole pair creation analysis. We propose an
effective one-loop action to describe the domain wall pair creation
process that accompanies the false vacuum decay of a scalar field (in
the absence of gravity). We compute the pair creation rate, including
the one-loop contribution, using the instanton method that is also used
to compute pair creation rates of black holes.

Chapter 9 . Pair creation of black holes on a cosmic string background .
In this chapter, we discuss in detail the creation of a black hole pair
when a cosmic string breaks, in an AdS, flat and dS background. The
instantons that describe the process are constructed from the AdS, flat
and dS C-metrics. We explicitly compute the pair creation rates.

@xmath Part III . Black holes and pair creation in higher dimensions

Chapter 10 . Black holes in higher dimensional spacetimes . In this
chapter, we discuss the higher dimensional Tangherlini black holes in an
AdS, flat, and dS background. In particular, we find the explicit range
of the mass and charge for which one has an extreme black hole.
Moreover, we will find the higher dimensional Nariai and
Bertotti-Robinson solutions.

Chapter 11 . Pair creation of black holes in higher dimensional
spacetimes . In this chapter, we discuss in detail the creation of a
higher dimensional Tangherlini black hole pair in a dS background. The
instantons that describe the process are constructed from the dS
Tangherlini solution. We explicitly compute the pair creation rates.

Chapter 12 . Gravitational radiation in @xmath -dimensional spacetimes
and energy released during black hole pair creation . In this chapter,
we construct the formalism to study linearized gravitational waves in
flat @xmath -dimensional spacetimes. This extension of the 4-dimensional
formalism is non-trivial, due to the behavior of the @xmath -dimensional
Green’s function. We find the @xmath -dimensional quadrupole formula,
and we apply it to two cases: a particle in circular motion in a generic
background, and a particle falling into a @xmath -dimensional
Schwarzschild black hole. We also consider the hard collision between
two particles, i.e., the collision takes zero seconds, and introduce a
cutoff frequency necessary to have meaningful results. We then use it to
compute the gravitational energy released during the possible black hole
formation at the LHC, and to estimate the gravitational radiation
emitted during the process of black hole pair creation in an external
field.

## Part I Black holes and pair creation in 3 dimensions

### Chapter 2 The BTZ black hole

] ] \minitoc

In section 2.1 , we will review some of the unusual properties of
3-dimensional Einstein gravity.

Bañados, Teitelboim and Zanelli [ 39 ] have found a black hole solution
(the BTZ black hole), with mass and angular momentum, that is
asymptotically AdS. As discussed in detail by Bañados, Henneaux,
Teitelboim, and Zanelli [ 40 ] (see also Steif [ 227 ] ), the BTZ black
hole can be expressed as a topological quotient of @xmath by a group of
isometries. In section 2.2 , we will show in detail the topological
construction that leads to the rotating neutral BTZ black hole.

The extension to include a radial electric field in the BTZ black hole
has been done by Clément [ 48 ] and Martínez, Teitelboim and Zanelli [
49 ] (this solution reduces to those of [ 23 , 24 ] when @xmath ). A BTZ
solution with an azimuthal electric field was found by Cataldo [ 50 ] .
In section 2.3 , we will discuss briefly these electric BTZ solutions.

Pure magnetic solutions with @xmath , that reduce to the neutral BTZ
black hole solution when the magnetic source vanishes, also exist. The
static magnetic solution has been found by Clément [ 48 ] , Hirschmann
and Welch [ 51 ] and Cataldo and Salgado [ 52 ] . The extension to
include rotation and a new interpretation for the source of magnetic
field has been made by Dias and Lemos [ 53 ] . In section 2.4 , we will
discuss in detail these solutions.

Other black hole solutions of 3-dimensional Einstein-Maxwell theory have
also been found by Kamata and Koikawa [ 54 , 55 ] , Cataldo and Salgado
[ 56 ] and Chan [ 57 ] , assuming self dual or anti-self dual conditions
between the electromagnetic fields.

#### 2.1 Properties of three dimensional general relativity

The Einstein equations @xmath can also be written, in 3-dimensions, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The choice of the energy-momentum tensor @xmath completely determines
the Ricci tensor @xmath , but in general it does not determine the
Riemann tensor @xmath . However, and this is the fundamental difference
between 3-dimensional and 4-dimensional gravities, in 3-dimensions the
Weyl tensor (the traceless part of @xmath ) vanishes, and so the Riemann
tensor depends linearly on the Ricci tensor,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting ( 2.1 ) in this last relation one indeed concludes that @xmath
is completely determined by @xmath and by the cosmological constant
@xmath . In particular, regions of spacetime with @xmath are regions of
constant curvature, with @xmath , and @xmath .

General relativity in a 3-dimensional spacetime has no Newtonian limit
in the sense that there is no gravitational force between static point
sources. In order to see this limit we start, has in 4-dimensions, from
a slightly perturbed Minkowski background (for simplicity, but without
loss of generality, we deal this issue only with the case @xmath ). To
be more general let us work on a @xmath -dimensional spacetime described
by a metric @xmath that approaches asymptotically the @xmath
-dimensional Minkowski metric @xmath , and write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is small, so that it represents small corrections to the
flat background. Then in later chapter 12.1.1 we show that the first
order Einstein field equations yield

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional Laplacian, @xmath is the
energy-momentum tensor, and @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional Newton’s
constant. Now, in the Newtonian limit we set as usual @xmath (where
@xmath is the mass density) and we neglect the other components of
@xmath . In these conditions, ( 2.4 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to recover the Poisson equation, @xmath , where @xmath is the
gravitational potential, we set @xmath . To proceed, we apply the
geodesic equation, @xmath , to ( 2.3 ) yielding @xmath . Inserting ( 2.4
) one finally has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath we get the usual Newtonian equation of motion, while for
@xmath we confirm that the acceleration is zero, that is static point
sources feel no gravitational force. The above discussion can be
extended to the @xmath case, withe the Poisson equation replaced by the
Liouville equation, @xmath

Another unusual property of 3-dimensional gravity is the absence of
gravitational waves. In chapter 12.1.2 we shall count the number of
polarization states of a gravitational wave in @xmath dimensions. We
shall see that this number is given by @xmath . From this computation we
conclude that gravitational waves are indeed present only when @xmath .

Propagation of massless fields (other than the gravitational ones,
obviously) in a 3-dimensional spacetime has also a property radically
different from the propagation in a 4-dimensional background. Indeed, in
3-dimensions, a pulse of electromagnetic or scalar waves travels not
only along the light cone but also spreads out behind it, and slowly
dies off in tails (this happens even in the absence of any kind of black
hole or matter and is due only to the intrinsic dimension of the
spacetime). That is, in 4-dimensions if one lights a lighter for five
seconds and then turn it off, any observer at rest relative to the
candle will see the light for exactly five seconds and then suddenly
fade out completely. However, in a 3-dimensional spacetime, after the
light source is turned off one will still see its shinning light, slowly
fading away but never completely (see Soodak and Tiersten [ 228 ] , and
Cardoso, Yoshida, Dias and Lemos [ 229 ] ). This is due to the fact that
in 4-dimensions the retarded Green’s function is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the delta function, while in 3-dimensions it is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the step Heaviside function defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, while the 4-dimensional retarded Green’s function is supported
only on the light cone, the 3-dimensional one this support extends also
to the interior of the light cone. So in 3-dimensions light propagates
at the usual velocity of light, @xmath , but also with velocities
smaller @xmath and this justifies the slow, and never complete fading
away.

The gravitational field of a spinning point source (in a @xmath
background) is given by [ 16 , 21 , 22 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the mass and the angular
momentum of the point source, and the identification of coordinates,
@xmath , holds. This line element can be brought into the flat metric
through the coordinate transformation @xmath , @xmath , yielding @xmath
. However, due to the coordinate transformation, the usual
identification of coordinates no longer holds and has been replaced by
the new one, @xmath . As a consequence, the spacetime ( 2.10 ) has a
conic and an helical structure. Indeed, with the new coordinate
identifications, one starts with the Minkowski spacetime, one cuts out a
wedge with an opening angle @xmath , and one identifies the opposite
edges to form a cone with an extra time translation @xmath . This
spacetime also has the property that it admits closed timelike curves.
This occurs when @xmath , i.e., in a region in the vicinity of the point
source with radius @xmath . Hence, the spacetime ( 2.10 ) represents a
physical solution for distances greater than the above critical radius.
For a spinless point source this problem does not occur. Static
multi-source solutions also exist [ 16 , 22 ] due to the absence of
gravitational interaction in 3-dimensions. Once more the geometry has a
conic and helical structure, with a wedge angle suppressed at each
source proportional to its mass.

In a @xmath , the spacetimes generated by point sources in 3-dimensional
Einstein gravity have also been found [ 30 ] and by Brown and Henneaux [
31 ] . In the de Sitter case ( @xmath ) there is no one-particle
solution. The simplest solution describes a pair of antipodal particles
on a sphere with a wedge removed between poles and with points on its
great circle boundaries identified [ 30 ] . In the anti-de Sitter case (
@xmath ), the simplest solution describes a hyperboloid with a wedge
removed proportional to the source mass located at the vertex of the
wedge [ 31 ] .

#### 2.2 The neutral BTZ black hole

##### 2.2.1 Identifications in @xmath

We will now consider [ 230 ] what kind of ‘topological spacetimes’ can
be obtained by considering identifications in @xmath . First, recall
that @xmath is normally defined by its embedding in @xmath ,
parameterised by coordinates @xmath and with flat metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath ‘curve’ is the hyperboloid

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cosmological length. The isometry group of @xmath is
@xmath , and the Killing vector fields might be taken to be the timelike
and spacelike rotations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

the four linearly independent boosts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the four translations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of these isometries, the translations do not leave the @xmath curve
invariant. The isometry group of @xmath is only the @xmath generated by
the two rotations and the four boosts.

Let @xmath be one of the isometries of @xmath . We wish to identify
points along the orbits of @xmath . Such identifications define a
discrete subgroup of the isometry group, @xmath , and the quotient

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines a new spacetime @xmath . The universal covering space of this
spacetime, @xmath is the universal covering space of @xmath .

In practice, the identification is implemented by defining an angular
coordinate @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This angular direction will, of course, be an isometry of @xmath . In
order for the identification not to create closed timelike curves, one
might also require that @xmath should be spacelike. Thus one defines a
‘radial’ coordinate, @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ‘origin’ @xmath is when @xmath becomes null. It will be faced as
some kind of spacetime boundary, which may or may not be a conical
singularity depending on the the action of @xmath having fixed points or
being free.

##### 2.2.2 The construction leading to the BTZ black hole

Take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are constants, @xmath . That is we will be identifying
points along a double boost: a boost in the @xmath -plane and a boost in
the @xmath -plane. For @xmath the action of this vector field has a
fixed point only at @xmath , which does not belong to the hyperboloid.
Hence this isometry acts freely on the hyperboloid. For @xmath , the
points @xmath are fixed points of the isometry action. Hence the one
dimensional hyperboloid

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a surface of fixed points. So we expect a conical singularity for
@xmath but not for @xmath .

From ( 2.17 ) the angular coordinate in @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the parameters on the hyperboloid to be @xmath the last equations
imply that

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.23)
  -- -- -- --------

where, for each of the variables @xmath either the ‘ @xmath ’ or the ‘
@xmath ’ solution could be taken. Thus, using simply ( 2.17 ) for our
choice of Killing vector field ( 2.19 ) we have constrained the form of
the embedding functions to be ( 2.23 ).

Next, we use the second requirement, namely the definition of the radial
coordinate ( 2.18 ). This yields the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

It seems therefore natural that if we take the solution @xmath ( @xmath
) for @xmath , then we should take the solution @xmath ( @xmath ) for
@xmath . The same applies to the pair @xmath . Thus, for the first pair
we have the two possible solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, for the second pair we have the two possibilities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Denote by @xmath choosing possibility @xmath for @xmath and possibility
@xmath for @xmath . We will insert this several possibilities in ( 2.24
). Since the left hand side of ( 2.24 ) only depends on @xmath it is
clear that the simplest solutions for the functions @xmath and @xmath
will be functions of @xmath only. Thus we take @xmath and @xmath from
now on.

 @xmath 

    @xmath yields for ( 2.24 ),

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Since the functions @xmath and @xmath are supposed to be real
    functions this condition is impossible to solve.

 @xmath 

    @xmath yields for ( 2.24 ),

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The solution is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.31)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which is only valid for @xmath , which we call @xmath .

 @xmath 

    @xmath yields for ( 2.24 ),

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.32)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The solution is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.33)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which is only valid for @xmath , which we call @xmath .

 @xmath 

    @xmath yields for ( 2.24 ),

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The solution is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which is only valid for @xmath , which we call @xmath .

Thus, the embedding functions of the BTZ black hole are, in Region I

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

in region II

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in region III

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing, for instance, the parameterization in region I, we can now
compute the metric induced on the hypersurface ( 2.12 ) by ( 2.11 ).
Since our parameterization already obeys all the constraints, still with
@xmath and @xmath unspecified, we take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath constants. The induced metric becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking @xmath and @xmath , for constant @xmath , the cross terms becomes
@xmath independent. Since @xmath and @xmath should have dimension @xmath
, take @xmath . Then, the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the standard BTZ metric. Alternatively, writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

m and J are interpreted as mass and angular momentum of the black hole,
respectively.

#### 2.3 The electric BTZ solutions

##### 2.3.1 The BTZ black hole with a radial electric field

###### 2.3.1.a Static black hole with a radial electric field

The gravitational field of the static electric BTZ black hole is [ 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath are the mass and electric charge of the black
hole, and the electromagnetic vector potential 1-form is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath goes to @xmath when @xmath and when @xmath . It has
a minimum at @xmath , and the value of @xmath at this minimum is @xmath
. When @xmath is negative, @xmath has two roots and the corresponding
charged black hole has two horizons. When these two roots coincide one
has an extreme charged black hole and, finally, when @xmath is positive
one has a naked singularity. The parameters @xmath and @xmath that
represent these three regions are represented in Fig. 2.1 , withdrawn
from [ 49 ] .

When @xmath , for small values of the charge there is a black hole
solution. Then, for a fixed mass in this interval, when the charge
increases slightly there is a finite range of @xmath where we find no
black hole solution and, surprisingly, when this charge grows above a
critical value we have again a black hole solution, no matter how big
the charge is. This is in clear contrast with the usual charged
solutions in (3+1)-dimensional spacetimes, for which the black hole
solutions exist only when the charge is below a certain critical value.
Moreover, and also in oppose to what happens in (3+1)-dimensions, there
exist black holes with negative mass as long as the charge is big
enough.

###### 2.3.1.b Rotating black hole with a radial electric field

The angular momentum is added to the solution ( 2.44 ) and ( 2.45 )
through the application of a Lorentz rotation boost in the @xmath -
@xmath plane [ 49 , 232 ] , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the
rotation velocity parameter, and @xmath is the usual Lorentz boost
factor. The gravitational field of the rotating electric BTZ black hole
is then [ 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is defined in ( 2.44 ). Under the above Lorentz boost the
potential ( 2.45 ) transforms into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rotating electric BTZ black hole can have a maximum of two horizons
which are the direct counterparts of the two horizons of the static
electric BTZ solution. The ADM mass, angular momentum, and electric
charge of the solution are given [ 49 ] , respectively, by @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath .

##### 2.3.2 The BTZ solution with an azimuthal electric field

To conclude this brief overview on the electric counterparts of the BTZ
solution, we mention that Cataldo [ 50 ] has found a horizonless BTZ
solution with an azimuthal electric field, whose gravitational field is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the electric charge of the solution, and with
electromagnetic vector potential 1-form given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

to which corresponds the above mentioned azimuthal electric field. When
we set @xmath ( 2.49 ) yields the empty @xmath spacetime.

#### 2.4 The magnetic BTZ solution

In this section, we discuss in detail the static [ 48 , 51 , 52 ] and
rotating [ 53 ] magnetic solution, that reduces to the BTZ solution when
the magnetic field source vanishes. In particular, the conserved
quantities (mass, angular momentum and electric charge), as well as
their upper bounds, are defined, and we give a physical interpretation
for the magnetic field source.

The plan of this section is the following. In Section 2.4.1 we study the
static magnetic solution found in [ 48 , 51 , 52 ] and its properties.
Section 2.4.2 is devoted to the rotating magnetic solution. The angular
momentum is added in section 2.4.2.a through a rotational Lorentz boost.
In section 2.4.2.b we calculate the mass, angular momentum, and electric
charge of both the static and rotating solutions and in section 2.4.2.c
we set relations between the conserved charges. The rotating magnetic
solution is written as a function of its hairs in section 2.4.2.d and we
show that it reduces to the rotating BTZ solution when the magnetic
source vanishes. In section 2.4.3 we give a physical interpretation for
the origin of the magnetic field source.

##### 2.4.1 Static solution. Analysis of its general structure

###### 2.4.1.a Static solution

Einstein gravity with a negative cosmological constant and a source of
magnetic field (or Einstein–Maxwell–anti de Sitter gravity) in three
dimensions can be characterized by the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of the metric @xmath , @xmath the Ricci
scalar, @xmath the electromagnetic tensor given in terms of the vector
potential @xmath by @xmath , and @xmath is the cosmological constant. In
this subsection we study the static point source solution of action (
2.51 ) found by Hirschmann and Welch [ 51 ] and by Cataldo and Salgado [
52 ] . The point source generates a gravitational field and a magnetic
field. Written in the gauge presented in [ 51 ] , the static solution is
given by the following metric and vector potential 1-form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.52)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the time, the radial and the
angular coordinates, respectively, @xmath is an integration constant
which measures the intensity of the magnetic field source and @xmath is
the cosmological length. This spacetime reduces to the three dimensional
BTZ black hole solution of Bañados, Teitelboim and Zanelli [ 39 , 40 ]
when the magnetic source vanishes. The parameter @xmath is the mass of
this uncharged solution.

The @xmath function is negative for @xmath and positive for @xmath ,
where @xmath is such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the condition @xmath is obeyed. One might then be tempted to say
that the solution has an horizon at @xmath and consequently that one is
in the presence of a magnetically charged black hole. However, this is
not the case. In fact, one first notices that the metric components
@xmath and @xmath are related by @xmath . Then, when @xmath becomes
negative (which occurs for @xmath ) so does @xmath and this leads to an
apparent change of signature from @xmath to @xmath . This strongly
indicates [ 231 ] that an incorrect extension is being used and that one
should choose a different continuation to describe the region @xmath .
By introducing a new radial coordinate, @xmath , one obtains a spacetime
that is both null and timelike geodesically complete for @xmath [ 51 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.55)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath . This static spacetime has no curvature singularity, but
it presents a conical geometry and, in particular, it has a conical
singularity at @xmath which can be removed if one identifies @xmath with
the period @xmath where [ 51 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . Near the origin, metric ( 2.55 ) describes a spacetime
which is locally flat but has a conical singularity at @xmath with an
angle deficit @xmath .

###### 2.4.1.b Geodesic structure

We want to study the geodesic motion and, in particular, to confirm that
the spacetime described by ( 2.55 ) is both null and timelike
geodesically complete, i.e., that every null or timelike geodesic
starting from an arbitrary point either can be extended to infinite
values of the affine parameter along the geodesic or ends on a
singularity. The equations governing the geodesics can be derived from
the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an affine parameter along the geodesic which, for a
timelike geodesic, can be identified with the proper time of the
particle along the geodesic. For a null geodesic one has @xmath and for
a timelike geodesic @xmath . From the Euler-Lagrange equations one gets
that the generalized momenta associated with the time coordinate and
angular coordinate are constants: @xmath and @xmath . The constant
@xmath is related to the timelike Killing vector @xmath which reflects
the time translation invariance of the metric, while the constant @xmath
is associated to the spacelike Killing vector @xmath which reflects the
invariance of the metric under rotation. Note that since the spacetime
is not asymptotically flat, the constants @xmath and @xmath cannot be
interpreted as the energy and angular momentum at infinity.

From the metric we can derive the radial geodesic,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the two useful relations @xmath and @xmath , we can write ( 2.58 )
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

(i) Null geodesics ( @xmath ) @xmath Noticing that @xmath is always
positive for @xmath and zero for @xmath , and that @xmath is always
negative we conclude the following about the null geodesic motion. The
first term in ( 2.59 ) is positive (except at @xmath where it vanishes),
while the second term is always negative. We can then conclude that
spiraling ( @xmath ) null particles coming in from an arbitrary point
are scattered at the turning point @xmath and spiral back to infinity.
If the angular momentum L of the null particle is zero it hits the
origin (where there is a conical singularity) with vanishing velocity.
(ii) Timelike geodesics ( @xmath ) @xmath Timelike geodesic motion is
possible only if the energy of the particle satisfies @xmath . In this
case, spiraling timelike particles are bounded between two turning
points that satisfy @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . When the timelike
particle has no angular momentum ( @xmath ) there is a turning point
located at @xmath and it hits the conical singularity at the origin
@xmath . Hence, we confirm that the spacetime described by ( 2.55 ) is
both timelike and null geodesically complete.

##### 2.4.2 Rotating magnetic solution

###### 2.4.2.a Addition of angular momentum

Now, we want to endow the spacetime solution ( 2.55 ) with a global
rotation, i.e., we want to add angular momentum to the spacetime. In
order to do so we perform the following rotation boost in the @xmath -
@xmath plane (see e.g. [ 49 , 71 , 232 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant parameters. Substituting ( 2.60 )
into ( 2.55 ) and ( 2.53 ) we obtain the stationary spacetime generated
by a magnetic source

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.61)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath . We set @xmath because in this way when the angular
momentum vanishes ( @xmath ) we have @xmath and so we recover the static
solution.

Solution ( 2.61 ) represents a magnetically charged stationary spacetime
and also solves the three dimensional Einstein-Maxwell-AdS gravity
action ( 2.51 ). Transformations ( 2.60 ) generate a new metric because
they are not permitted global coordinate transformations [ 233 ] .
Transformations ( 2.60 ) can be done locally, but not globally.
Therefore, the metrics ( 2.55 ) and ( 2.61 ) can be locally mapped into
each other but not globally, and as such they are distinct.

Chen [ 78 ] has applied @xmath -duality to [ 51 ] in order to write a
rotating metric. However, the properties of the spacetime were not
studied.

###### 2.4.2.b Mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the
solutions

Both the static and rotating solutions are asymptotically anti-de
Sitter. This fact allows us to calculate the mass, angular momentum and
the electric charge of the static and rotating solutions. To obtain
these quantities we apply the formalism of Regge and Teitelboim [ 314 ]
(see also [ 49 , 71 ] ). We first write ( 2.61 ) in the canonical form
involving the lapse function @xmath and the shift function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then, the action can be
written in the Hamiltonian form as a function of the energy constraint
@xmath , momentum constraint @xmath and Gauss constraint @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath (with @xmath being the momentum conjugate to
@xmath ), @xmath and @xmath are the electric and magnetic fields and
@xmath is a boundary term. The factor @xmath comes from the fact that,
due to the angle deficit, the integration over @xmath is between @xmath
and @xmath . Upon varying the action with respect to @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath one picks up additional surface terms. Indeed,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.65)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order that the Hamilton’s equations are satisfied, the boundary term
@xmath has to be adjusted so that it cancels the above additional
surface terms. More specifically one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where one identifies @xmath as the mass, @xmath as the angular momentum
and @xmath as the electric charge since they are the terms conjugate to
the asymptotic values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

To determine the mass, the angular momentum and the electric charge of
the solutions one must take the spacetime that we have obtained and
subtract the background reference spacetime contribution, i.e., we
choose the energy zero point in such a way that the mass, angular
momentum and charge vanish when the matter is not present.

Now, note that ( 2.61 ) has an asymptotic metric given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath so, it is asymptotically an anti-de Sitter spacetime. The
anti-de Sitter spacetime is also the background reference spacetime,
since the metric ( 2.61 ) reduces to ( 2.67 ) if the matter is not
present ( @xmath and @xmath ).

Taking the subtraction of the background reference spacetime into
account we have that the mass, angular momentum and electric charge are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

After taking the asymptotic limit, @xmath , we finally have that the
mass and angular momentum are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are logarithmic terms proportional to the
magnetic source @xmath that diverge as @xmath (see also [ 57 ] ). The
presence of these kind of divergences in the mass and angular momentum
is a usual feature present in charged solutions. They can be found for
example in the electrically charged point source solution [ 23 ] , in
the electrically charged BTZ black hole [ 49 ] and in the electrically
charged black holes of three dimensional Brans-Dicke gravity [ 71 ] .
Following [ 49 , 71 , 23 ] the divergences on the mass can be treated as
follows. One considers a boundary of large radius @xmath involving the
system. Then, one sums and subtracts @xmath to ( 2.69 ) so that the mass
( 2.69 ) is now written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term between brackets in ( 2.71 ) vanishes when @xmath . Then @xmath
is the energy within the radius @xmath . The difference between @xmath
and @xmath is @xmath which is interpreted as the electromagnetic energy
outside @xmath apart from an infinite constant which is absorbed in
@xmath . The sum ( 2.72 ) is then independent of @xmath , finite and
equal to the total mass. In practice the treatment of the mass
divergence amounts to forgetting about @xmath and take as zero the
asymptotic limit: @xmath .

To handle the angular momentum divergence, one first notices that the
asymptotic limit of the angular momentum per unit mass @xmath is either
zero or one, so the angular momentum diverges at a rate slower or equal
to the rate of the mass divergence. The divergence on the angular
momentum can then be treated in a similar way as the mass divergence.
So, one can again consider a boundary of large radius @xmath involving
the system. Following the procedure applied for the mass divergence one
concludes that the divergent term @xmath can be interpreted as the
electromagnetic angular momentum outside @xmath up to an infinite
constant that is absorbed in @xmath .

Hence, in practice the treatment of both the mass and angular
divergences amounts to forgetting about @xmath and take as zero the
asymptotic limits: @xmath and @xmath in ( 2.69 ) and ( 2.70 ).

Now, we calculate the electric charge of the solutions. To determine the
electric field we must consider the projections of the Maxwell field on
spatial hypersurfaces. The normal to such hypersurfaces is @xmath and
the electric field is given by @xmath . Then, from ( 2.68 ), the
electric charge is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the electric charge is proportional to @xmath . Since in three
dimensions the magnetic field is a scalar (rather than a vector) one
cannot use Gauss’s law to define a conserved magnetic charge. In the
next section we will propose a physical interpretation for the origin of
the magnetic field source and discuss the result obtained in ( 2.73 ).

The mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the static solutions
can be obtained by putting @xmath and @xmath on the above expressions
[see ( 2.60 )].

###### 2.4.2.c Relations between the conserved charges

Now, we want to cast the metric ( 2.61 ) in terms of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . We can use ( 2.69 ) and ( 2.70 ) to solve a
quadratic equation for @xmath and @xmath . It gives two distinct sets of
solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined a rotating parameter @xmath , which ranges between
@xmath , as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

When we take @xmath (which implies @xmath ), ( 2.74 ) gives @xmath and
@xmath while ( 2.75 ) gives the nonphysical solution @xmath and @xmath
which does not reduce to the static original metric. Therefore we will
study the solutions found from ( 2.74 ). The condition that @xmath
remains real imposes a restriction on the allowed values of the angular
momentum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition @xmath allows us to write @xmath as a function of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation allows us to achieve interesting conclusions about the
values that the parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can have. Indeed,
if we replace ( 2.78 ) into ( 2.74 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath ranges between @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath .
Besides, one has that @xmath and @xmath so from ( 2.71 ) we conclude
that both the static and rotating solutions have negative mass.
Therefore, from now one, whenever we refer to the mass of the solution
we will set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

unless otherwise stated.

Looking again to ( 2.78 ) we can also conclude that one must have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., there is an upper bound for the intensity of the magnetic field
strength.

From ( 2.70 ) we also see that the angular momentum is always negative
indicating that the angular momentum and the angular velocity, @xmath ,
have opposite directions. This is the expected result since @xmath is
the inertial momentum times the angular velocity and the inertial
momentum is proportional to the mass which is negative. Introducing (
2.78 ) into ( 2.77 ) we find an upper bound for the angular momentum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that from ( 2.76 ) we can get the precise value of @xmath as a
function of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Finally, we remark that the auxiliary equations ( 2.54 ), ( 2.56 ) and (
2.79 ) allow us to define the auxiliary parameters @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath as a function of the hairs @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### 2.4.2.d The rotating magnetic solution

We are now in position to write the stationary spacetime ( 2.61 )
generated by a source of magnetic field in three dimensional
Einstein-Maxwell-anti de Sitter gravity as a function of its hairs,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.83)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

as well as the vector potential 1-form ( 2.62 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

If we set @xmath (and thus @xmath and @xmath ) we recover the static
solution ( 2.55 ) [see ( 2.60 )]. Finally if we set @xmath (and so
@xmath ) one gets

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have dropped the absolute value of @xmath since now the mass
can be positive. This is the rotating uncharged BTZ solution written,
however, in an unusual gauge. To write it in the usual gauge we apply to
( LABEL:BTZ_0_BTZ ) the radial coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

and use the relation @xmath [see ( 2.76 )] to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, as expected, ( 2.83 ) reduces to the rotating uncharged BTZ solution
[ 39 , 40 ] when the magnetic field source vanishes.

###### 2.4.2.e Geodesic structure

The geodesic structure of the rotating spacetime is similar to the
static spacetime (see section II.2), although there are now direct
(corotating with @xmath ) and retrograde (counter-rotating with @xmath )
orbits. The most important result that spacetime is geodesically
complete still holds for the stationary spacetime.

##### 2.4.3 Physical interpretation of the magnetic source

When we look back to the electric charge given in ( 2.73 ), we see that
it is zero when @xmath , i.e., when the angular momentum @xmath of the
spacetime vanishes. This is expected since in the static solution we
have imposed that the electric field is zero ( @xmath is the only
non-null component of the Maxwell tensor).

Still missing is a physical interpretation for the origin of the
magnetic field source. The magnetic field source is not a Nielson-Oleson
vortex solution since we are working with the Maxwell theory and not
with an Abelian-Higgs model. We might then think that the magnetic field
is produced by a Dirac point-like monopole. However, this is not also
the case since a Dirac monopole with strength @xmath appears when one
breaks the Bianchi identity [ 235 ] , yielding @xmath (where @xmath is
the dual of the Maxwell field strength), whereas in this work we have
that @xmath . Indeed, we are clearly dealing with the Maxwell theory
which satisfies Maxwell equations and the Bianchi identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. In ( 2.88 ) we have made use of the fact that the general
relativistic current density is @xmath times the special relativistic
current density @xmath .

We then propose that the magnetic field source can be interpreted as
composed by a system of two symmetric and superposed electric charges
(each with strength @xmath ). One of the electric charges is at rest
with positive charge (say), and the other is spinning with an angular
velocity @xmath and negative electric charge. Clearly, this system
produces no electric field since the total electric charge is zero and
the magnetic field is produced by the angular electric current. To
confirm our interpretation, we go back to ( 2.88 ). In our solution, the
only non-vanishing component of the Maxwell field is @xmath which
implies that only @xmath is not zero. According to our interpretation
one has @xmath , which one inserts in ( 2.88 ). Finally, integrating
over @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, the magnetic source strength, @xmath , can be interpreted as an
electric charge @xmath times its spinning velocity.

Looking again to the electric charge given in ( 2.73 ), one sees that
after applying the rotation boost in the @xmath - @xmath plane to endow
the initial static spacetime with angular momentum, there appears a net
electric charge. This result was already expected since now, besides the
scalar magnetic field ( @xmath ), there is also an electric field (
@xmath ) [see ( 2.84 )]. A physical interpretation for the appearance of
the net electric charge is now needed. To do so, we return to the static
spacetime. In this static spacetime there is a static positive charge
and a spinning negative charge of equal strength at the center. The net
charge is then zero. Therefore, an observer at rest ( @xmath ) sees a
density of positive charges at rest which is equal to the density of
negative charges that are spinning. Now, we perform a local rotational
boost @xmath and @xmath to an observer ( @xmath ) in the static
spacetime, so that @xmath is moving relatively to @xmath . This means
that @xmath sees a different charge density since a density is a charge
over an area and this area suffers a Lorentz contraction in the
direction of the boost. Hence, the two sets of charge distributions that
had symmetric charge densities in the frame @xmath will not have charge
densities with equal magnitude in the frame @xmath . Consequently, the
charge densities will not cancel each other in the frame @xmath and a
net electric charge appears. This was done locally. When we turn into
the global rotational Lorentz boost of ( 2.60 ) this interpretation
still holds. The local analysis above is similar to the one that occurs
when one has a copper wire with an electric current and we apply a
translation Lorentz boost to the wire: first, there is only a magnetic
field but, after the Lorentz boost, one also has an electric field. The
difference is that in the present situation the Lorentz boost is a
rotational one and not a translational one.

#### 2.5 Summary and discussion

The BTZ black hole [ 39 ] , with non-vanishing mass and angular
momentum, is asymptotically AdS. This solution has constant curvature
and thus there can be no curvature singularity at the origin. As
discussed in detail in [ 40 ] , the BTZ black hole can be expressed as a
topological quotient of @xmath by a group of isometries. This is, the
BTZ black hole can be obtained through identifications along an isometry
of the @xmath spacetime, and in order to avoid closed timelike curves,
the origin must be a topological singularity (a boundary of the
spacetime). We have reviewed in detail this construction. Qualitatively,
the reason why the black hole exists only in an AdS background can be
understood as follows. The radius of an event horizon ( @xmath ) in a
@xmath -dimensional spacetime is expected to be proportional to @xmath ,
where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional Newton’s constant. Now, in mass
units @xmath has dimension @xmath . Thus, @xmath (and @xmath ) is
dimensionless in @xmath , and there is no length scale in @xmath . The
cosmological constant provides this length scale for the horizon, but
only when @xmath (AdS case). One may argue that this is due to the fact
that the AdS background is attractive, i.e., an analysis of the geodesic
equations indicates that particles in this background are subjected to a
potential well that attracts them (and so it is possible to concentrate
matter into a small region), while the dS background is repulsive (in
practice, if we try to construct a dS black hole through identifications
along an isometry of the @xmath spacetime, we verify that the possible
horizon is inside the region that contains closed timelike curves).

The extension to include a radial electric field in the BTZ black hole
has been done in [ 48 , 49 ] (this solution reduces to those of [ 23 ,
24 ] when @xmath ). Due to the slow fall off of the electric field in
3-dimensions, the system has infinite total energy. The presence of the
electric energy-momentum tensor implies that the spacetime has no longer
constant curvature, and the electric BTZ black hole cannot be expressed
as a topological quotient of @xmath by a group of isometries. The
rotating charged black hole is generated from the static charged
solution (already found in [ 39 ] ) through the application of a
rotation Lorentz boost. A BTZ solution with an azimuthal electric field
was found in [ 50 ] . This solution is horizonless, and reduces to empty
@xmath spacetime when the charge vanishes.

Pure magnetic solutions with @xmath , that reduce to the neutral BTZ
black hole solution when the magnetic source vanishes, also exist and
were reviewed in section 2.4 . Notice that, in oppose to what occurs in
4-dimensions where the the Maxwell tensor and its dual are 2-forms, in
3-dimensions the Maxwell tensor is still a 2-form, but its dual is a
1-form (in practice, the Maxwell tensor has only three independent
components: two for the electric vector field, and one for the scalar
magnetic field). As a consequence, the magnetic solutions are radically
different from the electric solutions in 3-dimensions. The static
magnetic solution has been found in [ 48 , 51 , 52 ] . This spacetime
generated by a static magnetic point source is horizonless and has a
conical singularity at the origin. The extension to include rotation and
a new interpretation for the source of magnetic field has been made in [
53 ] . In [ 51 ] , the static magnetic source has been interpreted as a
kind of magnetic monopole reminiscent of a Nielson-Oleson vortex
solution. In [ 53 ] , we prefer to interpret the static magnetic field
source as being composed by a system of two symmetric and superposed
electric charges. One of the electric charges is at rest and the other
is spinning. This system produces no electric field since the total
electric charge is zero and the scalar magnetic field is produced by the
angular electric current. When we apply a rotational Lorentz boost to
add angular momentum to the spacetime, there appears an electric charge
and an electric field.

### Chapter 3 Three dimensional dilaton black holes of the Brans-Dicke
type

] ] \minitoc

In order to turn the 3-dimensional gravity dynamics more similar with
the realistic 4-dimensional one, we can manage a way by which we
introduce local degrees of freedom. One way to do this, is by coupling a
scalar field to Einstein gravity, yielding a so called dilaton gravity.
The most general form of this kind of gravity was proposed by Wagoner [
67 ] in 1970. The scalar field provides a local dynamical degree of
freedom to the theory, and models of this kind (i.e., under certain
choices of the parameters) appear naturally in string theory. Some
choices of the parameters of the theory yield dilaton gravities that
have black hole solutions. One of these theories, which we will study in
this chapter, is an Einstein-dilaton gravity of the Brans-Dicke type in
a @xmath background, first discussed by Lemos [ 6 ] . This theory is
specified by a Brans-Dicke parameter, @xmath , and contains seven
different cases. Each @xmath can be viewed as yielding a different
dilaton gravity theory, with some of these being related with other
known special theories. For instance, for @xmath one gets the simplest
low-energy string action [ 68 ] , and for @xmath one gets a theory
related (through dimensional reduction) to 4-dimensional general
relativity with one Killing vector [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] . This is, the @xmath
black holes are the direct counterparts of the 4-dimensional AdS black
holes with toroidal or cylindrical topology first discussed by Lemos, in
the same way that a point source in 3-dimensions is the direct cousin of
a cosmic string in 4-dimensions. For @xmath the theory reduces to the
pure 3-dimensional general relativity. This is, the @xmath black holes
are the BTZ ones. Moreover, the case @xmath yields gravities whose black
holes have a structure and properties similar to the BTZ black hole, but
with a feature that might be useful: the @xmath black holes have
dynamical degrees of freedom, which implies for example that the origin
has a curvature singularity and that gravitational waves can propagate
in the spacetime. The neutral black holes of this Brans-Dicke theory
were found and analyzed by Sá, Kleber and Lemos [ 6 , 69 , 70 ] . The
pure electric charged black holes have been analysed by Dias and Lemos [
71 ] , and the pure magnetic solutions have been discussed by Dias and
Lemos [ 72 ] . We will analyze in detail these black holes in this
chapter.

The plan of this chapter is as follows. In section 3.2 we briefly
present the neutral black holes of the Brans-Dicke theory [ 6 , 69 , 70
] . Then, in section 3.2 , we discuss in detail the electric charged
black holes (static and rotating) of the theory [ 71 ] and, in section
3.3 , we do the same with the magnetic solutions [ 72 ] . Finally, in
section 3.4 , concluding remarks are given.

#### 3.1 Neutral Brans-Dicke dilaton black holes

We work with an action of the Brans-Dicke type in three-dimensions
written in the string frame as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the determinant of the 3-dimensional (3D) metric, @xmath
is the curvature scalar, @xmath is a scalar field called dilaton, @xmath
is the cosmological constant, @xmath is the three-dimensional
Brans-Dicke parameter.

From the field equations of ( 3.1 ), one finds the following solutions
(with many of them being black holes),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where, for @xmath , @xmath is defined as @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are,
respectively, the ADM mass and angular momentum of the solutions, and we
have defined the rotating parameter @xmath in such a way that @xmath
implies @xmath . The condition that @xmath remains real imposes, for
@xmath , a maximum bound for the angular momentum: @xmath . For @xmath ,
one has @xmath and @xmath , necessarily. For @xmath and @xmath , the
solutions have a curvature singularity located at @xmath , and for
@xmath the curvature singularity is at @xmath . For @xmath , both @xmath
and @xmath are singular. For @xmath there is no curvature singularity.
Many of this theories (i.e., for different @xmath ) have black hole
solutions. A detailed analysis of the character of the solutions can be
found in [ 69 , 70 ] . Here we do not go further in their study, since
in next section we will study in detail these solutions when a charge
@xmath is added to the system.

#### 3.2 Electric Brans-Dicke dilaton black holes

In this section we find and study in detail the static and rotating
electrically charged solutions of a Einstein-Maxwell-Dilaton action of
the Brans-Dicke type. So, these are the electric counterparts of the
solutions discussed in the last section [ 69 , 70 ] .

The electrically charged theory that we are going to study is specified
by the extra electromagnetic field @xmath . It contains eight different
cases. For @xmath one gets a theory related (through dimensional
reduction) to electrically charged four dimensional General Relativity
with one Killing vector [ 7 ] and for @xmath one obtains electrically
charged three dimensional General Relativity [ 48 , 49 ] .

Since magnetically charged solutions in (2+1) dimensions have totally
different properties from the electrically charged ones, we leave their
study for section 3.3 .

The plan of this section is the following. In Section 3.2.1 we set up
the action and the field equations. The static general solution of the
field equations are found in section 3.2.2 and we write the scalar
@xmath which, in 3-dimensions, signals the presence of singularities.
The angular momentum is added in section 3.2.3 . In section 3.2.4 we use
an extension of the formalism of Regge and Teitelboim to derive the
mass, angular momentum, electric charge and dilaton charge of the black
holes. In section 3.2.5 we study the properties of the different cases
that appear naturally from the solutions. We work out in detail the
causal structure and the geodesic motion of null and timelike particles
for typical values of @xmath that belong to the different ranges. The
Hawking temperature is computed in section 3.2.6 .

##### 3.2.1 Field equations of Brans-Dicke@xmathMaxwell theory

We are going to work with an action of the Maxwell-Brans-Dicke type in
three-dimensions written in the string frame as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the determinant of the 3D metric, @xmath is the
curvature scalar, @xmath is a scalar field called dilaton, @xmath is the
cosmological constant, @xmath is the three-dimensional Brans-Dicke
parameter and @xmath is the Maxwell tensor, with @xmath being the vector
potential. Varying this action with respect to @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath one gets the Einstein, Maxwell and ditaton equations,
respectively

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Einstein tensor, @xmath represents the covariant
derivative and @xmath is the Maxwell energy-momentum tensor.

We want to consider now a spacetime which is both static and
rotationally symmetric, implying the existence of a timelike Killing
vector @xmath and a spacelike Killing vector @xmath . The most general
static metric with a Killing vector @xmath with closed orbits in three
dimensions can be written as @xmath , with @xmath . Each different
@xmath has a very rich and non-trivial structure of solutions which
could be considered on its own. As in [ 69 , 70 ] we work in the
Schwarzschild gauge, @xmath , and compare different black hole solutions
in different theories. For this ansatz the metric is written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We also assume that the only non-vanishing components of the vector
potential are @xmath and @xmath , i.e. ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that the non-vanishing components of the symmetric Maxwell
tensor are @xmath and @xmath .

Inserting the metric ( 3.9 ) into equation ( 3.6 ) one obtains the
following set of equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes a derivative with respect to @xmath . In addition,
inserting the metric ( 3.9 ) into equations ( 3.7 ) and ( 3.8 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 3.2.2 The general static solution

From the above equations valid for a static and rotationally symmetric
spacetime one sees that equation ( 3.14 ) implies that the electric and
magnetic fields cannot be simultaneously non-zero, i.e., there is no
static dyonic solution. In this work we will consider the electrically
charged case alone ( @xmath ).

So, assuming vanishing magnetic field, one has from Maxwell equation (
3.15 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integration constant which, as we shall see in ( 3.45
), is the electric charge. One then has that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

To proceed we shall first consider the case @xmath . Adding equations (
3.11 ) and ( 3.12 ) one obtains @xmath , yielding for the dilaton field
the following solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants of integration. One can, without
loss of generality, choose @xmath . Then, equation ( 3.19 ) can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an appropriate constant that is proportional to the
cosmological constant [see equation ( 3.25 )]. The dimensionless
constant @xmath can be viewed as a normalization to the action ( 3.5 ).
Since it has no influence in our calculations, apart a possible
redefinition of the mass, we set @xmath . The vector potential @xmath
with @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the solutions ( 3.17 )-( 3.20 ) in equations ( 3.11 )-( 3.16
), we obtain for the metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.23)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is a constant of integration related with the mass of the
solutions, as will be shown, and @xmath . For @xmath @xmath is defined
as (we call your attention to a typo in [ 71 ] in this definition)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath we set @xmath . For @xmath equations ( 3.11 ) and ( 3.12 )
imply @xmath so, in contrast with the uncharged case [ 69 , 70 ] , the
cosmological constant is not null.

Now, we consider the case @xmath . From equations ( 3.11 )-( 3.16 ) it
follows that @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are constants of
integration, and that the cosmological constant and electric charge are
both null, @xmath . So, for @xmath the metric gives simply the
three-dimensional Minkowski spacetime and the dilaton is constant, as
occurred in the uncharged case [ 69 , 70 ] .

In (2+1) dimensions, the presence of a curvature singularity is revealed
by the scalar @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.27)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

An inspection of these scalars in ( 3.26 )-( 3.28 ) reveals that for
@xmath and @xmath the curvature singularity is located at @xmath and for
@xmath the curvature singularity is at @xmath . For @xmath both @xmath
and @xmath are singular. For @xmath spacetime has no curvature
singularities. Note that in the uncharged case [ 69 , 70 ] , for @xmath
the curvature singularity is located only at @xmath .

##### 3.2.3 The general rotating solution

In order to add angular momentum to the spacetime we perform the
following coordinate transformations (see e.g. [ 70 ] - [ 232 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant parameters. Substituting ( 3.29 )
into ( 3.22 )-( 3.24 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.31)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.32)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Introducing transformations ( 3.29 ) into ( 3.21 ) we obtain that the
vector potential @xmath is now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Solutions ( 3.30 )-( 3.33 ) represent electrically
charged stationary spacetimes and also solve ( 3.5 ). Analyzing the
Einstein-Rosen bridge of the static solution one concludes that
spacetime is not simply connected which implies that the first Betti
number of the manifold is one, i.e., closed curves encircling the
horizon cannot be shrunk to a point. So, transformations ( 3.29 )
generate a new metric because they are not permitted global coordinate
transformations [ 233 ] . Transformations ( 3.29 ) can be done locally,
but not globally. Therefore metrics ( 3.22 )-( 3.24 ) and ( 3.30 )-(
3.32 ) can be locally mapped into each other but not globally, and such
they are distinct.

##### 3.2.4 Mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the solutions

In this section we will calculate the mass, angular momentum, electric
charge and dilaton charge of the static and rotating electrically
charged black hole solutions. To obtain these quantities we apply the
formalism of Regge and Teitelboim [ 314 ] (see also [ 49 , 69 , 70 , 6 ]
).

We first write the metrics ( 3.30 )-( 3.32 ) in the canonical form
involving the lapse function @xmath and the shift function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then, the action can be
written in the hamiltonian form as a function of the energy constraint
@xmath , momentum constraint @xmath and Gauss constraint @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath (with @xmath being the momentum conjugate to
@xmath ), @xmath and @xmath are the electric and magnetic fields and
@xmath is a boundary term. Upon varying the action with respect to
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath one picks up additional
surface terms. Indeed,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.36)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order that the Hamilton’s equations are satisfied, the boundary term
@xmath has to be adjusted so that it cancels the above additional
surface terms. More specifically one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where one identifies @xmath as the mass, @xmath as the angular momentum
and @xmath as the electric charge since they are the terms conjugate to
the asymptotic values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

To determine the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of the black hole one must
take the black hole spacetime and subtract the background reference
spacetime contribution, i.e., we choose the energy zero point in such a
way that the mass, angular momentum and charge vanish when the black
hole is not present.

Now, note that for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , spacetime ( 3.30 ) has
an asymptotic metric given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., it is asymptotically an anti-de Sitter spacetime. In order to have
the usual form of the anti-de Sitter metric we choose @xmath . For the
cases @xmath we shall also choose @xmath , as has been done for the
uncharged case [ 69 , 70 ] . For @xmath the anti-de Sitter spacetime is
also the background reference spacetime, since the metrics ( 3.30 ) and
( 3.31 ) reduce to ( 3.38 ) if the black hole is not present ( @xmath
and @xmath ). For @xmath the above described procedure of choosing the
energy zero point does not apply since for any value of @xmath and
@xmath one still has a black hole solution. Thus, for @xmath the energy
zero point is chosen arbitrarily to correspond to the black hole
solution with @xmath and @xmath .

Taking the subtraction of the background reference spacetime into
account and noting that @xmath and that @xmath we have that the mass,
angular momentum and electric charge are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, for @xmath and @xmath , we finally have that the mass and angular
momentum are (after taking the appropriate asymptotic limit: @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath , see the Penrose diagrams on section 6.3
to understand the reason for these limits)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the mass and angular momentum of the
uncharged black hole. For @xmath , the mass and angular momentum are
(after taking the appropriate asymptotic limit, @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.42)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are terms proportional to the charge @xmath that
diverge at the asymptotic limit. The presence of these kind of
divergences in the mass and angular momentum is a usual feature present
in charged solutions. They can be found for example in the electrically
charged point source solution [ 23 ] , in the electric counterpart of
the BTZ black hole [ 49 ] , in the pure electric black holes of 3D
Brans-Dicke action [ 71 ] and in the magnetic counterpart of the BTZ
solution [ 53 ] . Following [ 23 , 49 ] , the divergences on the mass
can be treated as follows. One considers a boundary of large radius
@xmath involving the black hole. Then, one sums and subtracts @xmath to
( 3.41 ) so that the mass ( 3.41 ) is now written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term between brackets in ( 3.43 ) vanishes when @xmath . Then @xmath
is the energy within the radius @xmath . The difference between @xmath
and @xmath is @xmath which is interpreted as the electromagnetic energy
outside @xmath apart from an infinite constant which is absorbed in
@xmath . The sum ( 3.44 ) is then independent of @xmath , finite and
equal to the total mass.

To handle the angular momentum divergence, one first notice that the
asymptotic limit of the angular momentum per unit mass @xmath is either
zero or one, so the angular momentum diverges at a rate slower or equal
to the rate of the mass divergence. The divergence on the angular
momentum can then be treated in a similar way as the mass divergence.
So, the divergent term @xmath can be interpreted as the electromagnetic
angular momentum outside @xmath up to an infinite constant that is
absorbed in @xmath .

In practice the treatment of the mass and angular divergences amounts to
forgetting about @xmath and take as zero the asymptotic limits: @xmath
and @xmath . So, for @xmath the mass and angular momentum are also given
by ( 3.40 ).

Interesting enough, as has been noticed in [ 49 ] , is the fact that in
four spacetime dimensions there occurs a similar situation. For example,
the @xmath component of Reissner-Nordström solution can be written as
@xmath . The total mass @xmath is independent of @xmath and @xmath is
the electrostatic energy outside a sphere of radius @xmath . In this
case, since @xmath vanishes when @xmath , one does not need to include
an infinite constant in @xmath . Thus, in this general Brans-Dicke
theory in 3D we conclude that both situations can occur depending on the
value of @xmath . The @xmath case is analogous to the the
Reissner-Nordström black hole in the sense that it is not necessary to
include an infinite constant in @xmath , while the case @xmath is
similar to the electrically charged BTZ black hole [ 49 ] since an
infinite constant must be included in @xmath .

For @xmath the mass and angular momentum are ill defined since the
boundaries @xmath and @xmath have logarithmic singularities in the mass
term even in the absence of the electric charge.

Now, we calculate the electric charge of the black holes. To determine
the electric field we must consider the projections of the Maxwell field
on spatial hypersurfaces. The normal to such hypersurfaces is @xmath so
the electric field is @xmath . Then, from ( 3.39 ), the electric charge
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the static black holes
can be obtained by putting @xmath and @xmath on the above expressions
[see ( 3.29 )].

Now, we want to cast the metric in terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
For @xmath , we can use ( 3.40 ) to solve a quadratic equation for
@xmath and @xmath . It gives two distinct sets of solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined a rotating parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

When we take @xmath (which implies @xmath ), ( 3.46 ) gives @xmath and
@xmath while ( 3.47 ) gives the nonphysical solution @xmath and @xmath
which does not reduce to the static original metric. Therefore we will
study the solutions found from ( 3.46 ). For @xmath we have @xmath and
@xmath .

The condition that @xmath remains real imposes for @xmath a restriction
on the allowed values of the angular momentum: @xmath . For @xmath we
have @xmath . In the range @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath . The
condition @xmath fixes the value of @xmath and from ( 3.45 ) we can
write @xmath as a function of @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath               (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metrics ( 3.30 ) and ( 3.31 ) may now be cast in the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.52)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.53)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Analyzing the function @xmath in ( 3.30 ), ( 3.31 ), and ( 3.49 )-( 3.51
) we can set the conditions imposed on the mass and angular momentum of
the solutions obtained for the different values of @xmath , in order
that the black holes might exist. These conditions are summarized on
Table 1.

We can mention the principal differences between the charged and
uncharged theory. The charged theory has black holes which are not
present in the uncharged theory for the following range of parameters:
(i) @xmath , @xmath ; (ii) @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; (iii) @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath ; (iv) @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and (v) @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

  Range of @xmath   Black holes with @xmath       Black holes with @xmath
  ----------------- ----------------------------- ----------------------------
  @xmath            @xmath                        @xmath
  @xmath            might exist for any @xmath    @xmath
  @xmath            do not exist for any @xmath   might exist for any @xmath
  @xmath            @xmath                        might exist for any @xmath
  @xmath            @xmath                        @xmath

Table 1. Values of the angular momentum for which black holes with
positive and negative masses might exist.

##### 3.2.5 Causal and geodesic structure of the charged black holes

###### 3.2.5.a Analysis of the causal structure

In order to study the causal structure we follow the procedure of Boyer
and Lindquist [ 238 ] and Carter [ 259 ] and write the metrics ( 3.30
)-( 3.32 ) in the form [see ( 3.29 )]

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.54)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and in ( 3.55 ) @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.50 ).

Bellow we describe the general procedure to draw the Penrose diagrams.
Following Boyer and Lindquist [ 238 ] , we choose a new angular
coordinate which straightens out the spiraling null geodesics that pile
up around the event horizon. A good choice is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then ( 3.54 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now the null radial geodesics are straight lines at @xmath . The
advanced and retarded null coordinates are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the tortoise coordinate. In general, the integral
defining the tortoise coordinate cannot be solved explicitly for the
solutions ( 3.55 )-( 3.57 ). Moreover, the maximal analytical extension
depends critically on the values of @xmath . There are seven cases which
have to be treated separately: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . As we shall see, on some of the cases the
@xmath function has only one zero and so the black hole has one event
horizon, for other cases @xmath has two zeros and consequently two
horizons are present. If @xmath has one zero, @xmath , we proceed as
follows. In the region where @xmath we introduce the Kruskal coordinates
@xmath and @xmath and so @xmath . In the region where @xmath we define
the Kruskal coordinates as @xmath and @xmath in order that @xmath . The
signal of the product @xmath is chosen so that the factor @xmath , that
appears in the metric coefficient @xmath , is negative. The constant
@xmath is introduced in order that the limit of @xmath as @xmath stays
finite.

If @xmath has two zeros, @xmath and @xmath (with @xmath ), one has to
introduce a Kruskal coordinate patch around each of the zeros of @xmath
. The first patch constructed around @xmath is valid for @xmath . For
this patch, in the region where @xmath we introduce the Kruskal
coordinates @xmath and @xmath and so @xmath . In the region where @xmath
we define the Kruskal coordinates as @xmath and @xmath in order that
@xmath . The metric defined by this Kruskal coordinates is regular in
the patch @xmath and, in particular, is regular at @xmath . However, it
is singular at @xmath . To have a metric non singular at @xmath one has
to define new Kruskal coordinates for the second patch which is
constructed around @xmath and is valid for @xmath . For this patch, in
the region where @xmath we introduce the Kruskal coordinates @xmath and
@xmath and so @xmath . In the region where @xmath we define the Kruskal
coordinates as @xmath and @xmath in order that @xmath . @xmath and
@xmath are constants obeying the same condition defined above for @xmath
and the sign of @xmath is also chosen in order to have metric
coefficient @xmath negative. Now, these two different patches have to be
joined together. Finally, to construct the Penrose diagram one has to
define the Penrose coordinates by the usual arctangent functions of
@xmath and @xmath : @xmath and @xmath .

The horizon is mapped into two mutual perpendicular straight null lines
at @xmath . In general, to find what kind of curve describes the lines
@xmath or @xmath one has to take the limit of @xmath as @xmath , in the
case of @xmath , and the limit of @xmath as @xmath , in the case of
@xmath . If this limit is @xmath the corresponding line is mapped into a
curved null line. If the limit is @xmath the corresponding line is
mapped into a curved timelike line and finally, when the limit is @xmath
the line is mapped into a curved spacelike line. The asymptotic lines
are drawn as straight lines although in the coordinates @xmath and
@xmath they should be curved outwards, bulged. It is always possible to
change coordinates so that the asymptotic lines are indeed straight
lines.

The lines of infinite redshift, @xmath , are given by the vanishing of
the @xmath metric component. There are closed timelike curves, @xmath ,
whenever @xmath .

The Penrose diagram for the static charged black hole is similar to the
one drawn for the corresponding rotating charged black hole. The only
difference is that the infinite redshift lines coincide with the
horizons and there are no closed timelike surfaces. This similarity is
due to the fact that the rotating black hole is obtained from the static
one by applying the coordinate transformations ( 3.29 ).

In practice, to find the curve that describes the asymptotic limits
@xmath and @xmath , we can use a trick. We study the behavior of @xmath
at the asymptotic limits, i.e. we find which term of @xmath dominates as
@xmath and @xmath . Then, in the asymptotic region, we take @xmath in
the vicinity of @xmath and @xmath in the vicinity of @xmath . The above
procedure of finding the Kruskal coordinates is then applied to the
asymptotic regions, e.g. in the vicinity of @xmath we can take @xmath
and find the character of the @xmath curve from the limit of @xmath as
@xmath .

###### 3.2.5.b Analysis of the geodesic structure

Let us now consider the geodesic motion. The equations governing the
geodesics can be derived from the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an affine parameter along the geodesic which, for a
timelike geodesic, can be identified with the proper time of the
particle along the geodesic. For a null geodesic one has @xmath and for
a timelike geodesic @xmath . From the Euler-Lagrange equations one gets
that the generalized momentums associated with the time coordinate and
angular coordinate are constants: @xmath and @xmath . The constant
@xmath is related to the timelike Killing vector @xmath which reflects
the time translation invariance of the metric, while the constant @xmath
is associated to the spacelike Killing vector @xmath which reflects the
invariance of the metric under rotation. Note that since the spacetime
is not asymptotically flat, the constants @xmath and @xmath cannot be
interpreted as the local energy and angular momentum at infinity.

From the geodesics equations we can derive two equations which will be
specially useful since they describe the behavior of geodesic motion
along the radial coordinate. For @xmath and @xmath these are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For @xmath and @xmath the two useful equations are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the above equations @xmath is the inverse of the metric component
@xmath and we have introduced the definitions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where in ( 3.66 ) the minus sign is valid for @xmath and @xmath and the
plus sign is applied when @xmath or @xmath . There are turning points,
@xmath , whenever @xmath . If this is the case, equations ( 3.62 ) and (
3.64 ) will allow us to make considerations about the position of the
turning point relatively to the position of the horizon. For this
purpose it will be important to note that for @xmath and @xmath one has
@xmath , and for @xmath or @xmath we have that @xmath . As a first and
general example of the interest of equations ( 3.62 ) and ( 3.64 ) note
that the turning points coincide with the horizons when the energy and
the angular momentum are such that @xmath . From equations ( 3.63 ), (
3.65 ) and after some graphic computation we can reach interesting
conclusions.

###### 3.2.5.c Penrose diagrams and geodesics for each range of @xmath

We are now in position to draw the Penrose diagrams and study the
geodesic motion. Besides the cases @xmath and @xmath , for each
different range of @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
) we will consider a particular value of @xmath . These will be
precisely the ones that have been analyzed in the uncharged study of
action ( 3.5 ) [ 69 , 70 ] .

We will study the solutions with positive mass, @xmath , and describe
briefly the Penrose diagrams of the solutions with negative mass.

A. Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

For this range of @xmath there is the possibility of having black holes
with positive mass whenever @xmath . We are going to analyze the typical
case @xmath . The @xmath function, ( 3.55 ), is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where from ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.50 ) one has that @xmath and @xmath (if
@xmath ). For @xmath , @xmath has always one and only one zero given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.69)
  -- -- -- --------

@xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The curvature singularity at
@xmath is a spacelike line in the Penrose diagram while @xmath is a
timelike line. The Penrose diagram is drawn in figure 1. There is no
extreme black hole for this case.

When we consider the solutions with negative mass we conclude that, for
@xmath , one has black holes with two horizons, with one (extreme case)
or a spacetime without black holes. For the black hole with two horizons
the Penrose diagram is shown in figure 2.(a) of and the extreme black
hole has a Penrose diagram which is drawn in figure 2.(b).

Let us now consider the geodesic motion. Analyzing ( 3.62 ) and noting
that @xmath we see that for the null and timelike geodesics the
coefficient of @xmath is always negative so, for @xmath , the first term
of ( 3.62 ) is positive. Since the second term is positive or null we
conclude that whenever there are turning points, they are @xmath and
@xmath . From ( 3.63 ) we conclude the following about the geodesic
motion. (i) If @xmath null particles produced at @xmath escape to @xmath
and null particles coming in from infinity are scattered at @xmath and
spiral back to infinity. (ii) Null geodesics with @xmath are bounded
between the singularity @xmath and a maximum ( @xmath ) radial distance.
The turning point @xmath is exactly at the horizon @xmath if and only if
the energy and the angular momentum are such that @xmath . (iii) Null
geodesics with energy and angular momentum such that @xmath can reach
and “stay” at the curvature singularity @xmath . (iv) All the timelike
geodesics present the same features as the null geodesics with @xmath .
So, any timelike geodesic is bounded within the region @xmath (with
@xmath and @xmath ), and no timelike particle can either escape to
infinity or reach and “stay” at @xmath . (v) Neither null or timelike
geodesics have stable or unstable circular orbits.

B. Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

For @xmath , @xmath is given by ( 3.56 ) and, in the case @xmath ,
@xmath has one zero given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being such that @xmath . The scalar @xmath ( 3.27 ) diverge
at @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath is positive for @xmath and
negative for @xmath . At @xmath the curvature singularity is timelike
while @xmath is a null curvature singularity. The Penrose diagram is
represented in figure 3.(a). For @xmath , unlike the uncharged case, the
theory also has a black hole with a horizon located at @xmath given by (
3.70 ). @xmath is negative for @xmath and positive for @xmath . The
@xmath curvature singularity is spacelike and @xmath is a null curvature
singularity. The Penrose diagram is drawn in figure 3.(b). For @xmath
one has @xmath . Then, @xmath is a naked null singularity and the
boundary @xmath changes character and has no singularity, being a
timelike line in the Penrose diagram drawn in figure 3.(c).

Now, we study the geodesic motion for @xmath . The behavior of geodesic
motion along the radial coordinate can be obtained from the following
two equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We first consider the case @xmath . From equation ( 3.71 ) we conclude
that whenever there are turning points, they are given by @xmath and
@xmath . The turning point @xmath is exactly at the horizon @xmath if
and only if the energy and the angular momentum are such that @xmath ,
i.e, @xmath . From the graphic computation of ( 3.72 ) we conclude that:
(i) the only particles that can escape to @xmath or @xmath are null
particles that satisfy @xmath which implies @xmath ; (ii) all other null
geodesics and all timelike geodesics are bounded between @xmath and a
maximum ( @xmath ) radial distance.

For @xmath one has that: (i) timelike and null spiraling particles with
@xmath start at @xmath and reach infinity radial distances or timelike
and null geodesics start at @xmath and spiral toward @xmath and then
return back to infinity; (ii) null particles can escape to @xmath or
@xmath if @xmath , i.e., @xmath ; (iii) timelike geodesics with @xmath
can be bounded between @xmath and a maximum ( @xmath ) radial distance,
or start at @xmath and reach infinity radial distances.

C. Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

In this range of @xmath , spacetime has no black holes since from ( 3.49
) and ( 3.50 ) one has @xmath and @xmath so the @xmath function ( 3.55 )
is always positive. The curvature singularity @xmath is a naked null
singularity and the curvature singularity @xmath is a naked timelike
singularity. The Penrose diagram is drawn in figure 4.

When we consider the solutions with negative mass we conclude that one
might have black holes with one horizon. If this is the case, the
Penrose diagram is exactly equal to the one shown in figure 3.(a) (which
represents the typical case @xmath ).

Although there are no black holes with positive mass, it is interesting
to study the geodesics that we might expect for this spacetime. From
graphic computation of ( 3.65 ) we conclude the following for null and
timelike geodesics. (i) For @xmath there is no possible motion. (ii)
This situation also occurs for small positive values of @xmath . (iii)
However, when we increase the positive value of @xmath there is a
critical value for which a stable circular orbit is allowed. (iii) And
for positive values of @xmath above the critical value, null and
timelike geodesics are bounded between a minimum ( @xmath ) and a
maximum ( @xmath ) radial distance. (iv) Null particles with energy and
angular momentum satisfying @xmath that are produced at @xmath escape to
@xmath and null particles coming in from infinity are scattered at
@xmath and spiral back to infinity. (vi) Timelike particles with energy
and angular momentum satisfying @xmath are bounded within the region
@xmath , with @xmath finite.

D. Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

In this case, @xmath is given by ( 3.57 ). Depending on the value of
@xmath one has black holes with two horizons (small @xmath ), with one
(extreme case) or a spacetime without black holes (large @xmath ).

For the black hole with two horizons, we have @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath . For the patch @xmath , the curvature singularity @xmath is
mapped into two symmetrical timelike lines and the horizon @xmath is
mapped into two mutual perpendicular straight lines at @xmath . For the
patch @xmath , the curvature singularity @xmath is mapped into a pair of
two null lines and the horizon @xmath is mapped into two mutual
perpendicular straight lines at @xmath . One has to join these two
different patches and then repeat them over in the vertical. The
resulting Penrose diagram is shown in figure 5.(a). For the extreme
black hole the two curvature singularities @xmath and @xmath are still
null and timelike lines (respectively), but the event and inner horizon
join together in a single horizon @xmath . The Penrose diagram is like
the one drawn in figure 5.(b). The spacetime with no black hole present
has a Penrose diagram like the one represented in figure 4.

Now, we study the geodesic motion. The behavior of geodesic motion along
the radial coordinate can be obtained from the following two equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.75)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . From equation ( 3.75 ) we conclude that whenever there
are turning points, they are given by @xmath and @xmath . The turning
points coincide with the horizons if and only if the energy and the
angular momentum are such that @xmath . From the graphic computation of
( 3.76 ) we conclude that: (i) Whenever @xmath null particles describe
stable circular orbits wherever they are located; (ii) Null geodesics
with @xmath and all timelike geodesics describe a bound orbit between
@xmath and @xmath .

For the extreme black hole the two horizons coincide so all null
geodesics and all timelike geodesics describe a stable circular orbit.

E. Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

For this range of @xmath there is the possibility of having black holes
with positive mass whenever @xmath (Table 1). We are going to analyze
the typical case @xmath . The @xmath function, ( 3.55 ), is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where from ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.50 ) one has that @xmath and @xmath if
@xmath and @xmath . @xmath is negative for @xmath and positive for
@xmath , where @xmath is the only zero of @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

The physical curvature singularity is located inside the horizon at
@xmath and is a spacelike line in the Penrose diagram. At @xmath there
is a null topological singularity. The Penrose diagram is sketched in
figure 6.

When we consider the solutions with negative mass we conclude that, for
@xmath , one has black holes with a Penrose diagram equal to the one
drawn in figure 6. For @xmath one has black holes with two horizons,
with one (extreme case) or a spacetime without black holes. For the
black hole with two horizons the Penrose diagram is similar to the one
shown in figure 5.(a) and the extreme black hole has a Penrose diagram
which is similar to the one drawn in figure 5.(b). For @xmath the
Penrose diagram is similar to figure 4. The only difference is the fact
that @xmath is now a topological singularity rather than a curvature
singularity.

Let us now consider the geodesic motion for positive mass. Analyzing (
3.64 ) and noting that from ( 3.48 ) the condition @xmath implies @xmath
we conclude that, for null geodesics, whenever there are turning points,
they are @xmath and @xmath . From ( 3.65 ) we conclude the following
about the null geodesic motion. (i) For @xmath there is no possible
motion. (ii) Null geodesics with @xmath are bounded between the
singularity @xmath and a maximum ( @xmath ) radial distance. The turning
point @xmath is exactly at the horizon @xmath if and only if the energy
and the angular momentum are such that @xmath .

The timelike geodesic motion is radically different. (i) For @xmath we
have timelike spiraling particles that start at @xmath and reach
infinity radial distances or timelike geodesics that start at @xmath and
spiral toward @xmath and then return back to infinity. (ii) For small
positive values of @xmath , timelike particles that are produced at
@xmath escape to @xmath and timelike particles coming in from infinity
are scattered at @xmath and spiral back to infinity. (iii) When we
increase the positive value of @xmath there is a critical value for
which an unstable circular orbit is allowed. (iv) And for positive
values of @xmath above the critical value, timelike particles are
allowed to be bounded between @xmath and a maximum ( @xmath ) radial
distance or to start at @xmath and escape to infinity.

F. Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

The range @xmath is not discussed here since the properties of the
typical case @xmath have been presented in [ 7 ] , where the
three-dimensional gravity theory of @xmath was obtained through
dimensional reduction from four-dimensional General Relativity with one
Killing vector field.

G. Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The case @xmath is also not discussed here since this case reduces to
the electrically charged BTZ black hole which has been studied in detail
in [ 49 , 242 ] .

##### 3.2.6 Hawking temperature of the charged black holes

To compute the Hawking temperature of the rotating black holes, one
starts by writing the metric in the canonical form ( 3.34 ). To proceed
it is necessary to first perform the coordinate transformation to
coordinates @xmath , @xmath which corotate with the black hole. In other
words, the angular coordinate @xmath must be changed to @xmath defined
by @xmath , where @xmath is the angular velocity of the black hole. With
this transformation the metric ( 3.34 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, one applies the Wick rotation @xmath in order to obtain the
euclidean counterpart of ( 3.79 ). Now, one studies the behavior of the
euclidean metric in the vicinity of the event horizon, @xmath . In this
vicinity, one can write @xmath and take the expansion @xmath . One
proceeds applying the variable change @xmath so that one has @xmath and
@xmath . With this procedure the euclidean metric in the vicinity of the
event horizon can be cast in the form @xmath . Applying a final variable
change, @xmath , the metric becomes @xmath . To avoid the canonical
singularity at the event horizon one must demand that the period of
@xmath is @xmath which implies @xmath . Finally, the Hawking temperature
is defined as @xmath .

Applying the above procedure, one finds for the Hawking temperature of
the rotating black holes the following expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.80)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.82)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in ( 3.80 ), @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 3.49 ), (
3.50 ) and ( 3.46 ), respectively.

The Hawking temperature of the static charged black holes can be
obtained from ( 3.80 )-( 3.82 ) by taking @xmath and @xmath [see ( 3.29
)] (see also [ 6 ] for the @xmath uncharged black hole).

#### 3.3 Magnetic Brans-Dicke dilaton solutions

The issue of spacetimes generated by point sources in three dimensional
(3D) Einstein theory has been object of many studies, as we reviewed in
section 1.2 .

The aim of this section is to find and study in detail the static and
rotating magnetic charged solutions generated by a magnetic point source
in the Einstein-Maxwell-Dilaton action of the Brans-Dicke that we are
studying in this chapter. Here, we impose that the only non-vanishing
component of the vector potential is @xmath . For the @xmath case, our
solution reduces to the spacetime generated by a magnetic point source
in 3D Einstein-Maxwell theory with @xmath , studied in [ 48 ] , [ 51 ] -
[ 53 ] . The @xmath case is equivalent to 4D general relativity with one
Killing vector analysed by Dias and Lemos [ 8 ] .

The plan of this section is the following. In Section 3.3.1 we set up
the action and the field equations. The static general solutions of the
field equations are found in section 3.3.2 and we analyse in detail the
general structure of the solutions. The angular momentum is added in
section 3.3.3 and we calculate the mass, angular momentum, and electric
charge of the solutions. In section 3.3.4 we give a physical
interpretation for the origin of the magnetic field source.

##### 3.3.1 Field equations of Brans-Dicke@xmathMaxwell theory

We are going to work with an action of the Brans-Dicke @xmath Maxwell
type in 3D written in the string frame as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of the 3D metric, @xmath is the
curvature scalar, @xmath is the Maxwell tensor, with @xmath being the
vector potential, @xmath is a scalar field called dilaton, @xmath is the
3D Brans-Dicke parameter and @xmath is the cosmological constant.
Varying this action with respect to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath one gets
the Einstein, Maxwell and dilaton equations, respectively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (3.84)
     @xmath      (3.85)
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Einstein tensor, @xmath represents the covariant
derivative and @xmath is the Maxwell energy-momentum tensor.

##### 3.3.2 General static solution. Analysis of its structure

###### 3.3.2.a Field equations

We want to consider now a spacetime which is both static and
rotationally symmetric, implying the existence of a timelike Killing
vector @xmath and a spacelike Killing vector @xmath . We will start
working with the following ansatz for the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameter @xmath is, as we shall see, an appropriate constant
proportional to the cosmological constant @xmath . It is introduced in
order to have metric components with dimensionless units and an
asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetime. The motivation for this choice
for the metric gauge [ @xmath and @xmath ] instead of the usual
“Schwarzschild” gauge [ @xmath and @xmath ] comes from the fact that we
are looking for magnetic solutions. Indeed, let us first remember that
the Schwarzschild gauge is usually an appropriate choice when we are
interested on electric solutions. Now, we focus on the well known fact
that the electric field is associated with the time component, @xmath ,
of the vector potential while the magnetic field is associated with the
angular component @xmath . From the above facts, one can expect that a
magnetic solution can be written in a metric gauge in which the
components @xmath and @xmath interchange their roles relatively to those
present in the “Schwarzschild” gauge used to describe electric
solutions. This choice will reveal to be a good one to find solutions
since the dilaton and graviton will decouple from each other on the
fields equations ( 3.84 ) and ( 3.86 ). However, as we will see, for
some values of the Brans-Dicke parameter @xmath it is not the good
coordinate system to interpret the solutions.

We now assume that the only non-vanishing components of the vector
potential are @xmath and @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that the non-vanishing components of the anti-symmetric
Maxwell tensor are @xmath and @xmath . Use of metric ( 3.87 ) and
equation ( 3.84 ) yields the following set of equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
     @xmath      (3.90)
     @xmath      (3.91)
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes a derivative with respect to @xmath . In addition,
replacing the metric ( 3.87 ) into equations ( 3.85 ) and ( 3.86 )
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### 3.3.2.b The general static solution. Causal structure

Equations ( 3.89 )-( 3.94 ) are valid for a static and rotationally
symmetric spacetime. One sees that equation ( 3.92 ) implies that the
electric and magnetic fields cannot be simultaneously non-zero, i.e.,
there is no static dyonic solution. In this work we will consider the
magnetically charged case alone ( @xmath ). For purely electrically
charged solutions of the theory see [ 71 ] . So, assuming vanishing
electric field, one has from Maxwell equation ( 3.93 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integration constant which measures the intensity of
the magnetic field source. To proceed we shall first consider the case
@xmath . Adding equations ( 3.90 ) and ( 3.91 ) yields @xmath , and so
the dilaton field is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a generic constant which will be appropriately defined
below in equation ( 3.101 ). The 1-form vector potential @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Replacing solutions ( 3.95 )-( 3.97 ) into equations ( 3.89 )-( 3.94 )
allows us to find the @xmath function for @xmath ; @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.98)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.99)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant of integration related with the mass of the
solutions, as will be shown, and @xmath . For @xmath @xmath is defined
as (we call your attention to a typo in [ 72 ] in this definition)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath we set @xmath . For @xmath equations ( 3.89 ) and ( 3.90 )
imply @xmath .

Now, we consider the case @xmath . From equations ( 3.89 )-( 3.94 ) it
follows that @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are constants of
integration, and that the cosmological constant and magnetic source are
both zero, @xmath . So, for @xmath the metric gives simply the 3D
Minkowski spacetime and the dilaton is constant, as occurred in the
uncharged case [ 69 , 70 ] .

Now, we must analyze carefully the radial dependence of the @xmath
function defined in equations ( 3.98 )-( 3.100 ) which, recall, is
related to the metric components through the relations @xmath and @xmath
. The shape of the @xmath function depends on the values of the
Brans-Dicke parameter @xmath and on the values of the parameter @xmath
(where @xmath is related to the mass of the solution as we shall see in
section 3.3.3.b ). Nevertheless, we can group the values of @xmath and
@xmath into a small number of cases for which the @xmath function has
the same behavior. The general shape of the @xmath function for these
cases is drawn in the Appendix. Generally, the @xmath function can take
positive or negative values depending on the value of the coordinate
@xmath . However, when @xmath is negative, the metric components @xmath
and @xmath become simultaneously negative and this leads to an apparent
change of signature from @xmath to @xmath . This strongly indicates that
we are using an incorrect extension and that we should choose a
different continuation to describe the region where the change of
signature occurs [ 51 , 231 ] . Moreover, analysing the null and
timelike geodesic motion we conclude that null and timelike particles
can never pass through the zero of @xmath , @xmath (say), from the
region where @xmath is positive into the region where @xmath is
negative. This suggests that one can introduce a new coordinate system
in order to obtain a spacetime which is geodesically complete for the
region where both @xmath and @xmath are positive [ 51 , 231 ] . That is
our next step. Then, in section 3.3.2.c , we will check the completeness
of the spacetimes. The Brans-Dicke theories can be classified into seven
different cases that we display and study below.

(i) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

The shape of the @xmath function is drawn in Fig. 1(a). We see that for
@xmath (where @xmath is the zero of @xmath ) @xmath and @xmath become
simultaneously negative and this leads to an apparent change of
signature. One can however introduce a new radial coordinate @xmath so
that the spacetime is geodesically complete for the region where both
@xmath and @xmath are positive,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With this coordinate transformation, the spacetime generated by the
static magnetic point source is finally given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and function @xmath , which is always positive except at
@xmath where it is zero, is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Along this section 3.3.2.b , in cases (i) and (iii) we will use the
definition @xmath in order to shorten the formulas. This spacetime has
no horizons and so there are no magnetic black hole solutions, only
magnetic point sources. In three dimensions, the presence of a curvature
singularity is revealed by the scalar @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This scalar does not diverge for any value of @xmath (if @xmath ).
Therefore, spacetime ( 3.103 ) has no curvature singularities. However,
it has a conic geometry with a conical singularity at @xmath . In fact,
in the vicinity of @xmath , metric ( 3.103 ) is written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So, there is indeed a conical singularity at @xmath since as the radius
@xmath tends to zero, the limit of the ratio “circumference/radius” is
not @xmath . The period of coordinate @xmath associated with this
conical singularity is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From ( 3.106 )-( 3.108 ) one concludes that in the vicinity of the
origin, metric ( 3.103 ) describes a spacetime which is locally flat but
has a conical singularity with an angle deficit @xmath .

Before closing this case, one should mention the particular @xmath case
of Brans-Dicke theory since this theory is related (through dimensional
reduction) to 4D General Relativity with one Killing vector studied in [
8 ] .

(ii) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The Brans-Dicke theory defined by @xmath reduces to the spacetime
generated by a static magnetic point source in 3D Einstein-Maxwell
theory with @xmath studied in detail in [ 48 ] , [ 51 ] - [ 53 ] . The
behavior of this spacetime is quite similar to those described in case
(i) . It has a conical singularity at the origin and no horizons.

(iii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

For this range of the Brans-Dicke parameter we have to consider
separately the case (1) @xmath and (2) @xmath , where @xmath is the mass
parameter.

(1) If @xmath the shape of the @xmath function is drawn in Fig. 1(b).
Both @xmath and @xmath are always positive (except at @xmath ) and there
is no apparent change of signature. Hence, for this range of parameters,
the spacetime is correctly described by equations ( 3.87 ) and ( 3.98 ).
There are no horizons and so no magnetic black holes, but at @xmath the
scalar @xmath diverges (in equation ( 3.105 ) put @xmath and replace
@xmath by @xmath ). Therefore, at @xmath one has the presence of a naked
curvature singularity.

(2) If @xmath the shape of the @xmath function defined in ( 3.98 ) is
sketched in Fig. 1(c). There occurs an apparent change of signature for
@xmath . Proceeding exactly as we did in case (i) one can however
introduce the new radial coordinate @xmath defined in ( 3.102 ) and
obtain the geodesically complete spacetime described by ( 3.103 ) and (
3.104 ) (where now @xmath ). This spacetime has no horizons and the
scalar @xmath given by ( 3.105 ) does not diverge for any value of
@xmath and so no curvature singularities are present. The spacetime has
a conical singularity at @xmath corresponding to an angle deficit @xmath
, where @xmath is defined in ( 3.107 ).

(iv) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The shape of the @xmath function is drawn in Fig. 2(a). There is an
apparent change of signature for @xmath , where @xmath is the zero of
@xmath . We can however introduce a new coordinate system that will
allow us to conclude that the spacetime is complete for @xmath . First,
we introduce the radial coordinate @xmath . With this new coordinate
@xmath has a shape similar to the one shown in Fig. 1(a). Finally, we
set a second coordinate transformation given by @xmath , where @xmath is
the zero of @xmath . Use of these coordinate transformations, together
with equations ( 3.87 ) and ( 3.99 ), allows us to write the spacetime
generated by the static magnetic point source as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the function @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This function @xmath is always positive except at @xmath where it is
zero. Hence, the spacetime described by equation ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.110 )
has no horizon. Along this section 3.3.2.b , in cases (iv) - (vii) we
will use the definition @xmath in order to shorten the formulas.

The scalar @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.111)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This scalar diverges for @xmath and so there is a curvature singularity
at @xmath . Besides, the spacetime described by ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.110 )
has a conical singularity at @xmath with coordinate @xmath having a
period defined in equation ( 3.108 ),

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.112)
  -- -- -- ---------

So, near the origin, metric ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.110 ) describe a spacetime
which is locally flat but has a conical singularity at @xmath with an
angle deficit @xmath .

(v) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

For this range of the Brans-Dicke parameter we have again to consider
separately the case (1) @xmath and (2) @xmath , where @xmath is the mass
parameter.

(1) If @xmath the shape of the @xmath function defined in ( 3.98 ) is
similar to the one of case (iv) and sketched in Fig. 2(a). So,
proceeding as in case (iv) , we find that the spacetime generated by the
static magnetic point source is given by ( 3.109 ) with function @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is always positive except at @xmath where it is zero. Hence, the
spacetime described by equations ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.113 ) has no
horizons.

The scalar @xmath is given by ( 3.105 ) as long as we replace function
@xmath by @xmath . There is a curvature singularity at @xmath .

Near the origin, equations ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.113 ) describe a spacetime
which is locally flat but has a conical singularity at @xmath with an
angle deficit @xmath , with @xmath defined in equation ( 3.108 ),

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.114)
  -- -- -- ---------

(2) If @xmath the @xmath function can have a shape similar to the one
sketched in Fig. 2(b) or similar to Fig. 2(c), depending on the values
of the range. We will not proceed further with the study of this case
since it has a rather exotic spacetime structure.

(vi) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The shape of the @xmath function defined in ( 3.100 ) is similar to the
one of case (iv) and sketched in Fig. 2(a). So, proceeding as in case
(iv) , we conclude that the spacetime generated by the static magnetic
point source is given by ( 3.109 ) with function @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is always positive except at @xmath where it is zero. Hence, the
spacetime described by equations ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.115 ) has no
horizons.

The scalar @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a curvature singularity at @xmath .

Near the origin, equations ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.115 ) describe a spacetime
which is locally flat but has a conical singularity at @xmath with an
angle deficit @xmath , with @xmath defined in equation ( 3.108 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(vii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

The shape of the @xmath function is sketched in Fig. 2(a) and is similar
to the one of case (iv) . So, proceeding as in case (iv) , we find that
the spacetime generated by the static magnetic point source is given by
( 3.109 ) with function @xmath defined by ( 3.113 ). There are no
horizons and there is no curvature singularity [the scalar @xmath is
given by ( 3.105 ) if we replace function @xmath by @xmath ]. The
spacetime has a conical singularity at @xmath corresponding to an angle
deficit @xmath , where @xmath is defined in ( 3.114 ).

###### 3.3.2.c Geodesic structure

We want to confirm that the spacetimes described by ( 3.87 ), ( 3.103 )
and ( 3.109 ) are both null and timelike geodesically complete. The
equations governing the geodesics can be derived from the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an affine parameter along the geodesic which, for a
timelike geodesic, can be identified with the proper time of the
particle along the geodesic. For a null geodesic one has @xmath and for
a timelike geodesic @xmath . From the Euler-Lagrange equations one gets
that the generalized momentums associated with the time coordinate and
angular coordinate are constants: @xmath and @xmath . The constant
@xmath is related to the timelike Killing vector @xmath which reflects
the time translation invariance of the metric, while the constant @xmath
is associated to the spacelike Killing vector @xmath which reflects the
invariance of the metric under rotation. Note that since the spacetime
is not asymptotically flat, the constants @xmath and @xmath cannot be
interpreted as the energy and angular momentum at infinity.

From the metric we can derive the radial geodesic,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next, we analyse this geodesic equation for each of the seven cases
defined in the last section. Cases (i) , (ii) and (iii) have identical
geodesic structure, and cases (iv) - (vii) also.

(i) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

Using the two useful relations @xmath and @xmath , we can write equation
( 3.119 ) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Noticing that @xmath is always positive for @xmath and zero for @xmath ,
and that @xmath we conclude the following about the null geodesic motion
( @xmath ). The first term in ( 3.120 ) is positive (except at @xmath
where it vanishes), while the second term is always negative. We can
then conclude that spiraling ( @xmath ) null particles coming in from an
arbitrary point are scattered at the turning point @xmath and spiral
back to infinity. If the angular momentum L of the null particle is zero
it hits the origin (where there is a conical singularity) with vanishing
velocity.

Now we analyze the timelike geodesics ( @xmath ). Timelike geodesic
motion is possible only if the energy of the particle satisfies @xmath .
In this case, spiraling timelike particles are bounded between two
turning points that satisfy @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . When the
timelike particle has no angular momentum ( @xmath ) there is a turning
point located exactly at @xmath and it hits the origin @xmath . Hence,
we confirm that the spacetime described by equation ( 3.103 ) is both
timelike and null geodesically complete.

(ii) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The geodesic structure of the spacetime generated by a static magnetic
point source in 3D Einstein-Maxwell theory with @xmath has been studied
in detail in [ 53 ] . The behavior of this geodesic structure is quite
similar to the one described in case (i) . In particular, the spacetime
is both timelike and null geodesically complete.

(iii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

For this range of the Brans-Dicke parameter we have to consider
separately the case (1) @xmath and (2) @xmath , where @xmath is the mass
parameter.

(1) If @xmath the motion of null and timelike geodesics is correctly
described by equation ( 3.120 ) if we replace @xmath by @xmath and put
@xmath . Hence, the null and timelike geodesic motion has the same
feature as the one described in the above case (i) . In the above
statements we just have to replace @xmath by @xmath , put @xmath and
remember that at the origin there is now a naked curvature singularity
rather than a conical singularity.

(2) If @xmath the motion of null and timelike geodesics is exactly
described by ( 3.120 ) and the statements presented in case (i) apply
directly to this case.

(iv), (v), (vi), (vii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

In order to study the geodesic motion of spacetime described by
equations ( 3.109 ), one first notices that @xmath and @xmath . Hence we
can write equation ( 3.119 ) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One concludes that the geodesic motion of null and timelike particles
has the same feature as the one described in case (i) after ( 3.120 ) if
in the statements we replace @xmath by @xmath . The only difference is
that on @xmath there is now a curvature singularity for cases (iv)
@xmath , (v) @xmath and (vi) @xmath . In case (v) @xmath , if @xmath (as
we saw in last section) the spacetime has an exotic structure and so we
do not study it.

So, we confirm that the spacetimes described by equations ( 3.109 ) are
also both timelike and null geodesically complete.

##### 3.3.3 The general rotating solution

###### 3.3.3.a The generating technique

Now, we want to endow our spacetime solution with a global rotation,
i.e., we want to add angular momentum to the spacetime. In order to do
so we perform the following rotation boost in the @xmath - @xmath plane
(see e.g. [ 70 , 7 , 232 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.122)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant parameters.

(i) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

Use of equation ( 3.122 ) and ( 3.103 ) gives the gravitational field
generated by the rotating magnetic source

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined in ( 3.104 ).

The 1-form electromagnetic vector potential, @xmath , of the rotating
solution is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(ii) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The spacetime generated by a rotating magnetic point source in 3D
Einstein-Maxwell theory with @xmath has been obtained and studied in
detail in [ 53 ] .

(iii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

Proceeding exactly as in case (i) , we conclude that the gravitational
and electromagnetic fields generated by the rotating magnetic source are
also described by equations ( 3.123 )-( 3.125 ).

If @xmath we have to set @xmath in equations ( 3.123 ) and ( 3.125 ).

(iv) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

Use of equations ( 3.122 ) and ( 3.109 ) yields the gravitational field
generated by the rotating magnetic source

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined in ( 3.110 ).

The 1-form vector potential is also given by ( 3.124 ) but now one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(v) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

If @xmath , the gravitational and electromagnetic fields generated by
the rotating magnetic source are described by equations ( 3.126 ) and (
3.127 ), with @xmath defined in ( 3.113 ).

(vi) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The gravitational and electromagnetic fields generated by the rotating
magnetic source are described by equations ( 3.126 ) and ( 3.127 ), with
@xmath defined in ( 3.115 ).

(vii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

The gravitational and electromagnetic fields generated by the rotating
magnetic source are described by equations ( 3.126 ) and ( 3.127 ), with
@xmath defined in ( 3.113 ).

In equations ( 3.123 ), ( 3.124 ) and ( 3.126 ) we choose @xmath because
in this way when the angular momentum vanishes ( @xmath ) we have @xmath
and so we recover the static solution.

Solutions ( 3.123 )-( 3.127 ) represent magnetically charged stationary
spacetimes and also solve ( 3.83 ). Analyzing the Einstein-Rosen bridge
of the static solution one concludes that spacetime is not simply
connected which implies that the first Betti number of the manifold is
one, i.e., closed curves encircling the horizon cannot be shrunk to a
point. So, transformations ( 3.122 ) generate a new metric because they
are not permitted global coordinate transformations [ 233 ] .
Transformations ( 3.122 ) can be done locally, but not globally.
Therefore metrics ( 3.103 ), ( 3.109 ) and ( 3.123 )-( 3.127 ) can be
locally mapped into each other but not globally, and such they are
distinct.

###### 3.3.3.b Mass, angular momentum and charge of the solutions

As we shall see the spacetime solutions describing the cases (i) @xmath
, (ii) @xmath and (iii) @xmath are asymptotically anti-de Sitter. This
fact allows us to calculate the mass, angular momentum and the electric
charge of the static and rotating solutions. To obtain these quantities
we apply the formalism of Regge and Teitelboim [ 314 ] .

(i) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

We first write ( 3.123 ) in the canonical form involving the lapse
function @xmath and the shift function @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then, the action can be
written in the Hamiltonian form as a function of the energy constraint
@xmath , momentum constraint @xmath and Gauss constraint @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.129)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath (with @xmath being the momentum conjugate to
@xmath ), @xmath and @xmath are the electric and magnetic fields and
@xmath is a boundary term. The factor @xmath [defined in ( 3.107 )]
comes from the fact that, due to the angle deficit, the integration over
@xmath is between @xmath and @xmath . Upon varying the action with
respect to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath one picks up
additional surface terms. Indeed,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In order that the Hamilton’s equations are satisfied, the boundary term
@xmath has to be adjusted so that it cancels the above additional
surface terms. More specifically one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where one identifies @xmath as the mass, @xmath as the angular momentum
and @xmath as the electric charge since they are the terms conjugate to
the asymptotic values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

To determine the mass, the angular momentum and the electric charge of
the solutions one must take the spacetime that we have obtained and
subtract the background reference spacetime contribution, i.e., we
choose the energy zero point in such a way that the mass, angular
momentum and charge vanish when the matter is not present.

Now, note that for @xmath (and @xmath ), spacetime ( 3.123 ) has an
asymptotic metric given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath so, it is asymptotically an anti-de Sitter spacetime. For
@xmath (and @xmath ) the anti-de Sitter spacetime is also the background
reference spacetime, since the metric ( 3.123 ) reduces to ( 3.132 ) if
the matter is not present ( @xmath and @xmath ).

Taking the subtraction of the background reference spacetime into
account and noting that @xmath and that @xmath we have that the mass,
angular momentum and electric charge are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.133)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then, we finally have that the mass and angular momentum are (after
taking the asymptotic limit, @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.134)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.135)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are terms proportional to the magnetic source
@xmath that diverge as @xmath . The presence of these kind of
divergences in the mass and angular momentum is a usual feature present
in charged solutions. They can be found for example in the electrically
charged point source solution [ 23 ] , in the electric counterpart of
the BTZ black hole [ 49 ] , in the pure electric black holes of 3D
Brans-Dicke action [ 71 ] and in the magnetic counterpart of the BTZ
solution [ 53 ] . Following [ 23 , 49 ] , the divergences on the mass
can be treated as follows. One considers a boundary of large radius
@xmath involving the system. Then, one sums and subtracts @xmath to (
3.134 ) so that the mass ( 3.134 ) is now written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The term between brackets in ( 3.136 ) vanishes when @xmath . Then
@xmath is the energy within the radius @xmath . The difference between
@xmath and @xmath is @xmath which is interpreted as the electromagnetic
energy outside @xmath apart from an infinite constant which is absorbed
in @xmath . The sum ( 3.137 ) is then independent of @xmath , finite and
equal to the total mass. In practice the treatment of the mass
divergence amounts to forgetting about @xmath and take as zero the
asymptotic limit: @xmath .

To handle the angular momentum divergence, one first notices that the
asymptotic limit of the angular momentum per unit mass @xmath is either
zero or one, so the angular momentum diverges at a rate slower or equal
to the rate of the mass divergence. The divergence on the angular
momentum can then be treated in a similar way as the mass divergence.
So, one can again consider a boundary of large radius @xmath involving
the system. Following the procedure applied for the mass divergence one
concludes that the divergent term @xmath can be interpreted as the
electromagnetic angular momentum outside @xmath up to an infinite
constant that is absorbed in @xmath .

Hence, in practice the treatment of both the mass and angular
divergences amounts to forgetting about @xmath and take as zero the
asymptotic limits : @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.134 ) and ( 3.135 ).

Now, we calculate the electric charge of the solutions. To determine the
electric field we must consider the projections of the Maxwell field on
spatial hypersurfaces. The normal to such hypersurfaces is @xmath and
the electric field is given by @xmath . Then, from ( 3.133 ), the
electric charge is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the electric charge is proportional to @xmath . In section
3.3.4 we will propose a physical interpretation for the origin of the
magnetic field source and discuss the result obtained in ( 3.138 ).

The mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the static solutions
can be obtained by putting @xmath and @xmath on the above expressions
[see ( 3.122 )].

(ii) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the spacetime
generated by a magnetic point source in 3D Einstein-Maxwell theory with
@xmath have been calculated in [ 53 ] . Both the static and rotating
solutions have negative mass and there is an upper bound for the
intensity of the magnetic source and for the value of the angular
momentum.

(iii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

The mass, angular momentum and electric charge of the @xmath solutions
are also given by ( 3.134 ), ( 3.135 ) and ( 3.138 ), respectively. If
@xmath the factor @xmath is defined in ( 3.107 ) and if @xmath one has
@xmath .

For @xmath [cases (iv) - (vii) ], the asymptotic and background
reference spacetimes have a very peculiar form. In particular, they are
not an anti-de Sitter spacetime. Therefore, there are no conserved
quantities for these solutions.

###### 3.3.3.c The rotating magnetic solution in final form

For cases (i) @xmath , (ii) @xmath and (iii) @xmath we may cast the
metric in terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

(i) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

Use of ( 3.134 ) and ( 3.135 ) allows us to solve a quadratic equation
for @xmath and @xmath . It gives two distinct sets of solutions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have defined a rotating parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When we take @xmath (which implies @xmath ), ( 3.139 ) gives @xmath and
@xmath while ( 3.140 ) gives the nonphysical solution @xmath and @xmath
which does not reduce to the static original metric. Therefore we will
study the solutions found from ( 3.139 ).

For @xmath (and @xmath ), the condition that @xmath remains real imposes
a restriction on the allowed values of the angular momentum

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The parameter @xmath ranges between @xmath . The condition @xmath fixes
the value of @xmath as a function of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.143)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The gravitational field ( 3.123 ) generated by the rotating point source
may now be cast in the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath and the electromagnetic field generated by the rotating
point source can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath defined in ( 3.125 ).

The static solution can be obtained by putting @xmath (and thus @xmath
and @xmath ) on the above expression [see ( 3.122 )].

(ii) Brans-Dicke theory with @xmath

The spacetime generated by a rotating magnetic point source in 3D
Einstein-Maxwell theory with @xmath is written as a function of its
hairs in [ 53 ] .

(iii) Brans-Dicke theories with @xmath

For this range of @xmath , the gravitational and electromagnetic fields
generated by a rotating magnetic point source are also given by (
LABEL:Met_MJQ_MagBD ) and ( 3.146 ). If @xmath the factor @xmath is
defined in ( 3.144 ) and if @xmath one has @xmath .

###### 3.3.3.d Geodesic structure

The geodesic structure of the rotating spacetime is similar to the
static spacetime (see section 3.3.2.c ), although there are now direct
(corotating with @xmath ) and retrograde (counter-rotating with @xmath )
orbits. The most important result that spacetime is geodesically
complete still holds for the stationary spacetime.

##### 3.3.4 Physical interpretation of the magnetic source

When we look back to the electric charge given in ( 3.138 ), we see that
it is zero when @xmath , i.e., when the angular momentum @xmath of the
spacetime vanishes. This is expected since in the static solution we
have imposed that the electric field is zero ( @xmath is the only
non-null component of the Maxwell tensor).

Still missing is a physical interpretation for the origin of the
magnetic field source. The magnetic field source is not a Nielson-Oleson
vortex solution since we are working with the Maxwell theory and not
with an Abelian-Higgs model. We might then think that the magnetic field
is produced by a Dirac point-like monopole. However, this is not also
the case since a Dirac monopole with strength @xmath appears when one
breaks the Bianchi identity [ 235 ] , yielding @xmath (where @xmath is
the dual of the Maxwell field strength), whereas in this work we have
that @xmath . Indeed, we are clearly dealing with the Maxwell theory
which satisfies Maxwell equations and the Bianchi identity

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.147)
     @xmath      (3.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively. In ( 3.147 ) we have made use of the fact that the general
relativistic current density is @xmath times the special relativistic
current density @xmath .

We then propose that the magnetic field source can be interpreted as
composed by a system of two symmetric and superposed electric charges
(each with strength @xmath ). One of the electric charges is at rest
with positive charge (say), and the other is spinning with an angular
velocity @xmath and negative electric charge. Clearly, this system
produces no electric field since the total electric charge is zero and
the magnetic field is produced by the angular electric current. To
confirm our interpretation, we go back to ( 3.147 ). In our solution,
the only non-vanishing component of the Maxwell field is @xmath which
implies that only @xmath is not zero. According to our interpretation
one has @xmath , which one inserts in ( 3.147 ). Finally, integrating
over @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So, the magnetic source strength, @xmath , can be interpreted as an
electric charge times its spinning velocity.

Looking again to the electric charge given in ( 3.138 ), one sees that
after applying the rotation boost in the @xmath - @xmath plane to endow
the initial static spacetime with angular momentum, there appears a net
electric charge. This result was already expected since now, besides the
scalar magnetic field ( @xmath ), there is also an electric field (
@xmath ) [see ( 3.146 )]. A physical interpretation for the appearance
of the net electric charge is now needed. To do so, we return to the
static spacetime. In this static spacetime there is a static positive
charge and a spinning negative charge of equal strength at the center.
The net charge is then zero. Therefore, an observer at rest ( @xmath )
sees a density of positive charges at rest which is equal to the density
of negative charges that are spinning. Now, we perform a local
rotational boost @xmath and @xmath to an observer ( @xmath ) in the
static spacetime, so that @xmath is moving relatively to @xmath . This
means that @xmath sees a different charge density since a density is a
charge over an area and this area suffers a Lorentz contraction in the
direction of the boost. Hence, the two sets of charge distributions that
had symmetric charge densities in the frame @xmath will not have charge
densities with equal magnitude in the frame @xmath . Consequently, the
charge densities will not cancel each other in the frame @xmath and a
net electric charge appears. This was done locally. When we turn into
the global rotational Lorentz boost of ( 3.122 ) this interpretation
still holds. The local analysis above is similar to the one that occurs
when one has a copper wire with an electric current and we apply a
translation Lorentz boost to the wire: first, there is only a magnetic
field but, after the Lorentz boost, one also has an electric field. The
difference is that in the present situation the Lorentz boost is a
rotational one and not a translational one.

#### 3.4 Summary and discussion

We have added the Maxwell action to the action of a generalized 3D
dilaton gravity specified by the Brans-Dicke parameter @xmath introduced
in [ 69 , 70 ] and discussed in section 3.1 . We have concluded that for
the static spacetime the electric and magnetic fields cannot be
simultaneously non-zero, i.e. there is no static dyonic solution. Notice
that, in oppose to what occurs in 4-dimensions where the the Maxwell
tensor and its dual are 2-forms, in 3-dimensions the Maxwell tensor is
still a 2-form, but its dual is a 1-form (in practice, the Maxwell
tensor has only three independent components: two for the electric
vector field, and one for the scalar magnetic field). As a consequence,
the magnetic solutions are radically different from the electric
solutions in 3-dimensions.

In section 3.2 we have considered the electrically charged case alone.
We have found the static and rotating black hole solutions of this
theory. It contains eight different cases that appear naturally from the
solutions. For @xmath one gets a theory related (through dimensional
reduction) to electrically charged four dimensional AdS general
relativity with one Killing vector [ 7 ] , and for @xmath one obtains
electrically charged three dimensional general relativity [ 48 , 49 ] .
For @xmath the ADM mass and angular momentum of the solutions are
finite, well-behaved and equal to the ADM masses of the uncharged
solutions. However, for @xmath the ADM mass and angular momentum of the
solutions have terms proportional to the charge that diverge at the
asymptotic limit, as frequently occurs in the 3-dimensional theories
including a Maxwell field (see, e.g. [ 23 , 49 , 53 , 71 , 55 ] ). We
have shown how to treat this problem. For each range of @xmath we have
determined what conditions must be imposed on the ADM hairs of the
solutions in order to be possible the existence of black holes. Our
results show that there is no upper bound on the electric charge. The
causal and geodesic structure of the charged solutions has been analyzed
in detail.

In section 3.3 we have found geodesically complete spacetimes generated
by static and rotating magnetic point sources. These spacetimes are
horizonless and many of them have a conical singularity at the origin.
These features are common in spacetimes generated by point sources in 3D
gravity theories [ 18 ] - [ 31 ] . The static solution generates a
scalar magnetic field while the rotating solution produces, in addition,
a radial electric field. The source for the magnetic field can be
interpreted as composed by a system of two symmetric and superposed
electric charges. One of the electric charges is at rest and the other
is spinning. This system produces no electric field since the total
electric charge is zero and the scalar magnetic field is produced by the
angular electric current. When we apply a rotational Lorentz boost to
add angular momentum to the spacetime, there appears a net electric
charge and a radial electric field. The @xmath solution reduces to the
magnetic counterpart of the BTZ solution studied in chapter 2 . The
solutions corresponding to the theories described by a Brans-Dicke
parameter that belongs to the range @xmath or @xmath have a behavior
quite similar to the magnetic counterpart of the BTZ solution. For this
range of the Brans-Dicke parameter, the solutions are asymptotically
anti-de Sitter. This allowed us to calculate the mass, angular momentum
and charge of the solutions, and once again in we found divergencies at
spatial infinity.

The relation between spacetimes generated by sources in 3D and
cylindrically symmetric 4D solutions has been noticed by many authors
(see e.g. [ 20 , 16 , 50 , 6 , 8 ] ). The @xmath solutions (electric and
magnetic) considered in this chapter are the 3D counterparts of the 4D
cylindrical or toroidal solutions studied in [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] , and that
will be discussed in chapter 5 . Indeed, the dimensional reduction of 4D
general relativity with one Killing vector yields the @xmath case of
Brans-Dicke theory.

### Chapter 4 Pair creation of black holes in three dimensions

] ]

In chapters 9 and 11 we will analyze in detail the pair creation process
of 4-dimensional black holes and of higher dimensional black holes,
respectively. The process of quantum pair creation of black holes in an
external field in a 3-dimensional background has not been analyzed yet,
as far as we know. We will not do it here. However, we will try to
understand the difficulties associated with this issue, and we will also
propose a possible background in which the pair creation process in
3-dimensions might be analyzed.

When we want to analyze analytically the gravitational pair creation
process, our first task is to ask if there is an exact solution of
Einstein gravity that represents a pair of accelerated black holes. This
solution is important for the analysis of the process since it describes
the subsequent motion of the pair, after its creation. In 4-dimensions
and higher dimensions these solutions exist (see, respectively, chapters
6 and 10 ), however in 3-dimensions these solutions are not known. In
order to understand this lack recall that in 3-dimensional Einstein
gravity the only black hole that exists is the BTZ one, and it lives in
an AdS background (see chapter 2 ). So, black hole pair creation in
3-dimensional Einstein gravity, if possible, must occur in an AdS
background. However, from the studies on 4-dimensional spacetimes (see
chapter 9 ), we know that it is much more difficult in a sense to create
a pair in an AdS background than in a dS or flat background. Indeed, the
AdS background is attractive, i.e., it furnishes a cosmological constant
acceleration that pulls in the particles. Moreover, as we saw in detail
in chapter 2 , the BTZ black hole has constant curvature and thus its
construction is topological, i.e., it is obtained from the pure @xmath
solution through identifications along an isometry of the @xmath
spacetime. Therefore, a possible exact solution describing an
accelerating pair of BTZ black holes would probably have to be also
constructed using a similar topological procedure.

Now, in what concerns the acceleration source of the black holes, we
could in principle manage a way to overcome the repulsive AdS
acceleration. Using again our knowledge from pair creation in
4-dimensions, we could try an external source such as (i) an
electromagnetic field, (ii) a string with its tension, or (iii) the
3-dimensional analogue of a domain wall with its repulsive gravitational
field. In what concerns the hypothesis (i), even in 4-dimensions, there
is no AdS exact solution that describes a pair of AdS black holes
accelerated by an external Lorentz force. Thus, we expect also serious
difficulties when we try to find it in 3-dimensions. The hypothesis (ii)
cannot be discarded since there are string solutions in 3-dimensions.
Hypothesis (iii) is discarded since the analogue of a domain wall does
not exist in 3-dimensions. The reason is simple: in 3-dimensional
Einstein gravity a matter distribution produces no gravitational field.

Another possibility, is to try to analyze the black hole pair creation
process in the context of an effective 3-dimensional gravity theory,
e.g., in the dilaton Brans-Dicke theory discussed in chapter 3 . In
particular, the case with @xmath (where @xmath is the Brans-Dicke
parameter) might be interesting for our purposes. Indeed, recall that
this @xmath case can be obtained through dimensional reduction from
4-dimensional AdS general relativity with one Killing vector [ 6 , 7 , 8
] . This is, the cylindrical or toroidal 4-dimensional black hole found
in [ 6 ] yields, through dimensional reduction, the @xmath black hole.
Now, in section 7.4.2 we study the planar, cylindrical or toroidal AdS
C-metric [ 86 ] , which describes a pair of accelerated 4-dimensional
black holes with planar symmetry (i.e., with planar, cylindrical or
toroidal topology). The solution with planar black holes, or black
walls, is the most useful for our present discussion. Indeed, it is
possible that the dimensional reduction of this planar AdS C-metric
yields a 3-dimensional exact solution that describes a pair of
accelerated @xmath Brans-Dicke black strings (this is sketched in Fig.
4.1 ). We will not do this here. We leave it for future work. In chapter
9 we will analyze in detail the pair creation process of 4-dimensional
black holes, and in chapter 11 we will study the pair creation process
of higher dimensional black holes.

We have been discussing pair creation of black holes in 3-dimensions,
and gave reasons for the difficulty in studying the problem. One could
ask if there are works discussing particle pair creation in
3-dimensions. As far as we know, the literarture is also void in this
subject. Some of the remarks gathered for the difficulties in black hole
pair creation also apply here. Although point particle solutions in flat
3-dimensional general relativity exist, perhaps there are still
difficulties in finding exact solutions with an accelerating field where
the point particles could be boxed in. We would like to mention that
2-dimensional pair creation of particles has not been totally neglected.
Indeed, Brown and Teitelboim have discussed this problem [ 243 ] .

## Part II Black holes and pair creation in 4 dimensions

### Chapter 5 Black holes in a generalized @xmath background

] ] \minitoc

In this chapter we will briefly describe the main features of the black
hole solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell theory in a background with a
generalized cosmological constant @xmath . We stress that this
description is by no way a complete one. We will only focus on those
properties that will be needed to better understand the processes that
will be discussed in later chapters. Mainly, we shall discuss the range
of parameters for which one has black holes, we will analyze the causal
structure of the solutions, and we will briefly discuss the main
difference between the geodesic motion in an anti-de Sitter (AdS), in a
flat, and in a de Sitter (dS) background.

In sections 5.1.1 , 5.2 and 5.3 we will describe black holes with
spherical topology in an AdS, flat and dS background, respectively.
Their properties will be useful for us in chapter 6 , where we will
analyze solutions that describe a pair of accelerated black holes with
spherical topology in an AdS, flat and dS background. Then, in chapter 9
we will discuss the pair creation process of these black holes in an
external field. Moreover, in chapter 7 we will see that the solutions
studied in sections 5.1.3 , 5.2 and 5.3 of this chapter allows us to
generate the so called Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai
solutions. Subsection 5.1.2.b discusses work developed by us [ 8 ] . We
thus think that this introductory chapter is well justified.

In what concerns the causal structure, the main difference between the
Carter-Penrose diagrams of the @xmath (AdS), of the @xmath (flat), and
of the @xmath (dS) is at the level of the line that represents infinity
( @xmath ). In the AdS case the infinity is a timelike line (vertical
line in the diagrams), in the flat case it is represented by a null line
(a @xmath line), and in the dS case it is represented by a spacelike
line (an horizontal line in the diagram). These features are represented
in Fig. 5.1 for the pure AdS, Minkowski and dS backgrounds (the
character of the infinity line does not change when a mass or a charge
is added to the system). The infinity line is then a signature of the
cosmological background.

Note that in these Carter-Penrose diagrams, a null particle (e.g., a
light ray) moves necessarily along @xmath lines, while timelike
particles can move only into the top of the diagrams along a curve whose
tangent vector must do an angle less than @xmath with the vertical line.
As a typical example of the kind of information that can be withdrawn
from the Carter-Penrose diagrams, let us analyze the evolution of these
diagrams in a @xmath background when we start with the empty spacetime
(Minkowski solution with @xmath , @xmath ), and then progressively add a
mass @xmath (Schwarzschild solution) and then also a charge @xmath
(Reissner-Nordström solution) to the background spacetime. This
evolution is sketched in Fig. 5.2 . In Fig. 5.2 .(a), we have the
diagram of the Minkowski solution. The past infinity ( @xmath ) and the
future infinity ( @xmath ) are both represented by a null line, and the
origin of the radial coordinate, @xmath , is represented by a timelike
line. A null ray that is emitted from a point @xmath is free to move
towards @xmath or into the future infinity @xmath . When we add a mass
@xmath to the system [see Fig. 5.2 .(b)], several changes occur. First
of all, @xmath supports now a curvature singularity (since any scalar
polynomial of the curvature, e.g. the square of the Riemann tensor,
diverges there). The presence of this curvature singularity is indicated
by a zigzag line. Moreover, when compared with Fig. 5.2 .(a), we see
that @xmath suffers a @xmath rotation and is now represented by a
spacelike line. This rotation is accompanied by the appearance of two
mutually perpendicular lines at @xmath that represent the black hole
event horizon @xmath . The region IV is equivalent to region I [that was
already present in diagram (a)] and both represent the region outside
the black hole horizon, @xmath . A null ray that is sent from a point
@xmath in these regions can move towards @xmath , after crossing @xmath
, but it is also free to move into the future infinity @xmath [see Fig.
5.2 .(c)]. Note that regions I and IV are casually disconnected: no null
or timelike particle can start in region I and reach region IV. The
adding of the mass also leads to the appearance of two new regions,
represented by regions II and III in figure (b). Region II is
interpreted as the interior of the black hole horizon, since a null ray
emitted from a point in its interior [e.g., point @xmath in Fig. 5.2
.(c)] necessarily hits the future curvature singularity, and cannot
cross the horizon towards region I or IV (the discussion also applies to
timelike particles). Region III is interpreted as the interior of the
white hole, since any particle, e.g. the light ray that is emitted from
point @xmath in Fig. 5.2 .(c), is necessarily expelled out from region
III, i.e., it necessarily crosses the horizon towards region I or IV. In
Fig. 5.2 .(d) we show the causal diagram of the solution when a charge
is added to the solution. Again, several changes occur. When compared
with Fig. 5.2 .(b), we see that the curvature singularity @xmath suffers
again a @xmath rotation and is now represented by a timelike zigzag
line. This rotation is accompanied by the appearance of two new mutually
perpendicular lines at @xmath , that represent the black hole Cauchy
horizon @xmath , together with two new equivalent regions that are
represented as region V in the figure. The properties of this Cauchy
horizon are quite interesting. As an example note that the full history
of the regions I, II and IV is in the causal past of the Cauchy horizon,
i.e., this horizon can have access to all the information that is
generated in those regions.

The causal diagrams provide a lot of information about the solution, but
there are also relevant features that cannot be withdrawn from them. The
study of the geodesic structure of the solution provides some more
information, that will be useful for us in later chapters. The geodesic
equation of motion, for a general non-rotating black hole, can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath , with @xmath being an affine parameter along the geodesic
which, for a timelike geodesic, can be identified with the proper time
of the particle along the geodesic. For a null geodesic one has @xmath
and for a timelike geodesic @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are respectively
the mass and charge of the black holes, and @xmath is the angular
momentum of the particle subjected to the gravitational field of the
black hole.

In later chapters we will make a reference to the information withdrawn
from Fig. 5.3 , where we draw the general form of @xmath for timelike
geodesics in a pure anti-de Sitter, Minkowski and de Sitter spacetimes (
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ). From it we conclude that the AdS
spacetime is attractive, in the sense that particles in this background
are subjected to a potential well that attracts them, i.e., if a
particle tries to escape to infinity, it will be reflected back, no
matter how big its energy. On the other side, the dS spacetime is
repulsive: if a low-energy particle tries to approach the origin, it
will be reflected back to infinity.

For massless particles, this information concerning the
attractive/repulsive character of the AdS/dS backgrounds could also be
withdrawn from the corresponding Carter-Penrose diagrams, Fig. 5.1 .
Indeed, we see that a null ray ( @xmath line) that hits the timelike AdS
infinity is necessarily reflected back, and that a null ray that is sent
towards the dS spacelike infinity can never return back (unless we act
on the ray through an external process, a mirror, for example).

As another example of the utility of the geodesic analysis, and of the
limitations associated with the causal diagrams, the general form of
@xmath for @xmath timelike geodesics in a Schwarzschild black hole and
Reissner-Nordström black hole is sketched, respectively, in Figs. 5.4
and 5.5 for the three cosmological backgrounds (AdS, flat, dS). The
important fact that we want to stress is that, in the Schwarzschild
black hole (AdS, flat or dS), when a massive particle crosses inward the
@xmath sphere it cannot come back, as already expected. However, in the
Reissner-Nordström black hole (AdS, flat or dS), a massive particle can
never hit the curvature singularity (note that this does not apply in
the case of massless particles). This information could not be withdrawn
from the analysis of the Carter-Penrose diagram.

#### 5.1 Black holes in an anti-de Sitter background

The Einstein-Maxwell equations in an AdS background ( @xmath ) admit a
three-family of black hole solutions whose gravitational field is
described by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath can take the values @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

These three solutions describe three different kind of AdS black holes.
The black holes with @xmath are the usual AdS black holes with spherical
topology. The black holes with @xmath have planar, cylindrical or
toroidal (with genus @xmath ) topology and were introduced and analyzed
in [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] . The topology of the @xmath black holes is hyperbolic
or, upon compactification, toroidal with genus @xmath , and they have
been analyzed in [ 11 ] . In the following subsections we shall describe
briefly which one of these families of black holes. The solutions with
non-spherical topology (cases @xmath and @xmath ) do not have
counterparts in a @xmath or in a @xmath background.

##### 5.1.1 Black holes with spherical topology

In this subsection we will briefly present the black hole solutions with
spherical symmetry of the Einstein-Maxwell equations in a negative
cosmological background ( @xmath ). The gravitational field of the
electrically charged black hole solution is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the ADM mass and charge of
the solution, while the electromagnetic field is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the pure electric and in the pure magnetic cases, respectively. The
Carter-Penrose diagram of the nonextreme AdS @xmath Reissner-Nordström
black hole is sketched in Fig. ( 5.6 ).(a), of the extreme AdS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black hole in Fig. ( 5.6 ).(b), and the naked
particle in Fig. ( 5.6 ).(c). The Carter-Penrose diagram of the
AdS-Schwarzschild is drawn in Fig. ( 5.7 ).

##### 5.1.2 Black holes with toroidal or cylindrical topology

In this subsection we will consider solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell
equations with cylindrical symmetry in a negative cosmological
background ( @xmath ). The topology of the two dimensional angular space
can be (i) @xmath , the standard cylindrically symmetric model, (ii)
@xmath the flat torus @xmath model , and (iii) @xmath . We will focus
upon (i) and (ii). In the cylindrical model (i), we work with the
cylindrical coordinate system @xmath with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . In the toroidal model (ii), the range of the coordinate @xmath
is @xmath , with @xmath .

###### 5.1.2.a Neutral and electric charged black holes

The gravitational field of the rotating electrically charged black hole
solution can be written as [ 6 , 7 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath is the mass per unit length, @xmath is the
electric charge per unit length, and parameter @xmath (with units of
angular momentum per unit mass, and with range @xmath ) is related to
the angular momentum per unit length of the black hole by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The electromagnetic vector potential of the solution is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

At @xmath is located a curvature singularity. Depending on the value of
@xmath and of @xmath , there are five distinct cases to consider,
namely: (i) @xmath , which yields a black hole solution with event and
Cauchy horizons; (ii) @xmath , which corresponds to the extreme case of
the above black hole, where the two horizons merge; (iii) @xmath , which
yields a naked singularity solution; (iv) @xmath , which gives a null
topological singularity; and (v) @xmath , which gives a pathological
black hole solution with a single horizon. The most interesting
solutions are given by cases (i) and (ii), which present features
similar to the @xmath Kerr-Newman solution. For example, the curvature
singularity at @xmath has a ring structure, and closed timelike curves
are present but inside the inner horizon of the solution. Solutions (iv)
and (v) do not have partners in the Kerr-Newman family. The black hole
(v) is pathological since there are closed timelike curves outside the
horizon. The Carter-Penrose diagrams of these solutions (i)-(v) are
respectively sketched in items (a)-(e) of Fig. 5.8 .

When we turn off the rotation, @xmath or @xmath , only the counterparts
of the solutions (i)-(iii) survive. We then have (i) a black hole
solution with event and Cauchy horizons if @xmath , (ii) an extreme
black hole if @xmath , and (iii) a naked singularity if @xmath . All
these three solutions are free of closed timelike curves and the
curvature singularity at @xmath looses the ring structure. The
Carter-Penrose diagrams of these solutions are identical to the ones
sketched in items (a)-(c) of Fig. 5.8 .

When we set @xmath we have to consider three cases. If @xmath , we have
a black hole solution with a single horizon and without closed timelike
curves. The Carter-Penrose diagrams of this solution is sketched in Fig.
5.8 .(e), and it also describes the solution with @xmath . If @xmath we
have a null topological singularity without an horizon [see Fig. 5.8
.(d)]. This solution can be considered the extreme uncharged black hole
of the later black hole. Finally, when @xmath we have a naked timelike
singularity [see Fig. 5.8 .(c)].

###### 5.1.2.b Magnetic solutions

The gravitational field of the rotating magnetic solution is given by [
8 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the vector potential is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In these equations we have @xmath , @xmath is the highest root of the
equation @xmath , @xmath is the mass per unit length, @xmath is the
electric charge per unit length, , @xmath is a constant that measures
the intensity of the magnetic field source, and we have defined a
rotating parameter @xmath , which ranges between @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition that @xmath remains real imposes a restriction on the
allowed values of the angular momentum: @xmath . Note also that ( 5.11 )
indicates that the static solution ( @xmath ) produces only a
longitudinal magnetic field, while the rotating solution ( @xmath )
generates in addition a radial electric field.

The static solution can be obtained by setting @xmath (and thus @xmath ;
this also implies that @xmath , as we shall see just below) on ( 5.10 )
and ( 5.11 ). This static solution has no horizons and no curvature
singularity. However, it has a conical singularity at @xmath with a
deficit angle given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This conical deficit implies that the period of @xmath is @xmath , and
its presence is associated with a string with mass density @xmath . The
range of the other coordinates is @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
(cylindrical model). In the toroidal model, the range of the coordinate
@xmath is @xmath .

Now, the electric charge of the solution described by ( 5.10 ) and (
5.11 ) can be written as a function of the other parameters of the
solution as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we see that @xmath implies @xmath . This feature agrees with the
conclusions withdrawn from ( 5.11 ): the static solution produces no
electric field because its electric charge is zero.

In [ 8 ] , and following [ 251 ] , we have interpreted the magnetic
field source as being composed by a system of two symmetric and
superposed electrically charged lines along the @xmath direction. One of
the electrically charged lines is at rest with positive charge (say),
and the other is spinning around the @xmath direction with a negative
electric charge. Clearly, this system produces no electric field since
the total electric charge is zero and the magnetic field is produced by
the angular electric current. The value of the electric charge per unit
length ( 5.14 ), says that after applying a rotation boost in the @xmath
- @xmath plane to endow our initial static spacetime with angular
momentum, there appears a net electric charge. This result was once
again expected since now, besides the magnetic field along the @xmath
direction ( @xmath ), there is also a radial electric field ( @xmath ).
In the same spirit of the explanation presented in subsection 2.4.3 , we
can show that the rotational boost induces an asymmetry in the charge
densities of the two above strings that is responsible for the
appearance of the radial electric field. This physical situation is
similar to the one that occurs when one has a copper wire with an
electric current and we apply a translation Lorentz boost to the wire:
first, there is only a magnetic field but, after the Lorentz boost, one
also has an electric field. The difference is that in the present
situation the Lorentz boost is a rotational one and not a translational
one.

##### 5.1.3 Black holes with hyperbolic topology

In this subsection we will briefly present the black hole solutions of
the @xmath Einstein-Maxwell equations with hyperbolic topology or, upon
compactification, with toroidal topology with genus @xmath . The
gravitational field of the electrically charged black hole solution is
given by [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the electromagnetic field is still given by ( 5.6 ). @xmath and
@xmath are respectively the ADM mass and charge of the solution.

In order to describe the basic properties of these solutions let us
first define the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is negative when @xmath . When @xmath and @xmath , the solution
has an horizon that we identify as a cosmological horizon ( @xmath )
since it is present when the mass and charge vanish. In this case @xmath
is not a curvature singularity, but can be regarded as a topological
singularity (see Brill, Louko, and Peldan in [ 11 ] for a detailed
discussion). The Carter-Penrose diagram of this solution is drawn in
Fig. 5.9 .(a). When @xmath and @xmath , the solution still has a single
horizon, the same cosmological horizon that is present in the latter
case. However, now a curvature singularity is present at @xmath . The
corresponding Carter-Penrose diagram of this solution is represented in
Fig. 5.9 .(b). The most interesting @xmath solutions are present when
the mass of the solution is negative. We have three distinct cases,
namely: (i) @xmath , which yields a black hole solution with an event
horizon and a cosmological horizon; (ii) @xmath , which corresponds to
the extreme case of the above black hole, where the two horizons merge;
(iii) @xmath , which yields a naked timelike singularity solution. The
Carter-Penrose diagrams of these solutions (i)-(iii) are sketched in
items (c)-(e) of Fig. 5.9 . When @xmath , one has three cases, namely:
(i) @xmath , which yields a black hole solution with an event horizon
and a cosmological horizon; (ii) @xmath , which corresponds to the
extreme case of the above black hole; (iii) @xmath , which yields a
naked timelike singularity solution. Note that the presence of the
charge does not introduce an extra horizon, contrary to what usually
occurs in other black hole solutions. The Carter-Penrose diagrams of
these charged solutions (i)-(iii) are also identical to the ones
sketched in items (c)-(e) of Fig. 5.9 .

#### 5.2 Black holes in a flat background

In this section we will briefly present the black hole solutions of the
Einstein-Maxwell equations in a flat background ( @xmath ). These black
holes have a spherical topology and the gravitational field of the
electrically charged black hole solution is given by ( 5.5 ), as long as
we set @xmath . The electromagnetic field is given by ( 5.6 ). In these
equations @xmath and @xmath are still the ADM mass and charge of the
solution. The Reissner-Nordström solution ( @xmath ) has three distinct
cases, namely: (i) @xmath , which yields a nonextreme black hole
solution with event and Cauchy horizons; (ii) @xmath , which corresponds
to the extreme case of the above black hole, where the two horizons
merge; and (iii) @xmath , which yields a naked singularity solution. The
Carter-Penrose diagrams of these solutions (i)-(iii) are respectively
sketched in items (a)-(c) of Fig. 5.10 . The Schwarzschild solution (
@xmath ) has a Carter-Penrose diagram sketched in Fig. 5.11 .

#### 5.3 Black holes in a de Sitter background

In this section we will briefly present the black hole solutions of the
Einstein-Maxwell equations in a de Sitter background ( @xmath ). These
black holes have a spherical topology and the gravitational field of the
charged black hole solution is given by ( 5.5 ), as long as we set
@xmath . The electromagnetic field is given by ( 5.6 ). In these
equations @xmath and @xmath are still the ADM mass and charge of the
solution. The dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström solution ( @xmath ) has four
distinct cases, namely: (a) a nonextreme black hole solution with a
cosmological horizon ( @xmath ), and with an event ( @xmath ) and Cauchy
horizons ( @xmath ), where @xmath ; (b) an extreme case in which the
cosmological horizon merges with the black hole event horizon ( @xmath
); (c) an extreme case in which the Cauchy horizon merges with the black
hole event horizon ( @xmath ); and (d) a naked singularity solution. The
ranges of @xmath and @xmath that represent which one of the above black
holes is sketched in Fig. 5.12 . The Carter-Penrose diagrams of these
solutions (a)-(d) are respectively sketched in items (a)-(d) of Fig.
5.13 . The dS-Schwarzschild solution ( @xmath ) has three distinct
cases, namely: (a) a nonextreme black hole solution with a cosmological
horizon ( @xmath ), and with an event horizon ( @xmath ); (b) an extreme
case in which the cosmological horizon merges with the black hole event
horizon ( @xmath ); and (c) a naked singularity solution. The
Carter-Penrose diagrams of these solutions (a)-(c) are respectively
sketched in items (a)-(c) of Fig. 5.14 . Case (b) of Figs. 5.13 and 5.14
is sometimes called as Nariai black hole, although the this nomenclature
is not the most appropriate (see chapter 7 ).

### Chapter 6 Pair of accelerated black holes: the C-metric in a
generalized @xmath background

] ] \minitoc

Kinnersley and Walker [ 84 ] , in 1970, have interpreted the C-metric,
found by Levi-Civita [ 82 ] and by Weyl [ 83 ] in 1918-1919, has
describing a pair of accelerated black holes, with the energy being
provided by the tension of the strings or strut that are present in the
solution. We will review their interpretation in section 6.2 . From the
charged C-metric, Ernst [ 85 ] has generated a knew exact solution in
which the black hole pair is accelerated by an external electromagnetic
field. This solution will also be reviewed in section 6.2 . These are
one of the few exact solutions that contain already a radiative term.
I.e., being accelerated, the black holes necessarily release radiation
and the information concerning the radiative properties are already
included in the metric. The cosmological C-metric has been found by
Plebański and Demiański in 1976 [ 86 ] . In section 6.1 we will study in
detail the properties and physical interpretation of the C-metric in an
anti-de Sitter (AdS) background. We follow our work [ 87 ] which
complements earlier work done by Emparan, Horowitz and Myers [ 121 ] and
by Podolský [ 122 ] . Then, in section 6.3 we will discuss in detail the
C-metric in a de Sitter (dS) background, following our work [ 88 ]
(which has complemented previous work of Podolský and Griffiths [ 120 ]
). The analysis of this chapter will be supported by a thorough analysis
of the causal structure of the solution, together with the description
of the solution in the AdS and dS 4-hyperboloid, and the study of the
strings and strut’s physics. We follow the approach of Kinnersley and
Walker [ 84 ] and Ashtekar and Dray [ 104 ] . Although the alternative
approach of Bonnor simplifies in a way the interpretation, we cannot use
the case of the AdS C-metric and dS C-metric, since the cosmological
constant prevents the coordinate transformation of Bonnor into the Weyl
form. In section 6.4 we will summarize the results, and in particular we
will compare the C-metric in the three cosmological backgrounds, AdS,
flat and dS.

For a more complete historical overview on the C-metric we ask the
reader to go back to subsection 1.3.3 . In chapter 9 we will use the
solutions analyzed in this chapter to construct the instantons that
describe the quantum process of black hole pair creation in an external
field.

#### 6.1 Pair of accelerated black holes in an anti-de Sitter
background: the AdS C-metric

The plan of this section is as follows. In subsection 6.1.1 we present
the AdS C-metric and analyze its curvature and conical singularities. In
subsection 6.1.2 we study the causal diagrams of the solution. In
subsection 6.1.3 we give and justify a physical interpretation to the
solution. The description of the solution in the AdS 4-hyperboloid and
the physics of the strut are analyzed. These two subsections, 6.1.2 and
6.1.3 , are highly related and so, in order to fully understand each of
them, the reading of the other is required.

##### 6.1.1 General properties of the AdS C-metric

###### 6.1.1.a The AdS C-metric

The AdS C-metric, i.e., the C-metric with negative cosmological constant
@xmath , has been obtained by Plebański and Demiański [ 86 ] . For zero
rotation and zero NUT parameter it is given, according to [ 86 ] (see
also [ 178 ] ), by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The meaning of parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath will be clarified
soon. For the benefit of comparison with the flat C-metric, we note that
when @xmath vanishes we have @xmath . It is now convenient to redefine
the parameter @xmath as @xmath , together with the coordinate
transformations: @xmath and @xmath . With these redefinitions, the
gravitational field of the AdS C-metric is written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Maxwell field in the magnetic case is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

while in the electric case it is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This solution depends on four parameters namely, @xmath which is the
acceleration of the black hole, @xmath which is interpreted as the ADM
mass of the non-accelerated black hole, @xmath which is interpreted as
the ADM electromagnetic charge of the non-accelerated black hole and, in
general, @xmath with @xmath and @xmath being the electric and magnetic
charges, respectively, and finally the cosmological length @xmath . The
meaning attributed to the parameter @xmath will be understood in section
6.1.3 , while the physical interpretation given to the parameters @xmath
and @xmath is justified in the Appendix. We will consider the case
@xmath .

The coordinates used in ( 6.3 )-( 6.6 ) to describe the AdS C-metric are
useful to understand the geometrical properties of the spacetime, but
they hide the physical interpretation of the solution. In order to
understand the physical properties of the source and gravitational field
we will introduce progressively new coordinates more suitable to this
propose, following the approach of Kinnersley and Walker [ 84 ] and
Ashtekar and Dray [ 104 ] . Although the alternative approach of Bonnor
simplifies in a way the interpretation, we cannot use it were since the
cosmological constant prevents such a coordinate transformation into the
Weyl form.

###### 6.1.1.b Radial Coordinate. Curvature Singularities

We start by defining a coordinate @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to interpret this coordinate as being a radial coordinate, we
calculate a curvature invariant of the metric, namely the Kretschmann
scalar,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Clearly, this curvature invariant is equal to @xmath when the mass
@xmath and charge @xmath are both zero. When at least one of these
parameters is not zero, the curvature invariant diverges at @xmath ,
revealing the presence of a curvature singularity. Moreover, when we
take the limit @xmath , the curvature singularity approaches the
expected value for a spacetime which is asymptotically AdS. Therefore it
is justified that @xmath is interpreted as a radial coordinate.

###### 6.1.1.c Angular Surfaces. Conical Singularities

To gain more insight into the physical nature of the AdS C-metric we now
turn our attention into the angular surfaces @xmath constant and @xmath
constant, onwards labelled by @xmath . In this section we follow [ 84 ]
. In order to have the AdS C-metric with correct signature, @xmath , one
must restrict the coordinate @xmath to a domain on which the function
@xmath is non-negative [see ( 6.3 )]. The shape of this function depends
crucially on the three parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . In this
work we will select only the ranges of these three parameters for which
@xmath has at least two real roots, @xmath and @xmath (say), and demand
@xmath to belong to the range @xmath where @xmath . This restriction has
the important advantage of allowing us to endow the angular surfaces
@xmath with the topology of a compact surface. In these surfaces we now
define two new coordinates,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ranges between @xmath and @xmath is an arbitrary positive
constant which will be needed later when regularity conditions at the
poles are discussed. The coordinate @xmath ranges between the north
pole, @xmath , and the south pole, @xmath (not necessarily at @xmath ).
With these transformations the metric restricted to the surfaces @xmath
, @xmath , takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath or when both @xmath and @xmath , ( 6.9 ) gives @xmath ,
@xmath and if we use the freedom to put @xmath , the metric restricted
to @xmath is given by @xmath . This implies that in this case the
angular surface is a sphere and justifies the label given to the new
angular coordinates defined in ( 6.9 ). In this case the north pole is
at @xmath or @xmath and the south pole is at @xmath or @xmath . In the
other cases @xmath and @xmath can always be expressed as elliptic
functions of @xmath . The explicit form of these functions is of no need
in this work. All we need to know is that these functions have a period
given by @xmath .

As we shall see, the regularity analysis of the metric in the region
@xmath will play an essential role in the physical interpretation of the
AdS C-metric. The function @xmath is positive and bounded in @xmath and
thus, the metric is regular in this region between the poles. We must be
more careful with the regularity analysis at the poles, i.e., at the
roots of @xmath . Indeed, if we draw a small circle around the north
pole, in general, as the radius goes to zero, the limit
circunference/radius is not @xmath . Therefore, in order to avoid a
conical singularity at the north pole one must require that @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Repeating the procedure, this time for the south pole, @xmath , we
conclude that the conical singularity at this pole can also be avoid if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The so far arbitrary parameter @xmath introduced in ( 6.9 ) plays its
important role here. Indeed, if we choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 6.12 ) is satisfied. However, since we only have a single constant
@xmath at our disposal and this has been fixed to remove the conical
singularity at the south pole, we conclude that the conical singularity
will be present at the north pole. There is another alternative. We can
choose instead @xmath (where @xmath means derivative in order to @xmath
) and by doing so we avoid the deficit angle at the north pole and leave
a conical singularity at the south pole. In section 6.1.3 we will see
that in the extended Kruskal solution the north pole points towards the
other black hole, while the south pole points towards infinity. The
first choice of @xmath corresponds to a strut between the black holes
while the alternative choice corresponds to two strings from infinity
into each black hole. When we choose @xmath such that @xmath , the
period of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the choice @xmath implies that the period of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We leave a further discussion on the physical nature of the conical
singularities and on the two possible choices for the value of @xmath to
section 6.1.3.a . There is a small number of very special cases for
which the very particular condition, @xmath is verified. In these
special cases, the solution is free of conical singularities. They will
be mentioned bellow.

Since we have managed to put @xmath in a form equal to [ 84 ] , we can
now, following [ 84 ] closely, describe the behavior of @xmath for
different values of the parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We can
divide this discussion in three cases.

1. Massless uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ): in this case, we
have @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The angular surface @xmath is a
sphere and this is a particular case for which both the north and south
poles are free of conical singularities.

2. Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ): the massive uncharged
case must be divided into @xmath , and @xmath . When @xmath , @xmath has
three roots and, as justified above, we require @xmath to lie between
the two roots for which @xmath . In doing so we maintain the metric with
the correct signature and have an angular surface @xmath which is
compact. Setting the value of @xmath given in ( 6.13 ) one avoids the
conical singularity at the south pole but leave one at the north pole.
When @xmath , @xmath is an open angular surface. For this reason,
onwards we will analyze only the case @xmath .

3. Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ): for a general massive
charged solution, depending on the values of the parameters @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath can be positive in a single compact interval,
@xmath , or in two distinct compact intervals, @xmath and @xmath , say.
In this latter case we will work only with the interval @xmath (say) for
which the charged solutions reduce to the uncharged solutions when
@xmath . These solutions have a conical singularity at one of the poles.
The only massive charged solutions that are totally free of conical
singularities are those which satisfy the particular conditions @xmath
and @xmath . This indicates that in this case the AdS C-metric is an AdS
black hole written in an accelerated coordinate frame. In the massless
charged solution ( @xmath and @xmath ), @xmath is an even function, has
two symmetric roots and is positive between them. The angular surface
@xmath is therefore compact and there are no conical singularities at
both poles. Once again, this suggests that the solution is written in an
accelerated coordinate frame.

###### 6.1.1.d Coordinate ranges

In this section we analyze the important issue of the coordinate ranges.
Rewritten in terms of the new coordinates introduced in ( 6.7 ) and (
6.9 ), the AdS C-metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 6.4 ). The time coordinate @xmath
can take any value from the interval @xmath and @xmath ranges between
@xmath . As we saw in section 6.1.1.b , when @xmath or @xmath are not
zero there is a curvature singularity at @xmath . Therefore, we restrict
the radial coordinate to the range @xmath . On the other hand, in
section 6.1.1.c we have decided to consider only the values of @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath for which @xmath has at least two real roots, @xmath
and @xmath (say) and have demanded @xmath to belong to the range @xmath
where @xmath . By doing this we guarantee that the metric has the
correct signature @xmath and that the angular surfaces @xmath ( @xmath
constant and @xmath constant) are compact. From @xmath we then conclude
that @xmath must belong to the range @xmath . Indeed, @xmath corresponds
to @xmath , and @xmath to @xmath . Note however, that when both @xmath
and @xmath vanish there are no restrictions on the ranges of @xmath and
@xmath (i.e., @xmath and @xmath ) since in this case there is no
curvature singularity at the origin of @xmath to justify the constraint
on the coordinates.

###### 6.1.1.e Mass and charge parameters

In this subsection, one gives the physical interpretation of parameters
@xmath and @xmath that appear in the AdS C-metric. Applying the
coordinate transformations to ( 6.3 ) (see [ 122 ] ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and setting @xmath (and @xmath ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . So, when the acceleration parameter vanishes, the AdS
C-metric, ( 6.3 ), reduces to the AdS-Schwarzschild and AdS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black holes and the parameters @xmath and @xmath that
are present in the AdS C-metric are precisely the ADM mass and ADM
electromagnetic charge of these non-accelerated black holes. It should
however be emphasized that the accelerated black holes lose mass through
radiative processes and so the determination of the mass of the
accelerated black holes would require the calculation of the Bondi mass,
which we do not here.

##### 6.1.2 Causal Structure of the AdS C-metric

In this section we analyze the causal structure of the solution. As
occurs with the original flat C-metric [ 84 , 104 ] , the original AdS
C-metric, ( 6.16 ), is not geodesically complete. To obtain the maximal
analytic spacetime, i.e., to draw the Carter-Penrose diagrams we will
introduce the usual null Kruskal coordinates.

We now look carefully to the AdS C-metric, ( 6.16 ), with @xmath given
by ( 6.4 ). We first notice that, contrarily to what happens in the
@xmath background where the causal structure and physical nature of the
corresponding C-metric is independent of the relation between the
acceleration @xmath and @xmath , in the @xmath case we must distinguish
and analyze separately the cases @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Later, in
section 6.1.3 , we will justify physically the reason for this
distinction. The mathematical reason for this difference is clearly
identified by setting @xmath and @xmath in ( 6.4 ) giving @xmath . Since
the horizons of the solution are basically given by the real roots of
@xmath , we conclude that we have to treat separately the cases (A)
@xmath for which @xmath can have two real roots, (B) @xmath for which
@xmath is double root and (C) @xmath for which @xmath has no real roots
(see discussion in the text of Fig. 6.1 ). We will consider each of
these three cases separately in subsections 6.1.2.a and 6.1.3.a ( @xmath
case), 6.1.2.b and 6.1.3.b ( @xmath case), and 6.1.2.c and 6.1.3.c (
@xmath case). The description of the solution depends crucially on the
values of @xmath and @xmath . In each subsection, we will consider the
three most relevant solutions, namely: 1. Massless uncharged solution (
@xmath , @xmath ), 2. Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ),
and 3. Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ).

###### 6.1.2.a Causal Structure of the @xmath solutions

@xmath Massless uncharged solution ( @xmath )

In this case we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . The
shapes of @xmath and @xmath are represented in Fig. 6.1 .

The angular surfaces @xmath ( @xmath constant and @xmath constant) are
spheres and both the north and south poles are free of conical
singularities. The origin of the radial coordinate, @xmath , has no
curvature singularity and therefore both @xmath and @xmath are in the
range @xmath . However, in the general case, where @xmath or @xmath are
non-zero, there is a curvature singularity at @xmath . Since the
discussion of the present section is only a preliminary to that of the
massive general case, following [ 104 ] , the origin @xmath will treat
as if it had a curvature singularity and thus we admit that @xmath
belongs to the range @xmath and @xmath lies in the region @xmath . We
leave a discussion on the extension to negative values of @xmath to
section 6.1.3.a .

The general procedure to draw the Carter-Penrose diagrams is as follows.
First, we make use of the null condition @xmath (where @xmath is a
geodesic tangent) to introduce the advanced and retarded
Finkelstein-Eddington null coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the tortoise coordinate is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and both @xmath and @xmath belong to the range @xmath . In these
coordinates the metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metric still has coordinate singularities at the roots of @xmath .
To overcome this unwanted feature we have to introduce Kruskal
coordinates. Now, due to the lower restriction on the value of @xmath (
@xmath ), the choice of the Kruskal coordinates (and therefore the
Carter-Penrose diagrams) depends on the angular direction @xmath we are
looking at. In fact, depending on the value of @xmath , the region
accessible to @xmath might contain two, one or zero roots of @xmath (see
Fig. 6.1 ) and so the solution may have two, one or zero horizons,
respectively. This angular dependence of the causal diagram is not new.
The Schwarzschild and Reissner-Nordström solutions being spherically
symmetric do not present this feature but, in the Kerr solution, the
Carter-Penrose diagram along the pole direction is different from the
diagram along the equatorial direction. Such a dependence occurs also in
the flat C-metric [ 84 ] . Back again to the AdS C-metric, we have to
consider separately five distinct sets of angular directions, namely (a)
@xmath , (b) @xmath , (c) @xmath , (d) @xmath and (e) @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath (see Fig. 6.1 ).

(a) @xmath : within this interval of the angular direction, the
restriction on the range of @xmath , @xmath , implies that the function
@xmath is always positive in the accessible region of @xmath (see Fig.
6.1 ), and thus the solution has no horizons. Introducing the null
coordinates defined in ( 6.20 ) followed by the Kruskal coordinates
@xmath and @xmath gives @xmath , and ( 6.22 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are regarded as functions of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, let us find the values of the product @xmath at @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, for @xmath , the original massless uncharged AdS C-metric is
described by ( 6.23 ) subjected to the following coordinates ranges,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This spacetime is however geodesically incomplete. To obtain the maximal
analytical extension one allows the Kruskal coordinates to take also the
values @xmath and @xmath as long as ( 6.27 ) is satisfied.

Finally, to construct the Carter-Penrose diagram one has to define the
Carter-Penrose coordinates by the usual arc-tangent functions of @xmath
and @xmath : @xmath and @xmath , that bring the points at infinity into
a finite position. In general, to find what kind of curve describes the
lines @xmath or @xmath one has to take the limit of @xmath as @xmath (in
the case of @xmath ) and the limit of @xmath as @xmath (in the case of
@xmath ). If this limit is @xmath or @xmath the corresponding line is
mapped into a curved null line. If the limit is @xmath , or a negative
and finite constant, the corresponding line is mapped into a curved
timelike line and finally, when the limit is @xmath , or a positive and
finite constant, the line is mapped into a curved spacelike line. The
asymptotic lines are drawn as straight lines although in the coordinates
@xmath and @xmath they should be curved outwards, bulged. It is always
possible to change coordinates so that the asymptotic lines are indeed
straight lines. So, from ( LABEL:lim_u'v'_AdS ) we draw the
Carter-Penrose diagram sketched in Fig. 6.2 .(a). There are no horizons
and both @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ) are timelike lines.

(b) @xmath : for this particular angular direction, @xmath is restricted
to be on @xmath and @xmath is always positive except at @xmath (which
corresponds to @xmath ) where it is zero (see Fig. 6.1 ). Therefore, the
solution has no horizon and the Kruskal construction is similar to the
one described above in case (a). The only difference is that now @xmath
and thus @xmath ( @xmath ) is represented by a null line in the
Carter-Penrose diagram which is shown in Fig. 6.2 .(b).

(c) @xmath : the demand that @xmath must belong to the range @xmath
implies, for this range of the angular direction, that we have a region
I, @xmath , where @xmath is negative and a region II, @xmath , where
@xmath is positive (see Fig. 6.1 ). There is a single Rindler-like
acceleration horizon ( @xmath ) at @xmath , so called because it is is
absent when @xmath and present even when @xmath and @xmath . In region I
one sets the Kruskal coordinates @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath . In
region II one defines @xmath and @xmath in order that @xmath . We set
@xmath . Thus, in both regions the product @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and ( 6.22 ) expressed in terms of the Kruskal coordinates is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The Kruskal coordinates in both regions were chosen in order to obtain a
negative value for the factor @xmath , which appears in the metric
coefficient @xmath . The value of constant @xmath was selected in order
that the limit of @xmath as @xmath stays finite and different from zero.
By doing this, we have removed the coordinate singularity that was
present at the root @xmath of @xmath [see ( 6.22 )]. So, the metric is
now well-behaved in the whole range @xmath or @xmath . The coordinates
@xmath and @xmath are expressed as functions of @xmath and @xmath by (
6.24 ) and at the edges of the interval allowed to @xmath , the product
@xmath takes the values

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Once again, the maximal analytical extension is achieved by allowing the
Kruskal coordinates @xmath and @xmath to take all the values on the
range @xmath , as soon as the condition @xmath is satisfied. The
Carter-Penrose diagram for this range of the angular direction is drawn
in Fig. 6.2 .(c). @xmath is represented by a timelike line while @xmath
( @xmath ) is a spacelike line. The two mutual perpendicular straight
null lines at @xmath , @xmath , represent the accelerated horizon at
@xmath or @xmath .

(d) @xmath : in this particular direction, the region accessible to
@xmath is @xmath . @xmath is negative in region I, @xmath and positive
in region II, @xmath . It is zero at @xmath where is located the only
horizon ( @xmath ) of the solution and @xmath vanishes again at @xmath
which corresponds to @xmath (see Fig. 6.1 ). The Kruskal construction
follows directly the procedure described in case (c). The only
difference is that now @xmath and thus the @xmath line ( @xmath ) is now
represented by a null line in the Carter-Penrose diagram which is shown
in Fig. 6.2 .(d).

(e) @xmath : the region accessible to @xmath must be separated into
three regions (see Fig. 6.1 ). In region I, @xmath , @xmath is positive;
in region II, @xmath , @xmath is negative and finally in region III,
@xmath , @xmath is positive again. We have two Rindler-like acceleration
horizons, more specifically, an outer horizon at @xmath or @xmath and an
inner horizon at @xmath or @xmath . Therefore one must introduce a
Kruskal coordinate patch around each of the horizons. The first patch
constructed around @xmath is valid for @xmath (thus, it includes regions
I and II). In region I we define @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath . In
region II one defines @xmath and @xmath in order that @xmath . We set
@xmath . Thus, in both regions, I and II, the product @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and ( 6.22 ) expressed in terms of the Kruskal coordinates is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is regular in this patch @xmath and, in particular, it is regular
at the root @xmath of @xmath . However, it is singular at the second
root, @xmath , of @xmath . To regularize the metric around @xmath , one
has to introduce new Kruskal coordinates for the second patch which is
built around @xmath and is valid for @xmath (thus, it includes regions
II and III). In region II we set @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath . In
region III one defines @xmath and @xmath in order that @xmath . We set
@xmath . Thus, in both regions, II and III, the product @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, in this second Kruskal patch, ( 6.22 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is regular in @xmath and, in particular, at the second root @xmath
of @xmath . Once again, in both patches, the Kruskal coordinates were
chosen in order to obtain a factor @xmath negative [see ( 6.1.2.a )].
The values of constants @xmath and @xmath were selected in order that
the limit of @xmath as @xmath stays finite and different from zero. To
end the construction of the Kruskal diagram of this solution with two
horizons, the two patches have to be joined together in an appropriate
way first defined by Carter in the Reissner-Nordström solution.

From ( 6.34 ) and ( 6.32 ) we find the values of product @xmath at the
edges @xmath and @xmath of the radial coordinate,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and conclude that both @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ) are represented by
timelike lines in the Carter-Penrose diagram sketched in Fig. 6.2 .(e).
The two accelerated horizons of the solution are both represented as
perpendicular straight null lines at @xmath ( @xmath ).

@xmath Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath )

Now that the causal structure of the AdS C-metric with @xmath and @xmath
has been studied, the construction of the Carter-Penrose diagrams for
the @xmath case follows up directly. As has justified in detail in
section 6.1.1.c , we will consider only the case with small mass or
acceleration, i.e., we require @xmath , in order to have compact angular
surfaces (see discussion on the text of Fig. 6.3 ). We also demand
@xmath to belong to the range @xmath (see Fig. 6.3 ) where @xmath and
such that @xmath and @xmath when @xmath . By satisfying the two above
conditions we endow the @xmath constant and @xmath constant surfaces
with the topology of a compact surface.

The technical procedure to obtain the Carter-Penrose diagrams is similar
to the one described along section 6.1.2.a . In what concerns the
physical conclusions, we will see that the essential difference is the
presence of an extra horizon, a Schwarzschild-like horizon ( @xmath ),
due to the non-vanishing mass parameter, in addition to the accelerated
Rindler-like horizon ( @xmath ) which has due to non-vanishing @xmath .
Another important difference, as stated in section 6.1.1.b , is the
presence of a curvature singularity at @xmath and the existence of a
conical singularity at the north pole (see section 6.1.1.c ).

Once more the Carter-Penrose diagrams depend on the angular direction we
are looking at (see Fig. 6.3 ). We have to analyze separately five
distinct cases, namely (a) @xmath , (b) @xmath , (c) @xmath , (d) @xmath
and (e) @xmath , which are the massive counterparts of cases (a)-(e)
that were considered in section 6.1.2.a . When @xmath we have @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

(a) @xmath : the Carter-Penrose diagram [Fig. 6.4 .(a)] for this range
of the angular direction has a spacelike curvature singularity at @xmath
, a timelike line that represents @xmath ( @xmath ) and a
Schwarzschild-like horizon ( @xmath ) that was not present in the @xmath
corresponding diagram Fig. 6.2 .(a). The diagram is similar to the one
of the AdS-Schwarzschild solution, although now the curvature
singularity has an acceleration @xmath , as will be seen in section
6.1.3 .

(b) @xmath : the curvature singularity @xmath is also a spacelike line
in the Carter-Penrose diagram [see Fig 6.4 .(b)] and there is a
Schwarzschild-like horizon ( @xmath ). The infinity, @xmath ( @xmath ),
is represented by a null line. The origin is being accelerated (see
section 6.1.3 ).

(c) @xmath : the Carter-Penrose diagram [Fig. 6.4 .(c)] has a more
complex structure that can be divided into left, middle and right
regions. The middle region contains the spacelike infinity ( @xmath )
and an accelerated Rindler-like horizon, @xmath , that is already
present in the @xmath corresponding diagram [see Fig. 6.2 .(c)]. The
left and right regions both contain a spacelike curvature singularity
and a Schwarzschild-like horizon, @xmath .

(d) @xmath : the Carter-Penrose diagram [Fig. 6.4 .(d)] for this
particular value of the angular direction is similar to the one of above
case (c). The only difference is that @xmath ( @xmath ) is represented
by a null line rather than a spacelike line.

(e) @xmath : the Carter-Penrose diagram [Fig. 6.4 .(e)] can again be
divided into left, middle and right regions. The middle region consists
of a timelike line representing @xmath ( @xmath ) and two accelerated
Rindler-like horizons, an inner one ( @xmath ) and an outer one ( @xmath
), that were already present in the @xmath corresponding diagram [Fig.
6.2 .(e)]. The left and right regions both contain a spacelike curvature
singularity and a Schwarzschild-like horizon ( @xmath ).

@xmath Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath )

When both the mass and charge parameters are non-zero, depending on the
values of the parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath can be
positive in a single compact interval, @xmath , or in two distinct
compact intervals, @xmath and @xmath , say (see Fig. 6.5 ). In this
latter case we will work only with the interval @xmath (say) for which
the charged solutions are in the same sector of those we have analyzed
in the last two subsections when @xmath .

Depending also on the values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the
function @xmath can have four roots, three roots (one of them
degenerated) or two roots (see the discussion on the text of Fig. 6.5 ).
As will be seen, the first case describes a pair of accelerated AdS
@xmath Reissner-Nordström (AdS-RN) black holes, the second case
describes a pair of extremal AdS-RN black holes and the third case
describes a pair of naked AdS-RN singularities.

The essential differences between the Carter-Penrose diagrams of the
massive charged solutions and those of the massive uncharged solutions
are: (i) the curvature singularity is now represented by a timelike line
rather than a spacelike line, (ii) excluding the extremal and naked
cases, there are now (in addition to the accelerated Rindler-like
horizon, @xmath ) not one but two extra horizons, the expected inner (
@xmath ) and outer ( @xmath ) horizons associated to the charged
character of the solution.

Below, we study the causal structure of the electric or magnetic
counterparts of cases (a)-(e) discussed in the two last sections (see
Fig. 6.5 ), namely (a) @xmath , (b) @xmath , (c) @xmath , (d) @xmath and
(e) @xmath . When @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath . The Carter-Penrose
diagrams are drawn in Fig. 6.6 . In these diagrams, the left column
represents the non-extremal case, the middle column represents the
extremal case and the right column represents the naked charged case.
The row (a) describes the solution seen from the vicinity of the south
pole, row (c) applies to the equatorial vicinity, and row (e) describes
the solution seen from the vicinity of the north pole. The zigzag line
represents a curvature singularity, an accelerated horizon is
represented by @xmath , the inner and outer charge associated horizons
are sketched as @xmath and @xmath . @xmath and @xmath represent
respectively the past and future infinity ( @xmath ). @xmath corresponds
to @xmath and @xmath corresponds to @xmath . The hatched region does not
belong to the solution. In diagrams (c)-(e) we have to glue indefinitely
copies of the represented figure in the left and right sides of it. In
some of the diagrams, a similar gluing must be done in the top and
bottom regions.

(a) @xmath : both the curvature singularity, @xmath , and @xmath (
@xmath ) are represented by a spacelike line in the Carter-Penrose
diagram [Fig. 6.6 .(a)]. Besides, in the non-extremal case, there is an
inner horizon ( @xmath ) and an outer horizon ( @xmath ) associated to
the charged character of the solution. In the extremal case the two
horizons @xmath and @xmath become degenerate and so there is a single
horizon, @xmath (say), and in the naked case there is no horizon. The
diagram is similar to the one of the AdS @xmath Reissner-Nordström
solution, although now the curvature singularity has an acceleration
@xmath , as will be seen in section 6.1.3 .

(b) @xmath : the curvature singularity @xmath is a spacelike line in the
Carter-Penrose diagram [see Fig. 6.6 .(b)] and @xmath ( @xmath ) is
represented by a null line. Again, in the non-extremal case, there is an
inner horizon ( @xmath ) and an outer horizon ( @xmath ) associated to
the charged character of the solution. In the extremal case there is a
single horizon, @xmath , and in the naked case there is no horizon. The
origin is being accelerated (see section 6.1.3 ).

(c) @xmath : the Carter-Penrose diagram [Fig. 6.6 .(c)] has a complex
structure. As before [see Fig 6.4 .(c)], it can be divided into left,
middle and right regions. The middle region contains the spacelike
infinity ( @xmath ) and an accelerated Rindler-like horizon, @xmath ,
that was already present in the @xmath corresponding diagram [see Fig.
6.2 .(c)]. The left and right regions both contain a timelike curvature
singularity ( @xmath ). In addition, these left and right regions
contain, in the non-extremal case, an inner horizon ( @xmath ) and an
outer horizon ( @xmath ), in the extremal case they contain is a single
horizon ( @xmath ), and in the naked case they have no horizon.

(d) @xmath : the Carter-Penrose diagram [Fig. 6.6 .(d)] for this
particular value of the angular direction is similar to the one of above
case (c). The only difference is that @xmath ( @xmath ) is represented
by a null line rather than a spacelike line.

(e) @xmath : the Carter-Penrose diagram [Fig. 6.6 .(e)]. As before [see
Fig 6.4 .(e)], it can be divided into left, middle and right regions.
The middle region consists of a timelike line representing @xmath (
@xmath ) and two accelerated Rindler-like horizon, @xmath and @xmath ,
that were already present in the @xmath and @xmath corresponding diagram
[see Fig. 6.2 .(e)]. The left and right regions both contain a timelike
curvature singularity ( @xmath ). In addition, these left and right
regions contain, in the non-extremal case, an inner horizon ( @xmath )
and an outer horizon ( @xmath ), in the extremal case they contain is a
single horizon ( @xmath ), and in the naked case they have no horizon
(see however the physical interpretation of this case as a black hole in
the end of subsection 6.1.3 ).

###### 6.1.2.b Causal Structure of the @xmath solutions

The @xmath case was studied in detail in [ 121 ] . In particular, the
causal structure of the massive uncharged solution was discussed. For
completeness, we will also present the causal diagrams of the massless
uncharged solution and of the massive charged solution.

Once more, due to the lower restriction on the value of @xmath ( @xmath
), the causal diagrams depend on the angular direction @xmath we are
looking at. We have to consider separately three distinct sets of
angular directions (see discussion on the text of Figs. 6.1 , 6.3 and
6.5 ), namely (a) @xmath , (b) @xmath and (c) @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath when @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath Massless uncharged solution ( @xmath )

In this case we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see
discussion on the text of Fig. 6.1 ). The angular surfaces @xmath (
@xmath constant and @xmath constant) are spheres free of conical
singularities. The origin of the radial coordinate @xmath has no
curvature singularity and therefore both @xmath and @xmath can lie in
the range @xmath . However, in the general case, where @xmath or @xmath
are non-zero, there is a curvature singularity at @xmath . Since the
discussion of the present section is only a preliminary to that of the
massive general case, following [ 104 ] , we will treat the origin
@xmath as if it had a curvature singularity and thus we admit that
@xmath belongs to the range @xmath and @xmath lies in the region @xmath
. The Carter-Penrose diagrams are drawn in Fig. 6.7 . In case (c) @xmath
, and only in this case, there is an accelerated horizon, @xmath .

@xmath Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath )

The causal diagrams of this solution were first presented in [ 121 ] and
are drawn in Fig. 6.8 . In the case (c) @xmath , and only in this case,
there is an accelerated horizon, @xmath which is degenerated (see [ 121
] ). The Schwarzschild-like horizon is at @xmath .

@xmath Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath )

The Carter-Penrose diagrams of the solution for this range of parameters
is sketched in Fig. 6.9 . In these diagrams, the left column represents
the non-extremal black hole, the middle column represents the extremal
black hole and the right column represents the naked charged particle.
The row (a) describes the solution seen from an angle that is between
the south pole (including) and the equator (excluding), row (b) applies
only to the equatorial direction, and row (c) describes the solution
seen from an angle between the equator (excluding) and the north pole
(including).

###### 6.1.2.c Causal Structure of the @xmath solutions

The @xmath case was first analyzed in [ 122 ] . We complement it with
the analysis of the causal structure. Contrarily to the cases @xmath and
@xmath , the causal diagrams of this spacetime do not depend on the
angular direction we are looking at. The reason for this feature is
clearly identified and explained in the discussion on the text of Figs.
6.1 , 6.3 and 6.5 .

@xmath Massless uncharged solution ( @xmath )

The Carter-Penrose diagram is identical to the one of the AdS solution (
@xmath ) and is sketched in Fig. 6.7 .(a). The origin has an
acceleration @xmath , as will be seen in section 6.1.3 .

@xmath Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath )

The Carter-Penrose diagram is identical to the one of the
AdS-Schwarzschild solution ( @xmath ) and is drawn in Fig. 6.8 .(a). The
origin has an acceleration @xmath , as will be seen in section 6.1.3 .

@xmath Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath )

The Carter-Penrose diagrams are identical to those of the AdS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström solution ( @xmath ) and is represented in Fig. 6.9
.(a). In this figure, the non-extremal black hole is represented in the
left column, the extremal black hole is represented in the middle
column, and the naked charged particle is represented in the right
column. The origin has an acceleration @xmath , as will be seen in
section 6.1.3 .

##### 6.1.3 Physical interpretation of the AdS C-metric

The parameter @xmath that is found in the AdS C-metric is interpreted as
being an acceleration and the AdS C-metric with @xmath describes a pair
of black holes accelerating away from each other in an AdS background,
while the AdS C-metric with @xmath describes a single accelerated black
hole. In this section we will justify this statement.

In subsection 6.1.1.e we saw that, when @xmath , the general AdS
C-metric, ( 6.16 ), reduces to the AdS ( @xmath ), to the
AdS-Schwarzschild ( @xmath ), and to the AdS @xmath Reissner-Nordström
solutions ( @xmath ). Therefore, the parameters @xmath and @xmath are,
respectively, the ADM mass and ADM electromagnetic charge of the
non-accelerated black holes. Moreover, if we set the mass and charge
parameters equal to zero, even when @xmath , the Kretschmann scalar [see
( 6.8 )] reduces to the value expected for the AdS spacetime. This
indicates that the massless uncharged AdS C-metric is an AdS spacetime
in disguise.

###### 6.1.3.a @xmath. Pair of accelerated black holes

In this section, we will first interpret case 1. Massless uncharged
solution ( @xmath , @xmath ), which is the simplest, and then with the
acquired knowledge we interpret cases 2. Massive uncharged solution (
@xmath , @xmath ) and 3. Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ).
We will interpret the solution following two complementary descriptions,
the four dimensional (4D) one and the five dimensional (5D).

@xmath The 4-Dimensional description ( @xmath , @xmath )

As we said in 6.1.2.a , when @xmath and @xmath the origin of the radial
coordinate @xmath defined in ( 6.7 ) has no curvature singularity and
therefore @xmath has the range @xmath . However, in the realistic
general case, where @xmath or @xmath are non-zero, there is a curvature
singularity at @xmath and since the discussion of the massless uncharged
solution was only a preliminary to that of the massive general case,
following [ 104 ] , we have treated the origin @xmath as if it had a
curvature singularity and thus we admitted that @xmath belongs to the
range @xmath . In these conditions we obtained the causal diagrams of
Fig. 6.2 . Note however that one can make a further extension to include
the negative values of @xmath , enlarging in this way the range
accessible to the Kruskal coordinates @xmath and @xmath . By doing this
procedure we obtain the causal diagram of the AdS spacetime. In Fig.
6.10 we show the extension to negative values of coordinate @xmath (so
@xmath ) of the Carter-Penrose diagrams of Fig. 6.2 . This diagram
indicates that the origin of the AdS spacetime, @xmath , is
accelerating. The situation is analogous to the one that occurs in the
usual Rindler spacetime, @xmath . If one restricts the coordinate @xmath
to be positive one obtains an accelerated origin that approaches a
Rindler accelerated horizon. However, by making an extension to negative
values of @xmath one obtains the Minkowski spacetime.

Now, we want to clearly identify the parameter @xmath that appears in
the AdS C-metric with the acceleration of its origin. To achieve this
aim, we recover the massless uncharged AdS C-metric defined by ( 6.3 )
and ( 6.4 ) (with @xmath and @xmath ), and after performing the
following coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite the massless uncharged AdS C-metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The causal diagram of this spacetime is drawn in Fig. 6.11 .

Notice that the origin of the radial coordinate @xmath corresponds to
@xmath and therefore to @xmath , where @xmath has been introduced in (
6.7 ). So, when we consider the massive AdS C-metric there will be a
curvature singularity at @xmath (see section 6.1.1.b ).

To discover the meaning of parameter @xmath we consider the 4D timelike
worldlines described by an observer with @xmath constant, @xmath and
@xmath (see [ 252 ] ). These are given by @xmath , were @xmath is the
proper time of the observer since the 4-velocity @xmath satisfies @xmath
. The 4-acceleration of these observers, @xmath , has a magnitude given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the value @xmath is also the magnitude of the
3-acceleration in the rest frame of the observer. From ( 6.40 ) we
achieve the important conclusion that the origin of the AdS C-metric,
@xmath (or @xmath ), is being accelerated with a constant acceleration
whose value is precisely given by the parameter @xmath that appears in
the AdS C-metric. Moreover, at radius @xmath [or @xmath defined in
equation ( 6.19 )] the acceleration is infinite which corresponds to the
trajectory of a null ray. Thus, observers held at @xmath constant see
this null ray as an acceleration horizon and they will never see events
beyond this null ray.

@xmath The 5-Dimensional description ( @xmath , @xmath )

In order to improve and clarify the physical aspects of the AdS C-metric
we turn now into the 5D representation of the solution.

The AdS spacetime can be represented as the 4-hyperboloid,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the 5D Minkowski (with two timelike coordinates) embedding spacetime,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the massless uncharged AdS C-metric is an AdS spacetime in disguise
and therefore our next task is to understand how the AdS C-metric can be
described in this 5D picture. To do this we first recover the massless
uncharged AdS C-metric described by ( 6.38 ) and apply to it the
coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 6.39 ). Transformations ( 6.43 ) define an
embedding of the massless uncharged AdS C-metric into the 5D description
of the AdS spacetime since they satisfy ( 6.41 ) and take directly (
6.38 ) into ( 6.42 ).

So, the massless uncharged AdS C-metric is an AdS spacetime, but we can
extract more information from this 5D analysis. Indeed, let us analyze
with some detail the properties of the origin of the radial coordinate,
@xmath (or @xmath ). This origin moves in the 5D Minkowski embedding
spacetime according to [see ( 6.43 )]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations define two hyperbolic lines lying on the AdS hyperboloid
which result from the intersection of this hyperboloid surface defined
by ( 6.41 ) and the @xmath =constant @xmath plane [see Fig. 6.12 .(a)].
They tell us that the origin is subjected to a uniform 5D acceleration,
@xmath , and consequently moves along a hyperbolic worldline in the 5D
embedding space, describing a Rindler-like motion (see Fig. 6.12 ) that
resembles the well-known hyperbolic trajectory, @xmath , of an
accelerated observer in Minkowski space. But uniformly accelerated
radial worldlines in the 5D Minkowski embedding space are also uniformly
accelerated worldlines in the 4D AdS space [ 253 ] , with the 5D
acceleration @xmath being related to the associated 4D acceleration
@xmath by @xmath . Comparing this last relation with ( 6.44 ) we
conclude that @xmath . Therefore, and once again, we conclude that the
origin of the AdS C-metric is uniformly accelerating with a 4D
acceleration whose value is precisely given by the parameter @xmath that
appears in the AdS C-metric, ( 6.3 ), and this solution describes a AdS
space whose origin is not at rest as usual but is being accelerated.
Note that the origin of the usual AdS spacetime describes the circle
@xmath in the AdS hyperboloid in contrast to the origin of the AdS
C-metric with @xmath whose motion is described by ( 6.44 ). This
discussion allowed us to find the physical interpretation of parameter
@xmath and to justify its label. Notice also that the original AdS
C-metric coordinates introduced in ( 6.3 ) cover only the half-space
@xmath . The Kruskal construction done in section 6.1.2.a extended this
solution to include also the @xmath region and so, in the extended
solution, @xmath is associated to two hyperbolas that represent two
accelerated points (see Fig. 6.12 ). These two hyperbolas approach
asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration horizon ( @xmath ), so
called because it is is absent when @xmath and present even when @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath Pair of accelerated black holes ( @xmath , @xmath )

Now, we are in position to interpret the massive and charged solutions
that describe two black holes accelerating away from each other. To see
clearly this, let us look to the Carter-Penrose diagrams near the
equator, Fig. 6.2 .(c), Fig. 6.4 .(c) and Fig. 6.6 .(c) (for the
discussion that follows we could, as well, look at the diagrams of case
(d) on these figures). Looking at these figures we can compare the
different features that belong to the massless uncharge case [Fig. 6.2
.(c)], to the massive uncharged case [Fig. 6.4 .(c)], and ending in the
massive charged case [Fig. 6.6 .(c)]. In Fig. 6.2 .(c) we identify the
two hyperbolas @xmath (represented by two timelike lines) approaching
asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration horizon ( @xmath ). When we
add a mass to the solution we conclude that each of these two simple
hyperbolas @xmath are replaced by the more complex structure that
represents a Schwarzschild black hole with its spacelike curvature
singularity and its horizon (these are represented by @xmath in the left
and right regions of Fig. 6.4 .(c)). So, the two accelerating points
@xmath have been replaced by two Schwarzschild black holes that approach
asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration horizon (represented by
@xmath in the middle region of Fig. 6.4 .(c)). The same interpretation
can be assigned to the massive charged solution. The two hyperbolas
@xmath of Fig. 6.2 .(c) are replaced by two Reissner-Nordström black
holes (with its timelike curvature singularity and its inner @xmath and
outer @xmath horizons; see the left and right regions of Fig. 6.6 .(c))
that approach asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration horizon
already present in the @xmath and @xmath causal diagram.

The Carter-Penrose diagrams of cases (a) and (b) of Fig. 6.4 and Fig.
6.6 indicate that an observer that is looking through an angular
direction which is in the vicinity of the south pole does not see the
acceleration horizon and notices the presence of a single black hole.
This is in agreement with Fig. 6.12 .(b). Indeed, in this schematic
figure, coordinates @xmath and @xmath can be seen as Kruskal coordinates
and we conclude that an observer, initially located at infinity ( @xmath
) and moving inwards into the black hole along the south pole, passes
through the black hole horizons and hits eventually its curvature
singularity. Therefore, he never has the opportunity of getting in
contact with the acceleration horizon and with the second black hole.
This is no longer true for an observer that moves into the black hole
along an angular direction that is in the vicinity of the north pole. In
Fig. 6.12 .(b) this observer would be between the two black holes, at
one of the points of the @xmath semi-axis (say) and moving into the
black hole. Clearly, this observer passes through the acceleration
horizon before crossing the black hole horizons and hitting its
curvature singularity. This description agrees with cases (c), (d) and
(e) of Fig. 6.4 and Fig. 6.6 which describe the solution along an
angular direction which includes the equatorial plane [case (c)] as well
as the north pole [case (e)].

The diagrams of the third column of Fig. 6.6 concerning the naked case
of the @xmath massive charged C-metric deserve a comment. First, we
stress that the term naked is employed in this situation because the
values of parameters @xmath and @xmath are such that the solution has no
charged associated horizons, i.e., in the notation used along this
paper, @xmath and @xmath are not present in these diagrams. However,
these diagrams present an interesting new feature. Indeed, looking at at
rows (a) and (b) we have a single accelerated naked particle, in rows
(c)-(d) we find two naked singularities approaching asymptotically the
acceleration horizon @xmath but in row (e) we have no longer two naked
singularities. More precisely, we have a kind of a single AdS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black hole with the curvature singularity being
provided by the mass and charge but with the horizons having their
origin in the acceleration and cosmological constant.

@xmath Source of acceleration. The strut or the strings

We can now ask what entity is causing the acceleration and where it is
localized. To achieve this aim, let us go back to the massless uncharged
AdS C-metric and consider radial worldlines motions with @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath constant or, equivalently, with @xmath , @xmath constant and
@xmath constant. These observers move along a Rindler-like hyperbola
described by [see ( 6.43 )]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since the right hand side of ( 6.45 ) is smaller than @xmath defined in
( 6.44 ), the north pole @xmath is localized between the hyperbolas
@xmath in the @xmath diagram [see Fig. 6.12 .(b)]. What does this means?
When we put @xmath or @xmath different from zero, each of the two
hyperbolas assigned to @xmath represent the accelerated motion of a
black hole. Thus, ( 6.45 ) tells us that the @xmath axis points toward
the other black hole, i.e., it is in the region between the two black
holes [see Fig. 6.12 .(b)]. The south pole points along the symmetry
axis towards spatial infinity. Now, in section 6.1.1.c , we saw that
parameter @xmath has been chosen in order to avoid a conical singularity
at the south pole [see ( 6.13 )] and, by doing so, at the north pole is
localized a conical singularity. This is associated to a strut that
joins the two black holes and provides the acceleration of the black
holes. To confirm this, recall that either a straight string or a strut
have a metric described by [ 98 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . A string has @xmath and the geometry around it
is conic, i.e., it is a plane with a deficit angle @xmath , while a
strut has @xmath . Their mass per unit length is @xmath and their
interior energy-momentum tensor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the directions normal to the strut, and
@xmath and @xmath are Dirac delta-functions. The pressure on the string
or in the strut satisfies @xmath . If @xmath we have a string, if @xmath
we have a strut. Now, turning to our case, the AdS C-metric, ( 6.16 ),
near the north pole is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.48)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 6.13 ) and the term between the curved
brackets is the induced metric in the plane normal to the strut that
connects the two black holes (along the @xmath direction) and will be
labelled as @xmath . The C-metric strut has a mass per unit length given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have @xmath and so @xmath is negative. To obtain the pressure of the
C-metric strut, we write ( 6.48 ) in a Minkowski frame, @xmath , with
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In this Minkowski frame
the energy-momentum tensor, @xmath , of the C-metric strut is given by (
6.47 ). In order to come back to the coordinate basis frame and write
the energy-momentum tensor of the C-metric strut in this basis we use
@xmath and obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.50)
  -- -- -- --------

Defining the unit vector @xmath [so, @xmath ], the pressure along the
strut is @xmath and the pressure on the C-metric strut is given by the
integration over the @xmath - @xmath plane normal to the strut,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, the pressure and mass density of the C-metric strut satisfy the
relation @xmath . Since @xmath is negative, at both ends of the strut,
one has a positive pressure pushing away the two black holes.

Alternatively, instead of ( 6.13 ), we could have chosen for @xmath the
value @xmath . By doing so we would avoid the deficit angle at the north
pole ( @xmath ) and leave a conical singularity at the south pole (
@xmath ). This option would lead to the presence of a semi-infinite
string extending from each of the black holes towards infinity along the
south pole direction, which would furnish the acceleration. The mass
density of both strings is @xmath and the pressure on the string, @xmath
, is negative which means that each string is pulling the corresponding
black hole towards infinity.

At this point, we briefly remark that when we take the limit @xmath the
AdS C-metric does not reduce to a static solution describing two AdS
black holes whose inward gravitational attraction is cancelled by an
outward pressure exerted by the strut or strings. Indeed, when the
acceleration parameter @xmath vanishes, the AdS C-metric reduces into a
single non-accelerated black hole free of struts or strings (see
subsection 6.1.1.e and section 6.1.3.c ). We shall return to this issue
in subsection 6.2.3.b , where we will discuss this note in detail and
explain that the reason for this behavior is due to the fact that the
black holes do not interact gravitationally. This conclusion is
withdrawn from the Carter-Penrose diagrams of the AdS C-metric.

Ernst [ 85 ] has employed a Harrison-type transformation to the @xmath
charged C-metric in order to append a suitably chosen external
electromagnetic field (see discussion of this solution in subsection
6.2.1.b ). With this procedure the so called Ernst solution is free of
conical singularities at both poles and the acceleration that drives
away the two oppositely charged Reissner-Nordström black holes is
totally provided by the external electromagnetic field. In the AdS
background we cannot remove the conical singularities through the
application of the Harrison transformation [ 124 ] . Indeed, the
Harrison transformation does not leave invariant the cosmological term
in the action. Therefore, applying the Harrison transformation to ( 6.3
)-( 6.6 ) does not yield a new solution of the Einstein-Maxwell-AdS
theory.

@xmath Radiative properties

The C-metric (either in the flat, de Sitter or anti-de Sitter
background) is an exact solution that is radiative. As noticed in [ 84 ]
, the gravitational radiation is present since the complex scalar of the
Newman-Penrose formalism, @xmath (where @xmath is the Weyl tensor and
@xmath is the usual null tetrad of Newman-Penrose), contains a term
proportional to @xmath . Similarly, the charged version of the C-metric
includes, in addition, electromagnetic radiation. In [ 104 ] , it has
been shown that the Bondi news functions of the flat C-metric are indeed
non-zero. These Bondi news functions appear in the context of the Bondi
method introduced to study gravitational radiative systems. They are
needed to determine the evolution of the radiative gravitational field
since they carry the information concerning the changes of the system.
When at least one of them is not zero, the total Bondi mass of the
system decreases due to the emission of gravitational waves. The Bondi
news functions of the flat C-metric have been explicitly calculated in [
112 , 113 ] . For a detailed review on the radiative properties of the
C-metric and other exact solutions see [ 113 ] . In an AdS background
the energy released by a pair of accelerated black holes has been
discussed in detail by Podolský, Ortaggio and Krtouš [ 190 ] .

###### 6.1.3.b @xmath. Single accelerated black hole

When @xmath the AdS C-metric describes a single accelerated black hole.
The absence of a second black hole is clearly indicated by the
Carter-Penrose diagrams of Figs. 6.8 and 6.9 .

This case has been studied in detail in [ 121 ] where the
Randall-Sundrum model in a lower dimensional scenario has analyzed. In
this scenario, the brane-world is a 2-brane moving in a 4D
asymptotically AdS background. They have shown that the AdS C-metric
with @xmath describes a black hole bound to the Minkowski 2-brane. The
brane tension is fine tuned relative to the cosmological background
acceleration and thus, @xmath is precisely the acceleration that the
black hole has to have in order to comove with the 2-brane. They
concluded that the AdS C-metric describes the final state of
gravitational collapse on the brane-world. The causal structure of the
massive uncharged solution (Fig. 6.8 ) has been first discussed in [ 121
] . For completeness, we have also presented the causal diagrams of the
massless uncharged solution in Fig. 6.7 and of the non-extremal,
extremal, and naked massive charged solutions in Fig. 6.9 .

In [ 121 ] the coordinate transformation that takes the massless
uncharged AdS C-metric with @xmath into the known description of the AdS
spacetime in Poincaré coordinates is given. From there one can easily go
to the 5D description on the AdS hyperboloid. This 5D description can be
also understood directly from the limits on the solutions @xmath and
@xmath when @xmath . Indeed, if we take the limit @xmath in section
6.1.3.a (where we have studied the 5D description of case @xmath ), one
sees that the cut that generates the two hyperbolic lines degenerates
into two half circles which, on identifying the ends of the AdS
hyperboloid at both infinities, yields one full circle. This means that
the trajectory of the origin of the AdS C-metric in the @xmath case is a
circle (which when one unwraps the hyperboloid to its universal cover
yields a straight accelerated line). As we will see in the next
subsection, for @xmath the trajectory of the origin is a circle which,
on taking the limit @xmath , still yields a circle. The two limits give
the same result as expected.

###### 6.1.3.c @xmath. Single accelerated black hole

The @xmath case was first analyzed in [ 122 ] . We have complemented
this work with the analysis of the causal structure. The causal diagrams
of this spacetime are identical to the ones of the AdS ( @xmath ) [see
Fig. 6.7 .(a)], of the AdS-Schwarzschild ( @xmath ) [see Fig. 6.8 .(a)],
and of the AdS @xmath Reissner-Nordström solutions ( @xmath ) [see Fig.
6.9 .(a)]. However, the curvature singularity of the single black hole
of the solution is not at rest but is being accelerated, with the
acceleration @xmath provided by an open string that extends from the
pole into asymptotic infinity.

As was done with the @xmath case, it is useful to interpret the solution
following two complementary descriptions, the 4D one and the 5D. One
first recovers the massless uncharged AdS C-metric defined by ( 6.3 )
and ( 6.4 ) (with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ), and after performing the
following coordinate transformation [ 122 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite the massless uncharged AdS C-metric as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . A procedure similar to the one used to obtain (
6.40 ) indicates that an observer describing 4D timelike worldlines with
@xmath constant, @xmath and @xmath suffers a 4-acceleration with
magnitude given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the origin of the AdS C-metric, @xmath , is being accelerated
with a constant acceleration whose value is precisely given by @xmath .
The causal diagram of this spacetime is drawn in Fig. 6.13 . Notice that
when we set @xmath , ( LABEL:metric-int2_AdS ) reduces to the usual AdS
spacetime written in static coordinates.

Now, to obtain the 5D description, one applies to (
LABEL:metric-int2_AdS ) the coordinate transformation [ 122 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Transformations ( 6.55 ) define an embedding of the massless uncharged
AdS C-metric with @xmath into the 5D description of the AdS spacetime
since they satisfy ( 6.41 ) and take directly ( LABEL:metric-int2_AdS )
into ( 6.42 ).

The origin of the radial coordinate, @xmath moves in the 5D Minkowski
embedding spacetime according to [see ( 6.55 )]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, contrarily to the case @xmath where the origin described a
Rindler-like hyperbolic trajectory [see ( 6.44 )] that suggests the
presence of two black holes driving away from each other in the extended
diagram, in the @xmath case the origin describes a circle (a uniformly
accelerated worldline) in the 5D embedding space (see Fig. 6.14 ),
indicating the presence of a single trapped black hole in the AdS
background.

To summarize and conclude, we present the global description on the AdS
hyperboloid of the AdS C-metric origin when the acceleration @xmath
varies from @xmath to zero. When @xmath the origin of the solution is
represented in the hyperboloid by two mutual perpendicular straight null
lines at @xmath that result from the intersection of the hyperboloid
surface defined by ( 6.41 ) and the @xmath plane (see Fig. 6.12 ). When
@xmath belongs to @xmath , the origin of the solution is represented by
two hyperbolic lines [see ( 6.44 )] lying on the AdS hyperboloid and
result from the intersection of ( 6.41 ) and the @xmath =constant @xmath
plane [see Fig. 6.12 .(a)]. As the acceleration approaches the value
@xmath the separation between the two hyperbolic lines increases. When
@xmath the separation between the two hyperbolic lines becomes infinite
and they collapse into two half circles which, on identifying the ends
of the AdS hyperboloid at both infinities, yields one full circle in the
@xmath plane at infinite @xmath . At this point we see again that the
value @xmath sets a transition stage between @xmath and @xmath . When
@xmath belongs to @xmath the origin of the solution is described again
by a circle [see ( 6.56 )] in the @xmath plane but now at a constant
@xmath . As the acceleration approaches the value @xmath , the radius of
this circle decreases and when @xmath the circle has a radius with value
@xmath and is at @xmath (see Fig. 6.14 ) and we recover the usual AdS
solution whose origin is at rest.

#### 6.2 Pair of accelerated black holes in a flat background: the flat
C-metric and Ernst solution

##### 6.2.1 General properties of the flat C-metric and Ernst solution

The original flat C-metric has been found Levi-Civita [ 82 ] and by Weyl
[ 83 ] in 1918-1919. In 1963 Ehlers and Kundt [ 100 ] have given the
actual name to this solution. The physical interpretation of the flat
C-metric remained unknown until 1970 when Kinnersley and Walker [ 84 ] ,
in a pathbreaking work, have shown that the solution describes two
uniformly accelerated black holes in opposite directions, with the
acceleration being provided by strings or by a strut. In this section we
will review the work of Kinnersley and Walker [ 84 ] . In this way, in
the end of this chapter we will be able to make a comparison between the
C-metric in an AdS, flat and dS background. From the charged flat
C-metric, Ernst [ 85 ] has generated a knew exact solution in which the
black hole pair is accelerated by an external electromagnetic field. We
will also review briefly this solution.

###### 6.2.1.a The flat C-metric

The gravitational field of the flat C-metric can be written as [ 84 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore we have now @xmath . Note that when @xmath , the function
@xmath behaves in the same manner described in the AdS case. The Maxwell
field in the magnetic case is given by ( 6.5 ), while in the electric
case it is given by ( 6.6 ). This solution depends on three parameters
namely, @xmath which is the acceleration of the black holes (see section
6.2.3 ), and @xmath and @xmath which are interpreted as the ADM mass and
electromagnetic charge of the non-accelerated black holes, respectively.
To justify this interpretation of @xmath and @xmath , apply to ( 6.57 )
the coordinate transformations [ 114 ] , @xmath , @xmath , together with
( 6.9 ) and setting @xmath (and @xmath , @xmath ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . So, when the acceleration parameter vanishes, the flat
C-metric, ( 6.57 ), reduces to the Schwarzschild and Reissner-Nordström
black holes and the parameters @xmath and @xmath that are present in the
flat C-metric are precisely the ADM mass and ADM electromagnetic charge
of these non-accelerated black holes. The physical properties and
interpretation of the flat C-metric have been analyzed in detail by
Kinnersley and Walker [ 84 ] .

Now, the general properties of the flat C-metric, in what concerns the
issues of radial coordinate and curvature singularities, the analysis of
the angular surfaces and conical singularities, and the issue of
coordinate ranges are straightforwardly similar to the corresponding
properties of the AdS C-metric analyzed in subsections 6.1.1.b , 6.1.1.c
, and 6.1.1.d . For this reason we will not analyze again these
properties in detail. We ask the reader to go back to subsection 6.1.1.b
or to see [ 84 ] for details.

###### 6.2.1.b The Ernst solution

Ernst [ 85 ] has employed a Harrison-type transformation to the charged
flat C-metric in order to append a suitably chosen external
electromagnetic field. With this procedure the Ernst solution is free of
conical singularities at both poles and the acceleration that drives
away the two oppositely charged Reissner-Nordström black holes is
provided by the external electromagnetic field. The gravitational field
of the Ernst solution is [ 85 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 6.58 ), and

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.61)
  -- -- -- --------

In the electric solution one has @xmath and @xmath , i.e., @xmath and
@xmath are respectively the electric charge and the external electric
field. In the magnetic solution one has @xmath and @xmath , i.e., @xmath
and @xmath are respectively the magnetic charge and the external
magnetic field. The electromagnetic potential of the magnetic Ernst
solution is [ 85 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for the electric Ernst solution it is given by [ 101 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . This exact solution describes two oppositely
charged Reissner-Nordström black holes accelerating away from each other
in a magnetic Melvin [ 102 ] or in an electric Melvin-like background,
respectively.

Technically, the Harrison-type transformation employed to generate the
Ernst solution introduces, in addition to the parameter @xmath , a new
parameter, the external field @xmath that when appropriately chosen
allow us to eliminate the conical singularities at both poles. Indeed,
applying a procedure analogous to the one employed in subsection 6.1.1.c
, but now focused in spacetime ( LABEL:Ernst ), one introduces the new
angular coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . As before, the conical singularity at the south pole is
avoided by choosing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the conical singularity at the north pole can now be also
eliminated by choosing the value of the external field @xmath to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

An interesting support to the physical interpretation given to the Ernst
solution is the fact that in the particle limit, i.e., for small values
of @xmath , the condition ( 6.66 ) implies the classical Newton’s law [
85 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, in this regime, the acceleration is indeed provided by the Lorentz
force.

Remark that in a cosmological background we cannot remove the conical
singularities through the application of the Harrison transformation [
124 ] . Indeed, the Harrison transformation applied by Ernst does not
leave invariant the cosmological term in the action. Therefore, applying
the Harrison transformation to the cosmological C-metric solutions does
not yield a new solution of the Einstein-Maxwell theory in a
cosmological background.

##### 6.2.2 Causal Structure of the flat C-metric

For a similar reason to the one that occurs in the AdS C-metric, due to
the lower restriction on the value of @xmath ( @xmath ), the choice of
the Kruskal coordinates (and therefore the Carter-Penrose diagrams) for
the flat C-metric depends on the angular direction @xmath we are looking
at [ 84 , 104 ] . In fact, depending on the value of @xmath , the region
accessible to @xmath might contain a different number roots of @xmath
(see Figs. 6.15 , 6.17 , and 6.19 ) and so the solution may have a
different number of horizons. We have to consider separately three
distinct sets of angular directions, namely (a) @xmath , (c) @xmath ,
and (c) @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath when @xmath . These three cases
are perfectly identified in Figs. 6.15 , 6.17 , and 6.19 . The technical
procedures to obtain the Carter-Penrose diagrams of these flat cases
(a), (b) and (c) is equal to the ones presented in the AdS cases (b),
(c) and (d) of subsection 6.1.2.a , respectively. Hence, we will not
present again the construction process that leads to the diagrams. We
will only draw the diagrams, and even the discussion of their main
features follows now directly from the analysis of subsection 6.1.2.a .
Once again, the description of the solution depends crucially on the
values of @xmath and @xmath . We will consider the three most relevant
solutions, namely: A. Massless uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ),
B. Massive uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ), and C. Massive
charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ). The causal diagrams of the Ernst
solution are equal to the ones that describe the flat C-metric.

###### 6.2.2.a Massless uncharged solution (@xmath, @xmath)

In this case we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . The general behavior of these functions for this case is
represented in Fig. 6.15 .

The Carter-Penrose diagrams of the massless uncharged flat C-metric and
Ernst solution are sketched in Fig. 6.16 for the three angular
directions, (a), (b) and (c), specified above.

###### 6.2.2.b Massive uncharged solution (@xmath, @xmath)

As occurs with the AdS case (see subsection 6.1.2.a ), we will consider
only the case with small mass or acceleration, i.e., we require @xmath ,
in order to have compact angular surfaces (see discussion on the text of
Fig. 6.17 ). We also demand @xmath to belong to the range @xmath (see
Fig. 6.17 ) where @xmath and such that @xmath and @xmath when @xmath .
By satisfying the two above conditions we endow the @xmath constant and
@xmath constant surfaces with the topology of a compact surface.

The Carter-Penrose diagrams of the @xmath , and @xmath flat C-metric are
sketched in Fig. 6.18 for the three angular directions, (a), (b) and
(c), specified above.

###### 6.2.2.c Massive charged solution (@xmath, @xmath)

When both the mass and charge parameters are non-zero, depending on the
values of the parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath can be
positive in a single compact interval, @xmath , or in two distinct
compact intervals, @xmath and @xmath , say (see Fig. 6.19 ). In this
latter case we will work only with the interval @xmath (say) for which
the charged solutions are in the same sector of those we have analyzed
in the last two subsections when @xmath .

The Carter-Penrose diagrams of the charged massive flat C-metric and
Ernst solution are sketched in Fig. 6.20 for the three angular
directions, (a), (b) and (c), specified above.

##### 6.2.3 Physical interpretation of the flat C-metric

The parameter @xmath that is found in the flat C-metric is interpreted
as being an acceleration and the flat C-metric describes a pair of black
holes accelerating away from each other. In this section we will justify
this statement.

###### 6.2.3.a Description of the @xmath, @xmath solution

Use of ( 6.7 ), ( 6.9 ) with @xmath and @xmath , together with @xmath on
( 6.57 ) yields [ 84 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

As noticed by Kinnersly and Walker [ 84 ] this spacetime is closely
related to the ones discussed by Newman and Unti. There is a coordinate
transformation that allows to recast ( 6.68 ) into a Minkowski form,
namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, under this transformation the massless neutral flat C-metric
transforms into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence, the @xmath and @xmath flat C-metric is a Minkowski spacetime.
But we can extract more information from this analysis. Indeed, let us
analyze with some detail the properties of the origin of the radial
coordinate, @xmath . This origin moves according to [see ( 6.69 )]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations define two hyperbolic lines that tell us that the origin
is subjected to a uniform acceleration, @xmath , and consequently moves
along a hyperbolic worldline, describing a Rindler motion.

Let us now address the issue of the acceleration source and its
localization. In the massless uncharged dS C-metric, observers that move
along radial worldlines with @xmath const and @xmath const describe the
Rindler-like hyperbola [see ( 6.84 )]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, observers that move in the region @xmath describe the the
hyperbolic line @xmath (which is in between the two @xmath hyperbolas,
@xmath ), while observers in the region @xmath follow the curve @xmath .
When we put @xmath or @xmath different from zero, each of the two
hyperbolas assigned to @xmath represents the accelerated motion of a
black hole. Hence, from ( 6.72 ) we conclude that the north pole axis is
in the region between the two black holes [see Fig. 6.12 .(b)]. When the
conical singularity is at the north pole we then have a strut in between
the black holes, while when we choose the parameters such that the
conical singularity is at the south pole we have two strings from each
of the black holes into infinity that accelerates them. Notice also that
the original flat C-metric coordinates introduced in ( 6.57 ) cover only
the half-space @xmath . The Kruskal construction extends this solution
to include also the @xmath region and so, in the extended solution,
@xmath is associated to two hyperbolas that represent two accelerated
points [see Fig. 6.12 .(b)] that approach asymptotically the Rindler
acceleration horizon ( @xmath ).

###### 6.2.3.b Pair of accelerated black holes (@xmath, @xmath)

The massive and charged solutions describe two black holes accelerating
away from each other. This interpretation follows directly from the
Carter-Penrose diagrams, Fig. 6.16 , Fig. 6.18 and Fig. 6.20 , in a way
already explained in subsection 6.1.3.a . In Fig. 6.16 we identify the
two hyperbolas @xmath (represented by two timelike lines) approaching
asymptotically the Rindler acceleration horizon ( @xmath ). When we add
a mass or a charge to the solution we conclude that each of these two
simple hyperbolas @xmath are replaced by the more complex structure that
represents a Schwarzschild black hole (see Fig. 6.18 ) or a
Reissner-Nordström black hole (see Fig. 6.20 ).

At this point, a remark is relevant. Israel and Khan [ 90 ] (see also
Bach and Weyl [ 91 ] , Aryal, Ford and Vilenkin [ 92 ] , and Costa and
Perry [ 93 ] ) have found a @xmath solution that represents two (or
more) collinear Schwarzschild black holes interacting with each other in
such a way that allows dynamical equilibrium. In this solution, the two
black holes are connected by a strut that exerts an outward pressure
which cancels the inward gravitational attraction and so the distance
between the two black holes remains fixed [ 90 ] . Now, the C-metric
solution reduces to a single non-accelerated black hole free of struts
or strings when the acceleration parameter @xmath vanishes (see
subsection 6.2.1.a ). Thus, when we take the limit @xmath , the C-metric
does not reduce to the static solution of Israel and Khan. The reason
for this behavior can be found in the Carter-Penrose diagrams of the
C-metric. For example, looking into Fig. 6.18 .(c) [redrawn again in
Fig. 6.21 .(a) with the motion of a light ray that will be described
just below] which represents the massive uncharged flat C-metric along
the north pole, we conclude that a null ray sent from the vicinity of
one of the black holes can never cross the acceleration horizon ( @xmath
) into the other black hole. Indeed, recall that in these diagrams the
vertical axes represents the time flow and that light rays move along
@xmath lines. Thus, a null ray that is emitted from a region next to the
horizon @xmath of the left black hole of Fig. 6.21 .(a) can pass through
the acceleration horizon @xmath and, once it has done this, we will
necessarily proceed into infinity @xmath [see Fig. 6.21 .(a)]. This null
ray cannot enter the right region of Fig. 6.21 .(a) and, in particular,
it cannot hit the horizon @xmath of the right black hole. So, if the two
black holes cannot communicate through a null ray they cannot interact
gravitationally. The only interaction that is present in the system is
between the strut and each one of the black holes, that suffer an
acceleration which is only furnished by the strut’s pressure. That the
limit @xmath does not yield the solution [ 90 ] can also be inferred
from [ 107 ] , where the flat C-metric is obtained from the the two
black hole solution of [ 90 ] but through a singular limit in which
several quantities go appropriately to infinity. The situation is
completely different in the case of the Israel-Khan solution, whose
causal diagram is sketched in Fig. 6.21 .(b). In this case, a null ray
that is emitted from a region next to the horizon @xmath of the left
black hole can hit the horizon @xmath of the right black hole. Hence, in
the Israel-Khan solution the two black holes can communicate through a
null ray and so they interact gravitationally. Note also that the
acceleration horizon is absent in the causal diagram of the Israel-Khan
solution, as expected for a static solution.

The Israel-Khan solution [ 90 ] is valid for @xmath but, although it has
not been done, it can be extended in principle for generic @xmath .
Hence, the above remark holds also for generic @xmath , as has already
briefly mentioned in the end of subsection 6.1.3.a .

A similar discussion also applies to the Ernst solution. In this
solution, there is no gravitational force between the two
Reissner-Nordtröm black holes. They accelerate apart only subjected to
the Lorentz force provided for the external electromagnetic field, and
when @xmath the Ernst solution reduces to a single non-accelerated
Reissner-Nordtröm black hole. On the other side, Tomimatsu [ 94 ] has
found a solution, that is the charged counterpart of the neutral
Israel-Khan solution [ 90 ] , in which two Reissner-Nordtröm black holes
are held in equilibrium. In this case the gravitational attraction
between the black holes is cancelled by the Coulomb repulsion, and this
occurs only when the black holes are extreme, @xmath . Tomimatsu has
generalized for the black hole case, the relativistic treatment used by
Bonnor [ 95 ] and Ohta and Kimura [ 96 ] to study the equilibrium system
of two charged particles.

#### 6.3 Pair of accelerated black holes in a de Sitter background: the
dS C-metric

The plan of this section is as follows. In section 6.3.1 we present the
dS C-metric and analyze its curvature and conical singularities. In
section 6.3.2 we study the causal diagrams of the solution. In section
6.3.3 we give and justify a physical interpretation to the solution. The
description of the solution in the dS 4-hyperboloid and the physics of
the strut are analyzed.

##### 6.3.1 General properties of the dS C-metric

###### 6.3.1.a The dS C-metric

The dS C-metric, i.e., the C-metric with positive cosmological constant
@xmath , has been obtained by Plebański and Demiański [ 86 ] . For zero
rotation and zero NUT parameter, the gravitational field of the dS
C-metric can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Maxwell field in the magnetic case is given by ( 6.5 ), while in the
electric case it is given by ( 6.6 ). This solution depends on four
parameters namely, the cosmological length @xmath , @xmath which is the
acceleration of the black holes (see subsection 6.3.3 ), and @xmath and
@xmath which are interpreted as the ADM mass and electromagnetic charge
of the non-accelerated black holes, respectively (see subsection 6.3.1.b
). The physical properties and interpretation of this solution have been
analyzed by Dias and Lemos [ 88 ] , and by Podolský and Griffiths [ 120
] .

Now, the general properties of the dS C-metric, in what concerns the
issues of radial coordinate and curvature singularities, the analysis of
the angular surfaces and conical singularities, and the issue of
coordinate ranges are straightforwardly similar to the corresponding
properties of the AdS C-metric analyzed in subsections 6.1.1.b , 6.1.1.c
, and 6.1.1.d . For this reason we will not analyze again these
properties in detail. We will only briefly mention the main features,
and we ask the reader to go back to subsection 6.1.1.b or to see [ 88 ]
for details.

As occurs with the AdS C-metric (see subsection 6.1.1.b ), we can define
a radial coordinate given by ( 6.7 ). The Kretschmann scalar is also
given by ( 6.8 ), and indicates that the dS C-metric has a curvature
singularity at @xmath , and @xmath must belong to the range @xmath . The
point @xmath corresponds to a point that is infinitely far away from the
curvature singularity, thus as @xmath increases we approach the
curvature singularity and @xmath is the inverse of a radial coordinate.
At most, @xmath can have four real zeros which we label in ascending
order by @xmath . The roots @xmath and @xmath are respectively the inner
and outer charged black hole horizons, and @xmath is an acceleration
horizon which coincides with the cosmological horizon and has a
non-spherical shape, although the topology is spherical. The negative
root @xmath satisfies @xmath and has no physical significance, i.e., it
does not belong to the range accessible to @xmath .

As occurs with the AdS C-metric (see subsection 6.1.1.c ), we will
demand that @xmath belongs to the interval @xmath , sketched onwards in
the appropriate figures, where @xmath . By doing this we guarantee that
the metric has the correct signature @xmath [see ( 6.73 )] and that the
angular surfaces @xmath const and @xmath const are compact. In these
angular surfaces we can also define, through ( 6.9 ), two new
coordinates, @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath ranges between @xmath and
@xmath is an arbitrary positive constant which will be discussed later.
The coordinate @xmath ranges between the north pole, @xmath , and the
south pole, @xmath (not necessarily at @xmath ). Rewritten as a function
of these new coordinates, the angular part of the metric becomes @xmath
. Note that when we set @xmath we have @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Therefore, in this case the compact
angular surface @xmath is a round @xmath sphere which justifies the
label given to the new angular coordinates. When we set @xmath the
compact angular surface turns into a deformed 2-sphere that we represent
onwards by @xmath .

Finally, note again that when @xmath or @xmath are not zero there is a
curvature singularity at @xmath . Therefore, we restrict the radial
coordinate to the range @xmath . On the other hand, we have restricted
@xmath to belong to the range @xmath where @xmath . From @xmath we then
conclude that @xmath must belong to the range @xmath . Indeed, @xmath
corresponds to @xmath , and @xmath to @xmath . However, when both @xmath
and @xmath vanish there are no restrictions on the ranges of @xmath and
@xmath (i.e., @xmath and @xmath ) since in this case there is no
curvature singularity at the origin of @xmath to justify the constraint
on the coordinates.

###### 6.3.1.b Mass and charge parameters

In this subsection, one gives the physical interpretation of parameters
@xmath and @xmath that appear in the dS C-metric. Applying to ( 6.73 )
the coordinate transformations [ 120 ] , @xmath , @xmath , together with
( 6.9 ) and setting @xmath (and @xmath , @xmath ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . So, when the acceleration parameter vanishes, the dS
C-metric, ( 6.73 ), reduces to the dS-Schwarzschild and dS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black holes and the parameters @xmath and @xmath that
are present in the dS C-metric are precisely the ADM mass and ADM
electromagnetic charge of these non-accelerated black holes.

##### 6.3.2 Causal Structure of the dS C-metric

In this section we analyze the causal structure of the solution. The
original dS C-metric, ( 6.73 ), is not geodesically complete. To obtain
the maximal analytic spacetime, i.e., to draw the Carter-Penrose
diagrams we have to introduce the usual null Kruskal coordinates. The
technical procedure to obtain the Carter-Penrose diagram is similar to
the one presented in subsection 6.1.2 . Hence, we will not present again
the construction process that leads to the diagrams. We will only
discuss the main features and the diagrams. The description of the
solution depends crucially on the values of @xmath and @xmath . We will
consider the three most relevant solutions, namely: A. Massless
uncharged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ), B. Massive uncharged solution (
@xmath , @xmath ), and C. Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ).

###### 6.3.2.a Massless uncharged solution (@xmath, @xmath)

In this case we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (and so @xmath )
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The general behavior of these functions for this case is represented in
Fig. 6.22 .

The angular surfaces @xmath ( @xmath const and @xmath const) are spheres
and both the north and south poles are free of conical singularities.
The origin of the radial coordinate @xmath has no curvature singularity
and therefore both @xmath and @xmath can lie in the range @xmath .
However, in the realistic general case, where @xmath or @xmath are
non-zero, there is a curvature singularity at @xmath . Since the
discussion of the present section is only a preliminary to that of the
massive general case we will treat the origin @xmath as if it had a
curvature singularity and thus we admit that @xmath belongs to the range
@xmath and @xmath lies in the region @xmath . We leave a discussion on
the extension to negative values of @xmath to section 6.3.3.a .

The construction of the Carter-Penrose diagram follows directly the one
given in case (c) of subsection 6.1.2.a . The Carter-Penrose diagram of
the massless uncharged dS C-metric is sketched in Fig. 6.23 . @xmath is
represented by a timelike line while @xmath is a spacelike line (with
@xmath and @xmath representing, respectively, the past and future
infinity). The two mutual perpendicular straight null lines at @xmath ,
@xmath , represent a Rindler-like accelerated horizon.

To end this subsection it is important to remark that, contrary to what
happens in the C-metric with @xmath [ 87 ] and with @xmath [ 84 ] , the
presence of the acceleration in the @xmath C-metric does not introduce
an extra horizon relatively to the @xmath solution. Indeed, in the dS
C-metric the acceleration horizon coincides with the cosmological
horizon that is already present in the @xmath solution. However, in the
@xmath solution the cosmological horizon has the topology of a round
sphere, while in the dS C-metric ( @xmath ) the presence of the
acceleration induces a non-spherical shape in the acceleration
(cosmological) horizon. This conclusion is set from the expression of
the radius of the horizon, @xmath . It varies with the angular direction
@xmath and depends on the value of @xmath [see ( 6.76 )]. Another
important difference between the causal structure of the dS C-metric and
the causal structure of the @xmath and the @xmath cases is the fact that
the general features of the Carter-Penrose diagram of the dS C-metric
are independent of the angular coordinate @xmath . Indeed, in the @xmath
case (see subsection 6.1.2.a and [ 87 ] ) and in the @xmath case (see
subsection 6.2.2 and [ 84 ] ), the Carter-Penrose diagram at the north
pole direction is substantially different from the one along the south
pole direction and different from the diagram along the equator
direction (see [ 84 , 87 ] ).

###### 6.3.2.b Massive uncharged solution (@xmath, @xmath)

The construction of the Carter-Penrose diagram for the @xmath dS
C-metric follows up directly from the last subsection. We will consider
the small mass or acceleration case, i.e., we require @xmath and we also
demand @xmath to belong to the range @xmath (represented in Fig. 6.24
and such that @xmath and @xmath when @xmath ) where @xmath . By
satisfying the two above conditions we endow the @xmath const and @xmath
const surfaces @xmath with the topology of a compact surface. For @xmath
this surface is an open one and will not be discussed.

Now we turn our attention to the behavior of function @xmath . We have
to consider three distinct cases (see Fig. 6.25 ), namely: (i) pair of
non-extreme dS-Schwarzschild black holes ( @xmath ) for which @xmath
(see Fig. 6.24 ), (ii) pair of extreme dS-Schwarzschild black holes (
@xmath ) for which @xmath , and (iii) case @xmath for which @xmath is
always negative in the allowed range for @xmath . This last case
represents a naked particle and will not be discussed further. Notice
that when we set @xmath in the above relations we get the known results
[ 254 ] for the non-accelerated dS spacetime, namely: for @xmath we have
the non-extreme dS-Schwarzschild solution and for @xmath we get the
extreme dS-Schwarzschild solution. In what follows we will draw the
Carter-Penrose diagrams of cases (i) and (ii).

(i) Pair of non-extreme dS-Schwarzschild black holes ( @xmath ): the
technical procedure to obtain the Carter-Penrose diagram is similar to
the one described along section 6.3.2.a . In what concerns the physical
conclusions, we will see that the essential difference is the presence
of an extra horizon, a Schwarzschild-like horizon ( @xmath ) due to the
non-vanishing mass parameter, in addition to the accelerated
Rindler-like horizon ( @xmath ). Another important difference is the
presence of a curvature singularity at the origin of the radial
coordinate and the existence of a conical singularity at one of the
poles. The Carter-Penrose diagram is drawn in Fig. 6.26 .(i) and has a
structure that can be divided into left, middle and right regions. The
middle region contains the spacelike infinity (with @xmath and @xmath
representing, respectively, the past and future infinity) and an
accelerated Rindler-like horizon, @xmath , that was already present in
the @xmath corresponding diagram [see Fig. 6.23 ]. The left and right
regions both contain a spacelike curvature singularity at @xmath and a
Schwarzschild-like horizon, @xmath . This diagram is analogous to the
one of the non-accelerated ( @xmath ) dS-Schwarzschild solution.
However, in the @xmath solution the cosmological and black hole horizons
have the topology of a round sphere, while in the dS C-metric ( @xmath )
the presence of the acceleration induces a non-spherical shape in the
acceleration horizon (that coincides with the cosmological horizon) and
in the black hole horizon. Indeed, notice that once we find the zero,
@xmath , of @xmath that corresponds to an accelerated or black hole
horizon, the position of these horizons depends on the angular
coordinate @xmath since @xmath . In section 6.3.3.b we will justify that
this solution describes a pair of accelerated dS-Schwarzschild black
holes.

(ii) Pair of extreme dS-Schwarzschild black holes ( @xmath ): for this
range of values, we have a degenerate case in which the size of the
black hole horizon approaches and equals the size of the acceleration
horizon. In this case, as we shall see in section 6.3.3.b , the dS
C-metric describes a pair of accelerated extreme dS-Schwarzschild black
holes. The Carter-Penrose diagram of this solution is sketched in Fig.
6.26 .(ii). It should be noted that for this sector of the solution, and
as occurs with the @xmath case, there is an appropriate limiting
procedure (see chapter 7 and [ 89 ] ) that takes this solution into the
Nariai C-metric, i.e., the accelerated counterpart of the Nariai
solution [ 125 ] .

###### 6.3.2.c Massive charged solution (@xmath, @xmath)

When both the mass and charge parameters are non-zero, depending on the
values of the parameters, @xmath can be positive in a single compact
interval, @xmath , or in two distinct compact intervals, @xmath and
@xmath , say. We require that @xmath belongs to the interval @xmath
(sketched in Fig. 6.27 ) for which the charged solutions are in the same
sector of those we have analyzed in the last two subsections when @xmath
. Defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the above requirement is fulfilled by the parameter range @xmath . Now
we look into the behavior of the function @xmath . Depending on the sign
of @xmath at @xmath and @xmath (with @xmath and @xmath being the points
represented in Fig. 6.27 where the derivative of @xmath vanishes) we can
group the solutions into five different relevant physical classes,
namely: (i) @xmath and @xmath , (ii) @xmath and @xmath , (iii) @xmath
and @xmath , (iv) @xmath and @xmath , and (v) @xmath and @xmath . The
ranges of parameters @xmath , and @xmath that correspond to these five
cases are identified in Fig. 6.28 .

Condition @xmath requires @xmath and @xmath is satisfied by @xmath . We
have @xmath except at @xmath where these two functions are equal; @xmath
is always positive; and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Case
(i) has three horizons, the acceleration horizon @xmath and the inner (
@xmath ) and outer ( @xmath ) charged horizons and is the one that is
exactly represented in Fig. 6.27 ( @xmath ); in case (ii) the inner
horizon and outer horizon coincide ( @xmath ) and are located at @xmath
( @xmath is also present); in case (iii) the acceleration horizon and
outer horizon coincide ( @xmath ) and are located at @xmath ( @xmath is
also present); finally in cases (iv) and (v) there is a single horizon
@xmath . As will be seen, case (i) describes a pair of accelerated dS
@xmath Reissner-Nordström (dS-RN) black holes, case (ii) describes a
pair of extreme dS-RN black holes in which the inner and outer charged
horizons become degenerated, case (iii) describes a pair of extreme
dS-RN black holes in which acceleration horizon and outer charged
horizon become degenerated, and cases (iv) and (v) describe a pair of
naked charged particles. In chapter 7 we will return to the study of the
properties of the extreme cases of the dS C-metric. We will give
explicit expressions that give the mass and charge of these extreme
black holes as a function of @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, we will see
that for the sector (ii) of the solution, and as occurs with the @xmath
case, there is an appropriate limiting procedure [ 89 ] that takes this
solution into the Bertotti-Robinson C-metric, i.e., the accelerated
counterpart of the Bertotti-Robinson solution [ 127 ] . We will also
show that for the sector (iii) of the solution, and as occurs with the
@xmath case, there is also an appropriate limiting procedure [ 89 ] that
takes this solution into the charged Nariai C-metric, i.e., the
accelerated counterpart of the charged Nariai solution [ 169 , 125 ] .

The essential differences between the Carter-Penrose diagram of the
massive charged solutions and the diagram of the massive uncharged
solutions are: (1) the curvature singularity is now represented by a
timelike line rather than a spacelike line, (2) excluding the extreme
and naked cases, there are now (in addition to the accelerated
Rindler-like horizon, @xmath ) not one but two extra horizons, the
expected inner ( @xmath ) and outer ( @xmath ) horizons associated to
the charged character of the solution.

The Carter-Penrose diagram of case (i) is drawn in Fig. 6.29 .(i) and
has a structure that, as occurs in the massive uncharged case, can be
divided into left, middle and right regions. The middle region contains
the spacelike infinity and an accelerated Rindler-like horizon, @xmath ,
that was already present in the @xmath corresponding diagram (see Fig.
6.23 ). The left and right regions both contain a timelike curvature
singularity ( @xmath ), and an inner ( @xmath ) and an outer ( @xmath )
horizons associated to the charged character of the solution. This
diagram is analogous the the one of the non-accelerated ( @xmath ) dS
@xmath Reissner-Nordström solution. However, in the @xmath solution the
cosmological and black hole horizons have the topology of a round
sphere, while in the dS C-metric ( @xmath ) the presence of the
acceleration induces a non-spherical shape in the accelerated horizon
(that coincides with the cosmological horizon) and in the black hole
horizons. Indeed, notice that once we find the zero, @xmath , of @xmath
that corresponds to an accelerated or black hole horizon, the position
of these horizons depends on the angular coordinate @xmath since @xmath
. In Fig. 6.29 are also represented the other cases (ii)-(v). Again the
accelerated horizon is in between two (extreme) black holes in cases
(ii) and (iii) and in between two naked particles in cases (iv) and (v).

##### 6.3.3 Physical interpretation of the dS C-metric

The parameter @xmath that is found in the dS C-metric is interpreted as
being an acceleration and the dS C-metric describes a pair of black
holes accelerating away from each other in a dS background. In this
section we will justify this statement.

In subsection 6.3.1.b we saw that, when @xmath , the general dS
C-metric, ( 6.73 ), reduces to the dS ( @xmath ), to the
dS-Schwarzschild ( @xmath ), and to the dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström
solutions ( @xmath ). Therefore, the parameters @xmath and @xmath are,
respectively, the ADM mass and ADM electromagnetic charge of the
non-accelerated black holes. Moreover, if we set the mass and charge
parameters equal to zero, even when @xmath , the Kretschmann scalar [see
( 6.8 )] reduces to the value expected for the dS spacetime. This
indicates that the massless uncharged dS C-metric is a dS spacetime in
disguise.

In this section, we will first interpret case A. Massless uncharged
solution ( @xmath , @xmath ), which is the simplest, and then with the
acquired knowledge we interpret cases B. Massive uncharged solution (
@xmath , @xmath ) and C. Massive charged solution ( @xmath , @xmath ).
We will interpret the solution following two complementary descriptions,
the four dimensional (4D) one and the five dimensional (5D).

###### 6.3.3.a Description of the @xmath, @xmath solution

The 4-Dimensional description :

As we said in 6.3.2.a , when @xmath and @xmath the origin of the radial
coordinate @xmath defined in ( 6.7 ) has no curvature singularity and
therefore @xmath has the range @xmath . However, in the realistic
general case, where @xmath or @xmath are non-zero, there is a curvature
singularity at @xmath and since the discussion of the massless uncharged
solution was only a preliminary to that of the massive general case,
following [ 104 ] , we have treated the origin @xmath as if it had a
curvature singularity and thus we admitted that @xmath belongs to the
range @xmath . In these conditions we obtained the causal diagram of
Fig. 6.23 . Note however that one can make a further extension to
include the negative values of @xmath , enlarging in this way the range
accessible to the Kruskal coordinates @xmath and @xmath . By doing this
procedure we obtain the causal diagram of the dS spacetime, represented
in Fig. 6.30 .

Now, we want to clearly identify the parameter @xmath that appears in
the dS C-metric with the acceleration of its origin. To achieve this
aim, we recover the massless uncharged dS C-metric defined by ( 6.73 )
and ( 6.74 ) (with @xmath and @xmath ), and after performing the
following coordinate transformation [ 120 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite the massless uncharged dS C-metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point some remarks are convenient. The origin of the radial
coordinate @xmath corresponds to @xmath and therefore to @xmath , where
@xmath has been introduced in ( 6.7 ). So, when we consider the massive
dS C-metric there will be a curvature singularity at @xmath . Moreover,
when we set @xmath , ( 6.79 ) reduces to the usual dS spacetime written
in static coordinates.

To discover the meaning of the parameter @xmath we consider the 4D
timelike worldlines described by an observer with @xmath const, @xmath
and @xmath (see [ 120 ] ). These are given by @xmath , were @xmath is
the proper time of the observer and the 4-velocity @xmath satisfies
@xmath . The 4-acceleration of these observers, @xmath , has a magnitude
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the value @xmath is also the magnitude of the
3-acceleration in the rest frame of the observer. From ( 6.81 ) we
achieve the important conclusion that the origin of the dS C-metric,
@xmath (or @xmath ), is being accelerated with a constant acceleration
@xmath whose value is precisely given by the parameter @xmath that
appears in the dS C-metric. Moreover, at radius @xmath [or @xmath
defined in equation ( 6.76 )] the acceleration is infinite which
corresponds to the trajectory of a null ray. Thus, observers held at
@xmath const see this null ray as an acceleration horizon and they will
never see events beyond this null ray. This acceleration horizon
coincides with the dS cosmological horizon and has a non-spherical
shape. For the benefit of comparison with the @xmath dS spacetime, we
note that when we set @xmath , ( 6.81 ) says that the origin, @xmath ,
has zero acceleration and at radius @xmath the acceleration is again
infinite but now this is due only to the presence of the usual dS
cosmological horizon which has a spherical shape.

The 5-Dimensional description :

In order to improve and clarify the physical aspects of the dS C-metric
we turn now into the 5D representation of the solution.

The dS spacetime can be represented as the 4-hyperboloid,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the 5D Minkowski embedding spacetime,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the massless uncharged dS C-metric is a dS spacetime in disguise
and therefore our next task is to understand how the dS C-metric can be
described in this 5D picture. To do this we first recover the massless
uncharged dS C-metric described by ( 6.79 ) and apply to it the
coordinate transformation [ 120 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 6.80 ). Transformations ( 6.84 ) define an
embedding of the massless uncharged dS C-metric into the 5D description
of the dS spacetime since they satisfy ( 6.82 ) and take directly ( 6.79
) into ( 6.83 ).

So, the massless uncharged dS C-metric is a dS spacetime, but we can
extract more information from this 5D analysis. Indeed, let us analyze
with some detail the properties of the origin of the radial coordinate,
@xmath (or @xmath ). This origin moves in the 5D Minkowski embedding
spacetime according to [see ( 6.84 )]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations define two hyperbolic lines lying on the dS hyperboloid
which result from the intersection of this hyperboloid surface defined
by ( 6.82 ) and the @xmath =constant @xmath plane (see Fig. 6.31 ). They
tell us that the origin is subjected to a uniform 5D acceleration,
@xmath , and consequently moves along a hyperbolic worldline in the 5D
embedding space, describing a Rindler-like motion [see Figs. 6.31 .(a)
and 6.31 .(b)] that resembles the well-known hyperbolic trajectory,
@xmath , of an accelerated observer in Minkowski space.

But uniformly accelerated radial worldlines in the 5D Minkowski
embedding space are also uniformly accelerated worldlines in the 4D dS
space [ 253 ] , with the 5D acceleration @xmath being related to the
associated 4D acceleration @xmath by @xmath . Comparing this last
relation with ( 6.85 ) we conclude that @xmath . Therefore, and once
again, we conclude that the origin of the dS C-metric is uniformly
accelerating with a 4D acceleration whose value is precisely given by
the parameter @xmath that appears in the dS C-metric, ( 6.73 ), and this
solution describes a dS space whose origin is not at rest as usual but
is being accelerated. For the benefit of comparison with the @xmath dS
spacetime, note that the origin of the @xmath spacetime describes the
hyperbolic lines @xmath which result from the intersection of the @xmath
plane with the dS hyperboloid. In this case we can say that we have two
antipodal points on the spatial 3-sphere of the dS space accelerating
away from each other due only to the cosmological background
acceleration. When @xmath these two points suffer an extra acceleration.
This discussion allowed us to find the physical interpretation of
parameter @xmath and to justify its label. Notice also that the original
dS C-metric coordinates introduced in ( 6.73 ) cover only the half-space
@xmath . The Kruskal construction done in section 6.3.2 extended this
solution to include also the @xmath region and so, in the extended
solution, @xmath is associated to two hyperbolas that represent two
accelerated points (see Fig. 6.31 .(b)). These two hyperbolas approach
asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration horizon ( @xmath ).

###### 6.3.3.b Pair of accelerated black holes (@xmath, @xmath)

Now, we are in a position to interpret the massive and charged solutions
that describe two black holes accelerating away from each other. To see
clearly this, let us look to the Carter-Penrose diagrams, Fig. 6.23 ,
Fig. 6.26 and Fig. 6.29 . Looking at these diagrams we can compare the
different features that belong to the massless uncharge case (Fig. 6.23
), to the non-extreme massive uncharged case [Fig. 6.26 .(i)], and
ending in the non-extreme massive charged case [Fig. 6.29 ).(i)]. In
Fig. 6.23 we identify the two hyperbolas @xmath (represented by two
timelike lines) approaching asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration
horizon ( @xmath ). When we add a mass to the solution we conclude that
each of these two simple hyperbolas @xmath are replaced by the more
complex structure that represents a Schwarzschild black hole with its
spacelike curvature singularity and its horizon [this is represented by
@xmath in the left and right regions of Fig. 6.26 .(i)]. So, the two
accelerating points @xmath have been replaced by two Schwarzschild black
holes that approach asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration horizon
[represented by @xmath in the middle region of Fig. 6.26 .(i)]. The same
interpretation can be assigned to the massive charged solution. The two
hyperbolas @xmath of Fig. 6.23 are replaced by two Reissner-Nordström
black holes [with its timelike curvature singularity and its inner
@xmath and outer @xmath horizons; see the left and right regions of Fig.
6.29 .(i)] that approach asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration
horizon already present in the @xmath and @xmath causal diagram. An
issue that is relevant here, is whether the Cauchy horizons of the
charged dS C-metric are stable. The Cauchy horizon of the
non-accelerated dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black holes is stable to
small perturbations, as shown in [ 255 ] (for a review on Cauchy horizon
instabilities see, e.g., Burko and Ori [ 256 ] ). Moreover, in [ 257 ]
it has been shown that nearly extremal accelerating black holes in the
flat background have stable Cauchy horizons, unlike the Cauchy horizon
of the non-accelerated flat Reissner-Nordström black hole which is
unstable. Therefore, we expect that the Cauchy horizons of the
accelerated dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black holes are stable,
although we do not have confirmed this result. The discussion of this
subsection also applies directly to the extreme cases of the dS
C-metric.

###### 6.3.3.c Source of acceleration and radiative properties

In this subsection we address the issue of the acceleration source and
its localization. In the massless uncharged dS C-metric, observers that
move along radial worldlines with @xmath const and @xmath describe the
Rindler-like hyperbola [see ( 6.84 )]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Moreover, when we put @xmath or @xmath different from zero, each of the
two hyperbolas assigned to @xmath represents the accelerated motion of a
black hole. Thus, from ( 6.86 ) we conclude [ 87 ] that the north pole
axis is in the region between the two black holes (see Fig. 6.31 .(b)).
Now, the value of the arbitrary parameter @xmath introduced in ( 6.9 )
can be chosen in order to avoid a conical singularity at the south pole
( @xmath ), leaving a conical singularity at the north pole ( @xmath ).
This is associated to a strut that joins the two black holes along their
north poles and provides their acceleration [ 87 ] . This strut
satisfies the relation @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are respectively
its pressure and its mass density [ 87 ] . Alternatively, we can choose
@xmath such that avoids the deficit angle at the north pole ( @xmath )
and leaves a conical singularity at the south pole ( @xmath ). This
option leads to the presence of a string (with @xmath ) that connects
the two black holes along their south poles, and furnishes the
acceleration.

The C-metric is an exact solution that emits gravitational and
electromagnetic radiation. In the flat background the Bondi news
functions have been explicitly calculated in [ 104 , 112 , 113 ] . In dS
background these calculations have been carried in [ 188 , 189 ] .

Finally, recall (see subsection LABEL:Ernst ) that in a dS background we
cannot remove the conical singularities through Ernst’s trick.

#### 6.4 Summary and concluding remarks

The C-metric in an AdS, flat, and dS backgrounds share many common
properties, but there are also many features that differentiate them. In
the flat ( @xmath ) and dS ( @xmath ) backgrounds, the corresponding
C-metric always describes a pair of accelerated black holes. However,
the AdS C-metric only describes a pair of accelerated black holes if the
acceleration parameter @xmath satisfies @xmath , where @xmath is the
cosmological length. We can interpret this as due to the fact that the
AdS background is attractive, i.e., an analysis of the geodesic
equations indicates that particles in this background are subjected to a
potential well that attracts them (see Fig. 5.3 and the associated
discussion in the text). Therefore, if we want to have a pair of black
holes accelerating apart, we will have to furnish a sufficient force
that overcomes this cosmological background attraction. We then expect
that a pair of accelerated black holes in an asymptotically AdS
spacetime is possible only if acceleration @xmath is higher than a
critical value ( @xmath ). For @xmath the analysis of the solution
clearly indicates the absence of a second black hole and so the solution
describes a single accelerated black hole.

Among the properties that are shared by the three C-metrics, we first
point that the two black holes described by the solutions cannot
interact gravitationally. This feature is best displayed in the
Carter-Penrose diagram of the solutions, with one clarifying example
sketched in Fig. 6.21 .(a). In this figure one sees that a null ray sent
from the vicinity of a black hole can never reach the horizon of the
second black hole. So, if the two black holes cannot communicate through
a null ray they cannot interact gravitationally. The black holes
accelerate away from each other only due to the pressure of the
strut/strings without opposition from gravitational attraction. In
particular this also explains why the C-metric does not reduce to the
Israel-Khan when the acceleration vanishes. In the Israel-Khan solution
[see Fig. 6.21 .(b)], the null ray sent from one of the black holes can
reach the second black hole, and so they attract each other
gravitationally. In this solution, the two black holes are connected by
a strut that exerts an outward pressure which exactly cancels the inward
gravitational attraction, and so the distance between the two black
holes remains fixed.

Another common feature between the three cases concerns the physical
source of the acceleration. This source is associated with a conical
singularity in the angular poles of the solutions. The conical
singularity can be located in between the two black holes and along the
symmetry axis (or alternatively from the black holes out to infinity).
When it is between the two black holes, it is associated to a strut
satisfying the relation @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
respectively the pressure on the strut and its mass density. The
pressure is positive, so it points outwards into infinity and pulls the
black holes apart, furnishing their acceleration. When the conical
singularity points from each of the black holes into infinity, it is
associated to a string from each one of the black holes towards infinity
with negative pressure that pushes the black holes into infinity (to be
more accurate, in the dS case, there is only one string that connects
the two black holes along their south poles, but this difference is due
to the fact that the dS space is closed).

When we set the mass and charge to zero, the AdS C-metric and the dS
C-metric have a clarifying geometric interpretation in the
4-hyperboloids that represent the AdS and dS solutions in a
5-dimensional (5D) Minkowski spacetime. Indeed, the origin of the AdS
C-metric (with @xmath ) and the origin of the dS C-metric, are subjected
to a uniform acceleration, and describe a hyperbolic Rindler-like
worldline in the AdS/dS 4-hyperboloid embedded in the 5D Minkowski
space. To be more precise, the origin is represented by two hyperbolic
lines that approach asymptotically the Rindler-like accelerated horizon,
so called because it is is absent when @xmath and present even when
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . When we add a mass or a charge to the
system the causal diagrams indicate (see the clarifying explanation
sketched in Fig. 1.6 ) that now we have two AdS/dS-Schwarzschild or two
AdS/dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black holes approaching asymptotically
the Rindler-like accelerated horizon. In the case of the AdS C-metric
with @xmath the above procedure indicates the absence of a second black
hole and so the solution describes a single black hole. In the AdS
4-hyperboloid, the origin of these solutions describes a circle in the
plane defined by the two timelike coordinates.

The general features of the Carter-Penrose diagram of the dS C-metric
are independent of the angular coordinate. This sets a great difference
between the causal diagrams of the dS C-metric and the ones of the AdS
case and of the flat case. Indeed, for the @xmath C-metric, the
Carter-Penrose diagram at the north pole direction is substantially
different from the one along the south pole direction and different from
the diagram along the equator direction. These angular differences
between the causal diagrams between the AdS, flat and dS cases are
identified by comparing the Figs. 6.4 , 6.18 and 6.26 (in the neutral
black hole case), and by comparing Figs. 6.6 , 6.20 and 6.29 (in the
charged black hole case).

In the AdS and flat backgrounds, when @xmath , the acceleration horizon
disappears, and the C-metric reduces to a single black hole with the
usual features. In the dS case, when @xmath , the solution still reduces
to the usual dS-Schwarzschild or dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black
holes. These @xmath solutions, however, can also be interpreted as a
pair of black holes accelerated by the positive cosmological constant.
The cosmological horizon of the @xmath dS black hole plays the role of a
acceleration horizon. In the @xmath dS solution the cosmological horizon
has the topology of a round sphere, while in the dS C-metric ( @xmath )
the presence of the acceleration induces a non-spherical shape in the
acceleration horizon which coincides with the cosmological horizon.

Ernst has removed the conical singularities of the flat charged C-metric
through the introduction of an appropriate external electromagnetic
field. Its new exact solution then describes a pair of black holes
accelerated by the external Lorentz force. In a cosmological background
we cannot remove the conical singularities through the application of
the Harrison transformation used by Ernst in the flat case. Indeed, the
Harrison transformation applied by Ernst does not leave invariant the
cosmological term in the action. Therefore, applying the Harrison
transformation to the cosmological C-metric solutions does not yield a
new solution of the Einstein-Maxwell theory in a cosmological
background.

### Chapter 7 The extremal limits of the C-metric: Nariai,
Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai C-metrics

] ] \minitoc

Three important exact solutions of general relativity are de Sitter (dS)
spacetime which is a spacetime with positive cosmological constant (
@xmath ), Minkowski (or flat) spacetime with @xmath , and anti-de Sitter
(AdS) spacetime with negative cosmological constant ( @xmath ). These
stainless spacetimes, with trivial topology @xmath , have nonetheless a
rich internal structure best displayed through the Carter-Penrose
diagrams [ 258 ] . They also serve as the background to spacetimes
containing black holes which are then asymptotically dS, flat, or AdS.
These black holes in background spacetimes with a cosmological constant
- Schwarzschild, Reissner-Nordström, Kerr, and Kerr-Newman - have a
complex causal and topological structure well described in [ 259 ] .

There are other very interesting solutions of general relativity with
generic cosmological constant, that are neither pure nor contain a black
hole, and somehow can be considered intermediate type solutions. These
are the Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson, and anti-Nariai solutions [ 81 ] .
The Nariai solution [ 125 , 126 ] solves exactly the Einstein equations
with @xmath , without or with a Maxwell field, and has been discovered
by Nariai in 1951 [ 125 ] . It is the direct topological product of
@xmath , i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional dS spacetime with a round 2-sphere
of fixed radius. The Bertotti-Robinson solution [ 127 ] is an exact
solution of the Einstein-Maxwell equations with any @xmath , and was
found independently by Bertotti and Robinson in 1959. It is the direct
topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional AdS
spacetime with a round 2-sphere of fixed radius. The anti-Nariai
solution, i.e., the AdS counterpart of the Nariai solution, also exists
[ 128 ] and is an exact solution of the Einstein equations with @xmath ,
without or with a Maxwell field. It is the direct topological product of
@xmath , with @xmath being a 2-hyperboloid.

Three decades after Nariai’s paper, Ginsparg and Perry [ 97 ] connected
the Nariai solution with the Schwarzschild-dS solution. They showed that
the Nariai solution can be generated from a near-extreme dS black hole,
through an appropriate limiting procedure in which the black hole
horizon approaches the cosmological horizon. A similar extremal limit
generates the Bertotti-Robinson solution and the anti-Nariai solution
from an appropriate near extreme black hole (see, e.g. [ 128 ] ). One of
the aims of Ginsparg and Perry was to study the quantum stability of the
Nariai and the Schwarzschild-dS solutions [ 97 ] . It was shown that the
Nariai solution is in general unstable and, once created, decays through
a quantum tunnelling process into a slightly non-extreme black hole pair
(for a complete review and references on this subject see, e.g., Bousso
[ 129 ] , and later discussions on our paper). The same kind of process
happens for the Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions.

There is yet another class of related metrics, the C-metric class, which
represent not one, but two black holes, being accelerate apart from each
other. These black holes can also inhabit a dS, flat or AdS background,
as we saw in the last chapter. It is therefore of great interest to
apply the Ginsparg-Perry procedure to these metrics in order to find a
new set of exact solutions with a clear physical and geometrical
interpretation. In this chapter, following our work [ 89 ] , we address
this issue of the extremal limits of the C-metric with a generic @xmath
following [ 97 ] , in order to generate the C-metric counterparts (
@xmath ) of the Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions (
@xmath ), among others.

These C-metric counterparts are conformal to the product of two
2-dimensional manifolds of constant curvature, the conformal factor
depending on the angular coordinate. In addition, the C-metric extremal
solutions have a conical singularity at least at one of the poles of
their angular surfaces. We give a physical interpretation to these
solutions, e.g., in the Nariai C-metric (with topology @xmath ) to each
point in the deformed 2-sphere @xmath corresponds a @xmath spacetime,
except for one point which corresponds a @xmath spacetime with an
infinite straight strut or string. There are other important new
features that appear. One expects that the solutions found in this
chapter are unstable and decay into a slightly non-extreme black hole
pair accelerated by a strut or by strings. Moreover, the Euclidean
version of some of these solutions mediate the quantum process of black
hole pair creation, that accompanies the decay of the dS and AdS spaces,
as we shall see in chapter 9 .

The plan of this chapter is as follows. In section 7.1 , we describe the
main features of the Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai
solutions. In section 7.2 , we analyze the extremal limits of the dS
C-metric. We generate the Nariai C-metric, the Bertotti-Robinson dS
C-metric, and the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric. We study the
topology and the causal structure of these solutions, and we give a
physical interpretation. In section 7.3 we present the extremal limits
of the flat C-metric and Ernst solution, which are obtained from the
solutions of section 7.2 by taking the direct @xmath limit. The
Euclidean version of one of these @xmath solutions has already been used
previously, but we discuss two new solutions that have not been
discussed previously. In section 7.4 , we discuss the extremal limits of
the AdS C-metric and, in particular, we generate the anti-Nariai
C-metric. Finally, in section 7.6 concluding remarks are presented.

#### 7.1 Extremal limits of black hole solutions in dS, flat, and AdS
spacetimes: The Nariai, Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions

In this section we will describe the main features of the Nariai,
Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions. The extremal limits of the
C-metric that will be generated in later sections reduce to these
solutions when the acceleration parameter @xmath is set to zero.

##### 7.1.1 The Nariai solution

The neutral Nariai solution has been first introduced by Nariai [ 125 ,
126 ] . It satisfies the Einstein field equations in a positive
cosmological constant @xmath background, @xmath , and is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath both run from @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath has
period @xmath .

The electromagnetic extension of the Nariai solution has been introduced
by Bertotti and Robinson [ 127 ] . Its gravitational field is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive constant and constant @xmath satisfies @xmath
, while the electromagnetic field of the Nariai solution is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the purely magnetic case, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the purely electric case, with @xmath being the electric or magnetic
charge, respectively. The cosmological constant and the charge of the
Nariai solution are related to @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath , otherwise the charge is a complex number. The charged
Nariai solution satisfies the field equations of the Einstein-Maxwell
action in a positive cosmological constant background, @xmath , with
@xmath being the energy-momentum tensor of the Maxwell field. The
neutral Nariai solution ( 7.1 ) is obtained from the charged solution (
7.2 )-( 7.3 ) when one sets @xmath . The @xmath limit of the Nariai
solution, which is Minkowski spacetime, is taken in subsection 7.1.4 .
Through a redefinition of coordinates, @xmath and @xmath , the spacetime
( 7.2 ) can be rewritten in new static coordinates as

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.6)
  -- -- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the electromagnetic field changes also accordingly to the coordinate
transformation. Written in these coordinates, we clearly see that the
Nariai solution is the direct topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a
(1+1)-dimensional dS spacetime with a round 2-sphere of fixed radius
@xmath . This spacetime is homogeneous with the same causal structure as
(1+1)-dimensional dS spacetime, but it is not an asymptotically
4-dimensional dS spacetime since the radius of the 2-spheres is constant
( @xmath ), contrarily to what happens in the dS solution where this
radius increases as one approaches infinity.

Another way [ 126 , 260 ] to see clearly the topological structure of
the Nariai solution is achieved by defining it through its embedding in
the flat manifold @xmath , with metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Nariai 4-submanifold is determined by the two constraints

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The first of these constraints defines the @xmath
hyperboloid and the second defines the 2-sphere of radius @xmath . The
parametrization of @xmath given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , induces the metric ( 7.6 ) on the Nariai
hypersurface ( 7.9 ).

Quite remarkably, Ginsparg and Perry [ 97 ] (see also [ 170 ] ) have
shown that the neutral Nariai solution ( 7.1 ) can be obtained from the
near-extreme Schwarzschild-dS black hole through an appropriate limiting
procedure. By extreme we mean that the black hole horizon and the
cosmological horizon coincide. Hawking and Ross [ 181 ] , and Mann and
Ross [ 169 ] have concluded that a similar limiting approach takes the
near-extreme dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black hole into the charged
Nariai solution ( 7.2 ). In this case, by extreme we mean that the
cosmological and outer charged black hole horizons coincide. We will
make heavy use of this Ginsparg-Perry procedure later, so we will not
sketch it here. These relations between the near-extreme dS black holes
and the Nariai solutions are a priori quite unexpected since (i) the dS
black holes have a curvature singularity while the Nariai solutions do
not, (ii) the Nariai spacetime is homogeneous unlike the dS black holes
spacetimes, (iii) the dS black holes approach asymptotically the
4-dimensional dS spacetime while the Nariai solutions do not. The
Carter-Penrose diagram of the Nariai solution is equivalent to the
diagram of the (1+1)-dimensional dS solution, as will be discussed in
subsection 7.2.1 .

An important role played by the Nariai solution in physics is at the
quantum level (see Bousso [ 129 ] for a detailed review of what
follows). First, there is the issue of the stability of the solution
when perturbed quantically. Ginsparg and Perry [ 97 ] , in the neutral
case, and Bousso and Hawking [ 170 ] and Bousso [ 174 ] , in the charged
case, have shown that the Nariai solutions are quantum mechanically
unstable. Indeed, due to quantum fluctuations, the radius @xmath of the
2-spheres oscillates along the non-compact spatial coordinate @xmath and
the degenerate horizon splits back into a black hole and a cosmological
horizon. Those 2-spheres whose radius fluctuates into a radius smaller
than @xmath will collapse into the dS black hole interior, while the
2-spheres that have a radius greater than @xmath will suffer an
exponential expansion that generates an asymptotic dS region. Therefore,
the Nariai solutions are unstable and, once created, they decay through
the quantum tunnelling process into a slightly non-extreme dS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black hole pair. This issue of the Nariai instability
against perturbations and associated evaporation process has been
further analyzed by Bousso and Hawking [ 261 ] , by Nojiri and Odintsov
[ 262 ] , and by Kofman, Sahni, and Starobinski [ 263 ] . Second, the
Nariai Euclidean solution plays a further role as an instanton, in the
quantum decay of the dS space. This decay of the dS space is accompanied
by the creation of a dS black hole pair, in a process that is the
gravitational analogue of the Schwinger pair production of charged
particles in an external electromagnetic field. Here, the energy
necessary to materialize the black hole pair and to accelerate the black
holes apart comes from the cosmological constant background. It is
important to note that not all of the dS black holes can be pair
produced through this quantum process of black hole pair creation. Only
those black holes that have regular Euclidean sections can be pair
created (the term regular is applied here in the context of the analysis
of the Hawking temperature of the horizons). The Nariai instanton
(regular Euclidean Nariai solution, that is obtained from ( 7.1 ) and (
7.2 ) by setting @xmath ), belongs to the very restrictive class of
solutions that are regular [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 170 , 173 , 172 ] , and
can therefore mediate the pair creation process in the dS background. In
the uncharged case the Nariai instanton is even the only solution that
can describe the pair creation of neutral black holes. Another result at
the quantum level by Medved [ 264 ] indicates that quantum back-reaction
effects prevent a near extreme dS black hole from ever reaching a Nariai
state of precise extremality.

Other extensions of the Nariai solution are the dilaton charged Nariai
solution found by Bousso [ 174 ] , the rotating Nariai solution studied
by Mellor and Moss [ 167 , 168 ] , and by Booth and Mann [ 173 ] , and
solutions that describe non-expanding impulsive waves propagating in the
Nariai universe studied by Ortaggio [ 260 ] .

##### 7.1.2 The Bertotti-Robinson solution

The simplest Bertotti-Robinson solution [ 127 ] (see also [ 128 , 265 ]
) is a solution of the @xmath Einstein-Maxwell equations. Its
gravitational field is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the charge of the solution, and @xmath is unbounded,
@xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath and @xmath has period @xmath . The
electromagnetic field of the Bertotti-Robinson solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the magnetic and electric cases, respectively. Through a redefinition
of coordinates, @xmath and @xmath , the spacetime ( LABEL:br ) can be
rewritten in new static coordinates as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the electromagnetic field changes also accordingly to the coordinate
transformation. Written in these coordinates, we clearly see that the
Bertotti-Robinson solution is the direct topological product of @xmath ,
i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional AdS spacetime with a round 2-sphere of
fixed radius @xmath . Another way to see clearly the topological
structure of the Bertotti-Robinson solution is achieved by defining it
through its embedding in the flat manifold @xmath , with metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Bertotti-Robinson 4-submanifold is determined by the two constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first of these constraints defines the @xmath hyperboloid and the
second defines the 2-sphere of radius @xmath . The parametrization of
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , induces
the metric ( 7.13 ) on the Bertotti-Robinson hypersurface ( 7.16 ). Note
that since the parametrization @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , also obeys (
7.15 ) and the first constraint of ( 7.16 ), the Bertotti-Robinson
solution ( 7.13 ) can also be written as @xmath with @xmath

Following a similar procedure to the one applied in the Nariai solution,
the Bertotti-Robinson solution can be obtained from the near-extreme
Reissner-Nordström black hole through an appropriate limiting procedure
(here, by extreme we mean that the inner black hole horizon and the
outer black hole horizon coincide). Later on, we will make heavy use of
the Ginsparg-Perry procedure, so we will not sketch it here.
Generalizations of the Bertotti-Robinson solution to include a
cosmological constant background also exist [ 127 ] , and are an
extremal limit of the near-extreme Reissner-Nordström black holes with a
cosmological constant. The Carter-Penrose diagram of the
Bertotti-Robinson solution (with or without @xmath ) is equivalent to
the diagram of the (1+1)-dimensional AdS solution, as will be discussed
in subsection 7.2.2 .

The Hawking effect in the Bertotti-Robinson universe has been studied by
Lapedes [ 265 ] , and its thermodynamic properties have been analyzed by
Zaslavsky [ 266 ] , and by Mann and Solodukhin [ 267 ] . In [ 268 ] the
authors have shown that quantum back-reaction effects prevent a near
extreme charged black hole from ever reaching a Berttoti-Robinson state
of precise extremality. Recently, Ortaggio and Podolský [ 269 ] have
found exact solutions that describe non-expanding impulsive waves
propagating in the Bertotti-Robinson universe.

##### 7.1.3 The anti-Nariai solution

The anti-Nariai solution has a gravitational field given by [ 128 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are unbounded, @xmath has period @xmath , @xmath
is a positive constant, and the constant @xmath satisfies @xmath . The
electromagnetic field of the anti-Nariai solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the purely magnetic case, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the purely electric case, with @xmath being the magnetic or electric
charge, respectively. The cosmological constant, @xmath , and the charge
of the anti-Nariai solution are related to @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The neutral anti-Nariai solution ( @xmath ) is obtained from the charged
solution ( LABEL:qNariai-a ) when one sets @xmath which implies @xmath .
The @xmath limit of the anti-Nariai solution, which is Minkowski
spacetime, is taken in subsection 7.1.4 . The charged anti-Nariai
solution satisfies the field equations of the Einstein-Maxwell action in
a negative cosmological constant background. Through a redefinition of
coordinates, @xmath and @xmath , the spacetime ( LABEL:qNariai-a ) can
be rewritten in static coordinates as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the electromagnetic field changes also accordingly to the coordinate
transformation. Written in these coordinates, we clearly see that the
anti-Nariai solution is the direct topological product of @xmath , i.e.,
of a (1+1)-dimensional AdS spacetime with a 2-hyperboloid of radius
@xmath . It is a homogeneous spacetime with the same causal structure as
(1+1)-dimensional AdS spacetime, but it is not an asymptotically
4-dimensional AdS spacetime since the size of the 2-hyperboloid is
constant ( @xmath ), contrarily to what happens in the AdS solution
where this radius increases as one approaches infinity. Another way to
see clearly the topological structure of the anti-Nariai solution is
achieved by defining it through its embedding in the flat manifold
@xmath with metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The anti-Nariai 4-submanifold is determined by the two constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The first of these constraints defines the @xmath
hyperboloid and the second defines the 2-hyperboloid of radius @xmath .
The parametrization of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath induces the metric ( LABEL:qNariai2-a ) on the
anti-Nariai hypersurface ( 7.24 ).

Having in mind the example of the Nariai solution, we may ask if the
anti-Nariai solution can be obtained, through a similar limiting
Ginsparg-Perry procedure, from a near-extreme AdS black hole. As we saw
in subsection 5.1 , in the AdS background, there are black holes whose
horizons have topologies different from spherical, such as toroidal
horizons [ 6 , 7 , 10 , 8 ] , and hyperbolical horizons [ 11 ] , also
called topological black holes. The AdS black hole that generates the
anti-Nariai solution is the hyperbolic one [as is clear from the angular
part of ( LABEL:qNariai2-a )], and has a cosmological horizon. Indeed,
the hyperbolic topology together with the presence of the cosmological
horizon turn the hyperbolic black holes (studied in subsection 5.1.3 )
into the appropriate solutions that allow the generation of the
anti-Nariai solution ( LABEL:qNariai-a ) with the limiting
Ginsparg-Perry procedure, when the black hole horizon approaches the
cosmological horizon.

A further study of the anti-Nariai solution was done in [ 269 ] where
non-expanding impulsive waves propagating in the anti-Nariai universe
are described.

##### 7.1.4 @xmath limit of the Nariai and anti-Nariai solutions

In this subsection we find the @xmath limit of the Nariai solution, (
7.2 ), and of the anti-Nariai solution, ( LABEL:qNariai-a ). In this
limit the line element of both solutions goes apparently to infinity
since @xmath . To achieve the suitable limit of the Nariai solution, we
first make the coordinate rescales: @xmath , and @xmath . Then, taking
the @xmath limit, the solution becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spacetime sector is a Rindler factor, and the angular sector is a
cylinder. Therefore, under the usual coordinate transformation @xmath
and @xmath , and unwinding the cylinder ( @xmath and @xmath ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, while the Nariai solution is topologically @xmath , its
@xmath limit is topologically @xmath , i.e., @xmath .

A similar procedure shows that taking the @xmath limit of the
anti-Nariai solution ( LABEL:qNariai-a ) ( @xmath ) leads to ( 7.26 ).

#### 7.2 Extremal limits of the dS C-metric

In the last section we saw that there is an appropriate extremal
limiting procedure, introduced by Ginsparg and Perry [ 97 ] , that
generates from the near-extreme black hole solutions the Nariai,
Bertotti-Robinson and anti-Nariai solutions. Analogously, we shall apply
the procedure of [ 97 ] to generate new exact solutions from the
near-extreme cases of the dS C-metric. Specifically the C-metric
counterparts of the Nariai and Bertotti-Robinson solutions are found
using this method. When the acceleration parameter @xmath is set to zero
in these new solutions, we will recover the Nariai and Bertotti-Robinson
solutions. To achieve our propose we will analyze with more detail the
extreme cases of the dS C-metric already discussed in subsections
6.3.2.b and 6.3.2.c . Recall that the gravitational field of the dS
C-metric is given by ( 6.73 ) and ( 6.74 ), and its electromagnetic
field is given by ( 6.5 ) and ( 6.6 ).

##### 7.2.1 The Nariai C-metric

We will generate the Nariai C-metric from a special extremal limit of
the dS C-metric. First we will describe this particular near-extreme
solution and then we will generate the Nariai C-metric.

We are interested in a particular extreme dS C-metric, for which the
size of the acceleration horizon @xmath is equal to the size of the
outer charged horizon @xmath . Let us label this degenerated horizon by
@xmath , i.e., @xmath with @xmath . In this case, the function @xmath
given by ( 6.74 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the roots @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
     @xmath      (7.30)
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass and the charge of the solution are written as functions of
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conditions @xmath and @xmath require that the allowed range of
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value of @xmath decreases monotonically with @xmath and we have
@xmath . The mass and the charge of the Nariai solution, denoted now as
@xmath and @xmath respectively, are monotonically increasing functions
of @xmath , and as we go from @xmath into @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the @xmath extreme ( @xmath ) solution has a lower maximum mass and
charge, and has a lower minimum mass than the corresponding @xmath
solution [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ] , and, for a fixed @xmath , as the
acceleration parameter @xmath grows these extreme values decrease
monotonically. For a fixed @xmath and for a fixed mass between @xmath ,
the allowed acceleration varies as @xmath .

We are now ready to obtain the Nariai C-metric. In order to generate it
from the above near-extreme dS C-metric we first set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order that @xmath measures the deviation from degeneracy, and the
limit @xmath is obtained when @xmath . Now, we introduce a new time
coordinate @xmath and a new radial coordinate @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and condition ( 7.33 ) implies @xmath with @xmath . In the limit @xmath
, from ( 6.73 ) and ( 7.27 ), we get the gravitational field of the
Nariai C-metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has only two real roots, the south pole @xmath and the north pole
@xmath . The angular coordinate @xmath can range between these two
poles, whose values are calculated in section 7.5 . Under the coordinate
transformation ( 7.36 ), the Maxwell field for the magnetic case is
still given by ( 6.5 ), while in the electric case, ( 6.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, if we give the parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath we can
construct the Nariai C-metric. The Nariai C-metric is conformal to the
topological product of two 2-dimensional manifolds, @xmath , with the
conformal factor @xmath depending on the angular coordinate @xmath , and
@xmath being a deformed 2-sphere.

In order to obtain the @xmath limit, we first set @xmath [see ( 7.29 )],
a parameter that has a finite and well-defined value when @xmath . Then
when @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath
satisfying relations ( 7.5 ). This, together with transformations ( 6.9
), show that the Nariai C-metric transforms into the Nariai solution (
7.2 ) when @xmath .

The limiting procedure that has been applied in this subsection has
generated a new exact solution that satisfies the Maxwell-Einstein
equations in a positive cosmological constant background.

In order to give a physical interpretation to this extremal limit of the
dS C-metric, we first recall the physical interpretation of the dS
C-metric. This solution describes a pair of uniformly accelerated black
holes in a dS background, with the acceleration being provided by the
cosmological constant and by a strut between the black holes that pushes
them away or, alternatively, by a string that connects and pulls the
black holes in. The presence of the strut or of the string is associated
to the conical singularities that exist in the C-metric (see, e. g., [
88 ] ). Indeed, in general, if we draw a small circle around the north
or south pole, as the radius goes to zero, the limit
circunference/radius is not @xmath . There is a deficit angle at the
north pole given by (see [ 87 , 88 ] ), @xmath (where the prime means
derivative with respect to @xmath ) and, analogously, a similar conical
singularity ( @xmath ) is present at the south pole. The so far
arbitrary parameter @xmath introduced in ( 6.9 ) plays its important
role here. Indeed, if we choose @xmath we remove the conical singularity
at the south pole ( @xmath ). However, since we only have a single
constant @xmath at our disposal and this has been fixed to avoid the
conical singularity at the south pole ( @xmath ), we conclude that a
conical singularity will be present at the north pole with @xmath . This
is associated to a strut (since @xmath ) that joins the two black holes
along their north poles and provides their acceleration. This strut
satisfies the relation @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are respectively
its pressure and its mass density (see [ 87 ] ). There is another
alternative. We can choose instead @xmath and by doing so we avoid the
deficit angle at the north pole ( @xmath ), and leave a conical
singularity at the south pole ( @xmath ). This option leads to the
presence of a string (with @xmath ) connecting the black holes along
their south poles that furnishes the acceleration. Summarizing, when the
conical singularity is at the north pole, the pressure of the strut is
positive, so it points outwards and pushes the black holes apart,
furnishing their acceleration. When the conical singularity is at the
south pole, it is associated to a string between the two black holes
with negative pressure that pulls the black holes away from each other.

The causal structure of the dS C-metric has been analyzed in detail in [
88 ] . The Carter-Penrose diagram of the non-extreme charged dS C-metric
is sketched in Fig. 7.1 .(a) (whole figure) and has a structure that,
loosely speaking, can be divided into left, middle and right regions.
The middle region contains the null infinity, the past infinity, @xmath
, and the future infinity, @xmath , and an accelerated Rindler-like
horizon, @xmath (that coincides with the cosmological horizon). The left
and right regions both contain a timelike curvature singularity (the
zig-zag line), and an inner ( @xmath ) and an outer ( @xmath ) horizons
associated to the charged character of the solution. This diagram
represents two dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black holes that approach
asymptotically the Rindler-like acceleration horizon (for a more
detailed discussion see [ 88 ] ). This is also schematically represented
in Fig. 7.1 .(c) (whole figure), where we explicitly show the strut that
connects the two black holes and provides their acceleration.

Now, as we have just seen, the Nariai C-metric can be appropriately
obtained from the vicinity of the black hole and acceleration horizons
in the limit in which the size of these two horizons approach each
other. We now will see that the conical singularity of the dS C-metric
survives the near-extremal limiting procedure that generates the Nariai
C-metric. Following an elucidative illustration shown in [ 270 ] for the
Bertotti-Robinson solution (with @xmath and @xmath ), this near-horizon
region is sketched in Fig. 7.1 .(a) as a shaded area, and from it we can
identify some of the features of the Nariai C-metric, e.g., the
curvature singularity of the original dS black hole is lost in the
near-extremal limiting procedure. But, more important, this shaded
near-horizon region also allows us to construct straightforwardly the
Carter-Penrose diagram of the Nariai C-metric drawn in Fig. 7.1 .(b).
The construction steps are as follows. First, as indicated by ( 7.35 )
and the second relation of ( 7.36 ), we let the cross lines that
represent the black hole horizon [ @xmath in Fig. 7.1 .(a)] join
together with the cross lines that represent the acceleration horizon [
@xmath in Fig. 7.1 .(a)], and so on, i.e., we do this joining ad
infinitum with all the cross lines @xmath and @xmath . After this step
all that is left from the original diagram is a single cross line, i.e,
all the spacetime that has originally contained in the shaded area of
Fig. 7.1 .(a) has collapsed into two mutually perpendicular lines at
@xmath at @xmath . Now, as indicated by the first relation of ( 7.36 ),
when @xmath the time suffers an infinite blow up. To this blow up in the
time corresponds an infinite expansion in the Carter-Penrose diagram in
the vicinity of @xmath . We then get again the shaded area of Fig. 7.1
.(a), but now the cross lines of this shaded area are all identified
into a single horizon, and they no longer have the original signature
associated to @xmath and @xmath that differentiated them. This is, in
the shaded area of Fig. 7.1 .(a) we must now erase the original labels
@xmath and @xmath . The Carter-Penrose diagram of the Nariai C-metric is
then given by Fig. 7.1 .(b), which is equivalent to the diagram of the
(1+1)-dimensional dS solution. Note that the diagram of the @xmath dS
@xmath Reissner-Nordström solution is identical to the one of Fig. 7.1
.(a), as long as we replace @xmath (acceleration horizon) by @xmath
(cosmological horizon). Applying the same construction process described
just above we find that the Carter-Penrose diagram of the Nariai
solution ( @xmath ), described in subsection 7.1.1 , is also given by
Fig. 7.1 .(b).

The Nariai near-horizon region is also sketched in Fig. 7.1 .(c) as a
shaded area. This schematic figure is clarifying in the sense that it
indicates that the strut that connects the two original black holes
along their north pole directions survives to the near-extremal limiting
process and will be present in the final result of the process, i.e., in
the Nariai C-metric. Indeed, note that the endpoints of the strut are at
the north pole of the event horizons of the two black holes and crosses
the acceleration horizon. As we saw just above, this region suffers
first a collapse followed by an infinite blow up and during the process
the strut is not lost. Thus the Nariai C-metric ( 7.38 )-( LABEL:Gfactor
) describes a spacetime that is conformal to the product @xmath . To
each point in the deformed 2-sphere corresponds a @xmath spacetime,
except for one point which corresponds a @xmath spacetime with an
infinite straight strut. This strut has negative mass density given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the derivative of ( LABEL:Gfactor ), and with a positive
pressure @xmath . Alternatively, if we remove the conical singularity at
the north pole, the Nariai C-metric describes a string with positive
mass density @xmath and negative pressure @xmath .

As we have said in subsection 7.1.1 , the Nariai solution ( @xmath ) is
unstable and, once created, it decays through the quantum tunnelling
process into a slightly non-extreme black hole pair. We then expect that
the Nariai C-metric is also unstable and that it will decay into a
slightly non-extreme pair of black holes accelerated by a strut or by a
string. The Nariai C-metric instanton also plays an important role in
the decay of the dS space, since it can mediate the Schwinger-like
quantum process of pair creation of black holes in a dS background [ 131
] . Indeed, as we said in subsection 7.1.1 , the Nariai instanton (
@xmath ) has been used [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 , 172 ] to study the pair
creation of dS black holes materialized and accelerated by the
cosmological background field. Moreover, the Euclidean “Nariai” flat
C-metric and Ernst solution (see section 6.3 ) have been used to analyze
the process of pair production of @xmath black holes, accelerated by a
string or by an electromagnetic external field, respectively. Therefore,
it is natural to expect that the Euclidean Nariai limit of the dS
C-metric mediates the process of pair creation of black holes in a
cosmological background, that are then accelerated by a string, in
addition to the cosmological background field. The picture would be that
of the nucleation, in a dS background, of a Nariai C universe, whose
string then breaks down and a pair of dS black holes is created at the
endpoints of the string. This expectation is confirmed in [ 131 ] .

##### 7.2.2 The Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric

Now, we are interested in another particular extreme dS C-metric
(usually called cold solution when @xmath [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ] )
for which the size of the outer charged black hole horizon @xmath is
equal to the size of the inner charged horizon @xmath . Let us label
this degenerated horizon by @xmath , such that, @xmath and @xmath . This
solution requires the presence of the electromagnetic charge. In this
case, the function @xmath given by ( 6.74 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given by ( 7.28 ), the roots @xmath and @xmath are defined
by ( 7.29 ) and ( 7.30 ), respectively, and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 7.32 ) defines the mass and the charge of the solution as a
function of @xmath , and, for a fixed @xmath and @xmath , the ratio
@xmath is higher than @xmath . The conditions @xmath and @xmath require
that the allowed range of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value of @xmath decreases monotonically with @xmath and we have
@xmath . Contrary to the Nariai case, the mass and the charge of the
Bertotti-Robinson solution, @xmath and @xmath , respectively, are
monotonically decreasing functions of @xmath , and as we come from
@xmath into @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the @xmath extreme ( @xmath ) solution has a lower maximum mass and
charge than the corresponding @xmath solution [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ]
and, for a fixed @xmath , as the acceleration parameter @xmath grows
this maximum value decreases monotonically. For a fixed @xmath and for a
fixed mass below @xmath , the maximum value of the acceleration is
@xmath .

We are now ready to generate the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric from the
above cold dS C-metric. We first set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order that @xmath measures the deviation from degeneracy, and the
limit @xmath is obtained when @xmath . Now, we introduce a new time
coordinate @xmath and a new radial coordinate @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and condition ( 7.44 ) implies @xmath . In the limit @xmath , from (
6.73 ) and ( 7.42 ), the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is unbounded and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has only two real roots, the south pole @xmath and the north pole
@xmath . The angular coordinate @xmath can range between these two poles
whose value is calculated in section 7.5 . Under the coordinate
transformation ( 7.47 ), the Maxwell field for the magnetic case is
still given by ( 6.5 ), while in the electric case, ( 6.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, if we give the parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath we can
construct the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric. This solution is conformal
to the topological product of two 2-dimensional manifolds, @xmath , with
the conformal factor @xmath depending on the angular coordinate @xmath .

In order to obtain the @xmath limit, we first set @xmath [see ( 7.29 )],
a parameter that has a finite and well-defined value when @xmath . Then
when @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath . This, together with
transformations ( 6.9 ), show that the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric
transforms into the dS counterpart of the Bertotti-Robinson solution
discussed in subsection 7.1.2 , when @xmath . The limiting procedure
that has been applied in this subsection has generated a new exact
solution that satisfies the Maxwell-Einstein equations in a positive
cosmological constant background.

We have just seen that the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric can be
appropriately obtained from the vicinity of the inner and outer black
hole horizons in the limit in which the size of these two horizons
approach each other. This near-horizon region is sketched in Fig. 7.2
.(a) as a shaded area, and from it we can construct straightforwardly
the Carter-Penrose diagram of the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric drawn in
Fig. 7.2 .(b). The construction steps are as follows. First, as
indicated by ( 7.46 ) and the second relation of ( 7.47 ), we let the
cross lines that represent the black hole Cauchy horizon [ @xmath in
Fig. 7.2 .(a)] join together with the cross lines that represent the
black hole event horizon [ @xmath in Fig. 7.2 .(a)], and so on, i.e., we
do this junction ad infinitum with all the cross lines @xmath and @xmath
. After this step all that is left from the original diagram is a single
cross line, i.e, all the spacetime that has originally contained in the
shaded area of Fig. 7.2 .(a) has collapsed into two mutually
perpendicular lines at @xmath at @xmath . Now, as indicated by the first
relation of ( 7.47 ), when @xmath the time suffers an infinite blow up.
To this blow up in the time corresponds an infinite expansion in the
Carter-Penrose diagram in the vicinity of @xmath that generates an
@xmath region. We then get again the shaded area of Fig. 7.2 .(a), but
now the cross lines of this shaded area are all identified into a single
line, and they no longer have the original labels associated to @xmath
and @xmath that differentiated them. This is, in the shaded area of Fig.
7.2 .(a) we must now erase the original labels @xmath and @xmath . The
Carter-Penrose diagram of the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric is then
given by Fig. 7.2 .(b), which is equivalent to the diagram of the
(1+1)-dimensional AdS solution. Note that the diagram of the @xmath
Reissner-Nordström @xmath dS solution is identical to the one of Fig.
7.2 .(a). Therefore, applying the same construction process described
just above we find that the Carter-Penrose diagram of the
Bertotti-Robinson dS solution ( @xmath ) is similar to the one of Fig.
7.2 .(b). The diagram of the Bertotti-Robinson solution with @xmath
described by ( LABEL:br ) is also given by Fig. 7.2 .(b).

The Bertotti-Robinson near-horizon region is also sketched in Fig. 7.2
.(c) as a shaded area. This schematic figure is clarifying in the sense
that it indicates that the strut that connects the two original black
holes along their north pole directions does not survive to the
near-extremal limiting process and will not be present in the final
result of the process, i.e., in the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric.
However, a reminiscence of this strut remains in the final solution.
Indeed, the angular factor of the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric [which,
remind, describes a deformed 2-sphere @xmath with a fixed size @xmath
given by ( LABEL:Gfactor-br )] has a conical singularity at least at one
of its poles. We can choose the parameter @xmath , introduced in ( 6.9
), in order to have a conical singularity only at the north pole (
@xmath ), or only at the south pole ( @xmath ), however we cannot
eliminate both. When the parameter @xmath is set to zero, the conical
singularities disappear, the angular factor describes a round 2-sphere
with fixed radius, and the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric reduces into
the Bertotti-Robinson dS solution with topology @xmath .

##### 7.2.3 The Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric

As the previous sections and the label suggest, the Nariai
Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric will be generated from the extremal limit
of a very particular dS C-metric (usually called ultracold solution when
@xmath [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ] ) for which the size of the three
horizons ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) are equal, and let us label this
degenerated horizon by @xmath : @xmath . In this case, the function
@xmath is given by ( 7.27 ) with @xmath , and @xmath defined in ( 7.28
). The negative root @xmath is given by ( 7.30 ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass and the charge of the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric
solution , @xmath and @xmath , respectively, are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and these values are the maximum values of the mass and charge of both
the Nariai C and Bertotti-Robinson C solutions, ( 7.34 ) and ( 7.45 ),
respectively. To clarify the nature of these solutions, a diagram @xmath
is plotted in Fig. 7.3 . For a fixed value of @xmath and @xmath , the
allowed range of the mass and charge of the Nariai C-metric, of the
Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric, and of the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS
C-metric is shown.

We are now ready to generate the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric
from the above ultracold dS C-metric. We first set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we introduce a new time coordinate @xmath and a new radial
coordinate @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath the metric ( 6.73 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath has only two real roots, the south pole @xmath and the north pole
@xmath . The angular coordinate @xmath can range between these two poles
whose value is calculated in section 7.5 . Notice that the spacetime
factor @xmath is just @xmath in Rindler coordinates. Therefore, under
the usual coordinate transformation @xmath and @xmath , this factor
transforms into @xmath . Under the coordinate transformation ( 7.55 ),
the Maxwell field for the magnetic case is still given by ( 6.5 ), while
in the electric case, ( 6.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric is conformal to the topological
product of two 2-dimensional manifolds, @xmath , with the conformal
factor @xmath depending on the angular coordinate @xmath .

In the @xmath limit, @xmath , and one obtains the Nariai
Bertotti-Robinson solution @xmath , which has the topology @xmath [ 167
, 168 , 169 , 173 ] ).

We have just seen that the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric can be
appropriately obtained from the vicinity of the accelerated and black
hole horizons in the limit in which the size of these three horizons
approach each other. This near-horizon region is sketched in Fig. 7.4
.(a) as a shaded area, and can be viewed as the intersection of the
shaded areas of Figs. 7.1 .(a) and 7.2 .(a). From it we can construct
straightforwardly, following the construction steps already sketched in
subsections 7.2.1 and 7.2.2 , the Kruskal diagram of the Nariai
Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric drawn in Fig. 7.4 .(b). This diagram is
equivalent to the Kruskal diagram of the Rindler solution. The strut
that connects the two original black holes along their north pole
directions survives to the near-extremal limiting process. Thus the
Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric describes a spacetime that is
conformal to the product @xmath . To each point in the deformed 2-sphere
corresponds a @xmath spacetime, except for one point which corresponds a
@xmath spacetime with an infinite straight strut or string, with a mass
density and pressure satisfying @xmath . In an analogous way to the one
that occurs with the Nariai C universe (see section 7.3.1 ), we expect
that the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C universe is unstable and, once
created, it decays through the quantum tunnelling process into a
slightly non-extreme black hole pair. The picture would be that of the
nucleation, in a dS background, of a Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C
universe, whose string then breaks down and a pair of dS black holes is
created at the endpoints of the string. This expectation is confirmed in
[ 131 ] . When the parameter @xmath is set to zero, the conical
singularities disappear (and so the strut or string are no longer
present) and the angular factor describes a round 2-sphere with fixed
radius, and the topology of the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric
reduces into @xmath .

#### 7.3 Extremal limits of the flat C-metric and of the Ernst solution

The Euclidean version of the “Nariai” flat C-metric that will be
discussed in subsection 7.3.1 has already been used previously, [ 158 ]
- [ 166 ] and [ 133 ] , in the study of the quantum process of pair
creation of black holes. However, as far as we know, the
Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric (discussed in subsection 7.3.2 ) and the
Nariai Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric (discussed in subsection 7.3.3 )
have not been written explicitly.

##### 7.3.1 The “Nariai” flat C-metric

The Nariai solution [ 125 ] is originally a solution in the @xmath
background which can be obtained from a near-extremal limit of the dS
black hole when the outer black horizon approaches the cosmological
horizon. Therefore, it would seem not appropriate to use the name Nariai
to label a @xmath solution. However, in the flat C-metric the
acceleration horizon plays the role of the cosmological horizon.
Moreover, the limit @xmath of the solution discussed in this subsection
is equal to the limit @xmath of the Nariai solution (see subsection
7.1.4 ). In this context, we find appropriate to label this solution by
“Nariai” in between commas, in order to maintain the nomenclature of the
paper.

This solution can be obtained from a near-extremal limit of the flat
C-metric when the outer black horizon approaches the acceleration
horizon. This is the way it has been first constructed in [ 158 ] - [
166 ] . However, given the Nariai C-metric ( @xmath ) generated in
subsection 7.2.1 , we can construct the “Nariai” flat C-metric ( @xmath
) by taking directly the @xmath limit of ( 7.38 )-( LABEL:Gfactor ). The
gravitational field of the “Nariai” flat C-metric is then given by (
7.38 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath when @xmath . @xmath has only two real roots,
the south pole @xmath and the north pole @xmath . The angular coordinate
@xmath can range between these two poles whose value is calculated in
section 7.5 .

There is a great difference between the Nariai C solution of the @xmath
case and the “Nariai” C solution of the @xmath case. In subsection 7.2.1
we saw that the Nariai C-metric ( @xmath ) has a conical singularity at
one of the poles of its deformed 2-sphere. This feature is no longer
present in the “Nariai” flat C-metric, i.e., it is free of conical
singularities. Indeed, in the flat C-metric we have @xmath . Therefore,
if the outer black hole horizon coincides with the acceleration horizon
then the roots @xmath and @xmath of @xmath also coincide (see Fig. 6.19
). This implies that the range of the angular coordinate @xmath becomes
@xmath since the proper distance between @xmath and @xmath goes to
infinity [ 114 ] , [ 158 ] - [ 166 ] . The point @xmath disappears from
the @xmath angular section which is no longer compact but becomes
topologically @xmath or @xmath . So, we have a conical singularity only
at @xmath which can be avoided by choosing @xmath . Therefore, while the
Nariai C-metric ( @xmath ) is topologically conformal to @xmath , the
“Nariai” flat C-metric is topologically conformal to @xmath . Its
Carter-Penrose diagram is given by Fig. 7.1 (b). We could construct the
“Nariai” Ernst solution, however since its main motivation is related to
the removal of the conical singularities present in the C-metric
solution and in this case our “Nariai” flat C-metric is free of conical
singularities, we will not do it.

At this point, it is appropriate to find the @xmath limit of the
“Nariai” flat C-metric. This limit is not direct [see ( 7.60 )]. To
achieve the suitable limit we first make the coordinate rescales: @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath . Then, setting @xmath , the solution becomes
@xmath ]. This limit agrees with the one taken from the @xmath Nariai
solution (written in subsection 7.1.1 ) in the limit @xmath (see
subsection 7.1.4 ). Therefore, while the limit @xmath of the Nariai
C-metric ( @xmath ) is topologically @xmath , the @xmath limit of the
“Nariai” flat C-metric is topologically @xmath . This is a reminiscence
of the fact that with @xmath when @xmath goes to zero there is no
acceleration horizon to play the role of cosmological horizon that
supports the extremal limit taken in this subsection. As a final remark
in this subsection, we note that Horowitz and Sheinblatt [ 271 ] have
taken a different extremal limit, which differs from the one discussed
in this subsection mainly because it preserves the asymptotic behavior
and topology of the original flat C-metric solution.

##### 7.3.2 The Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric

Given the Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric generated in subsection 7.2.2 ,
we can construct the Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric by taking the
direct @xmath limit of ( 7.49 )-( LABEL:Gfactor-br ). The gravitational
field of the Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric is then given by ( 7.49 )
with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . @xmath has only two real roots, the south pole @xmath and
the north pole @xmath . The angular coordinate @xmath can range between
these two poles whose value is calculated in section 7.5 . As in the
Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric, this solution has topology conformal to
@xmath , and a Carter-Penrose diagram drawn in Fig. 7.2 .(b). The
solution has a conical singularity at one of the poles of its deformed
2-sphere @xmath . In the @xmath limit, we have @xmath and @xmath and we
obtain the Bertotti-Robinson solution ( LABEL:br ) discussed in
subsection 7.1.2 .

From the above solution we can generate the Bertotti-Robinson Ernst
solution whose gravitational field is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given by ( 7.61 ), and with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its electromagnetic field is given by ( 6.62 ), in the pure magnetic
case, and by ( LABEL:pot-Ernst-E ), in the pure electric case. Choosing
@xmath satisfying ( 6.65 ), with @xmath , and @xmath such that condition
( 6.66 ) is satisfied, the Bertotti-Robinson Ernst solution is free of
conical singularities. As a final remark in this subsection, we note
that Dowker, Gauntlett, Kastor and Traschen [ 114 ] have taken a
different extremal limit, which differs from the one discussed in this
subsection mainly because it preserves the asymptotic behavior and
topology of the original flat C-metric solution.

##### 7.3.3 The “Nariai” Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric

From the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric generated in subsection
7.2.3 , we can construct the “Nariai” Bertotti-Robinson flat C-metric by
taking the direct @xmath limit of ( LABEL:Nariai-C-Metric-N-br )-( 7.58
). We can also construct the “Nariai” Bertotti-Robinson Ernst solution.
We do not do these limits here because they are now straightforward.

#### 7.4 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric

In the AdS background there are three different families of C-metrics.
When we set @xmath , each one of these families reduces to a different
single AdS black hole. The main features of each one of these three
families of AdS black holes (the spherical, the toroidal and the
hyperbolic families) have been described in section 5.1 ).

Now, to each one of these families corresponds a different AdS C-metric
which has been found by Plebański and Demiański [ 86 ] . In what follows
we will then describe each one of these solutions and, in particular, we
will generate a new solution - the anti-Nariai C-metric.

##### 7.4.1 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric with spherical horizons

The spherical AdS C-metric has already been discussed in detail in
section 6.1 . Its gravitational field is given by ( 6.3 ) with @xmath
and @xmath given by 6.4 . Recall that this solution describes a pair of
accelerated black holes in the AdS background [ 87 ] when the
acceleration @xmath and the cosmological constant are related by @xmath
. When we set @xmath [ 121 , 122 , 87 ] we obtain a single
non-accelerated AdS black hole with spherical topology described
subsection 5.1.1 .

In a way analogous to the one described in last sections we can generate
new solutions from the extremal limits of the AdS C-metric. Since this
follows straightforwardly, we do not do it here. The new relevant
feature of this case is the fact that the Nariai-like extremal solution
only exists when @xmath . In this case, and only in this one, the
acceleration horizon is present in the AdS C-metric and we can have the
outer black hole horizon approaching it.

##### 7.4.2 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric with toroidal horizons

The gravitational field of the massive charged toroidal AdS C-metric
(see [ 86 , 178 ] ) is given by ( 6.3 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the electromagnetic field is given by ( 6.5 ) and ( 6.6 ). When we
set @xmath we obtain the AdS black hole with planar, cylindrical or
toroidal topology [ 6 , 7 , 10 , 8 ] described in subsection 5.1.2.a .

In a way analogous to the one described in section 7.2 we can generate
new solutions from the extremal limits of the toroidal AdS C-metric,
that are the toroidal AdS counterparts of the Nariai and
Bertotti-Robinson C-metrics. Since this follows straightforwardly, we do
not do it here.

##### 7.4.3 Extremal limits of the AdS C-metric with hyperbolic horizons

The gravitational field of the massive charged AdS C-metric with
hyperbolic horizons, the hyperbolic AdS C-metric, is given by ( 6.3 )
with [ 86 , 178 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

(represented in Fig. 7.5 ), and the electromagnetic field is given by (
6.5 ) and ( 6.6 ).

This solution depends on four parameters namely, the cosmological
constant @xmath , the acceleration parameter @xmath , and @xmath and
@xmath which are mass and electromagnetic charge parameters,
respectively. When @xmath this solution reduces to the hyperbolic black
holes [ 11 ] studied in subsection 5.1.3 .

###### 7.4.3.a The anti-Nariai C-metric

We are interested in a particular extreme hyperbolic AdS C-metric, for
which @xmath (see Fig. 7.5 ), and let us label this degenerated horizon
by @xmath : @xmath . In this case, the function @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the degenerate root @xmath , and the negative roots @xmath and
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass parameter and the charge parameter of the solution are written
as a function of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The requirement that @xmath and @xmath are real roots and the condition
@xmath require that the allowed range of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass and the charge of the anti-Nariai type solution, @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, are both monotonically decreasing functions of
@xmath , and as one comes from @xmath into @xmath one has,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to generate the anti-Nariai C-metric from the near-extreme
topological AdS C-metric we first set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order that @xmath measures the deviation from degeneracy, and the
limit @xmath is obtained when @xmath . Now, we introduce a new time
coordinate @xmath and a new radial coordinate @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath implies @xmath with @xmath . In the limit @xmath , from ( 6.3
) and ( 7.66 ), the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.76)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Under the coordinate transformation ( 7.73 ), the Maxwell field for the
magnetic case is still given by ( 6.5 ), while in the electric case, (
6.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Carter-Penrose diagram of the anti-Nariai C-metric is also given by
Fig. 7.2 .(b).

At this point, let us focus our attention on the angular surfaces with
@xmath constant and @xmath constant. When @xmath , we choose @xmath such
that it belongs to the range @xmath (sketched in Fig. 7.5 ) where @xmath
. In this way, the metric has the correct signature, the angular
surfaces are compact, and the allowed range of @xmath includes the
acceleration ( @xmath ) and black hole ( @xmath ) horizons (if we had
chosen the other possible interval of @xmath where @xmath , sketched in
Fig. 7.5 , this last condition would not be satisfied). We unavoidably
have a conical singularity at least at one of the poles of this compact
surface (that we label by @xmath , say). Thus, the charged anti-Nariai
C-metric has a compact angular surface of fixed size with a conical
singularity at one of its poles. It is topologically conformal to @xmath
. When @xmath , the zero @xmath of @xmath disappears, and @xmath grows
monotonically from @xmath into @xmath . Then, the angular surfaces are
not compact, and we have a single pole ( @xmath ) with a conical
singularity, which can be eliminated. Thus, the neutral anti-Nariai
C-metric has a non-compact angular surface of fixed size (a kind of a
deformed 2-hyperboloid that we label by @xmath , say) which is free of
conical singularities. It is topologically conformal to @xmath .

In order to obtain the @xmath limit, we first set @xmath [see first
relation of ( 7.68 )], a parameter that has a finite and well-defined
value when @xmath . Then when @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath , with
@xmath and @xmath satisfying relations ( 7.20 ). Moreover, when we set
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the coordinate transformations @xmath and
@xmath imply that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The angular surface
then reduces to a 2-hyperboloid, @xmath , of fixed size with line
element @xmath . Therefore, when @xmath the anti-Nariai C-metric reduces
to the anti-Nariai solution ( LABEL:qNariai-a ) described in subsection
7.1.3 , with topology @xmath . The limiting procedure that has been
applied in this subsection has generated a new exact solution that
satisfies the Maxwell-Einstein equations in a negative cosmological
constant background.

###### 7.4.3.b Other extremal limits

We could also discuss other extremal limits of the charged topological
AdS C-metric (see Fig. 7.5 ), but these do not seem to be so
interesting.

#### 7.5 Determination of the north and south poles

In this section we discuss the zeros of the function @xmath that appears
in the extremal limits of the dS C-metric, and in the extremal limits of
the flat C-metric. This function @xmath has only two real zeros in the
cases discussed in this paper, namely the Nariai, the Bertotti-Robinson,
and the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson (both for @xmath and @xmath ). These
two roots are the south pole and the north pole, and are respectively
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the absolute values of the
coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in ( LABEL:Gfactor ), (
LABEL:Gfactor-br ), ( 7.58 ), ( 7.60 ), and ( 7.61 ). For the function
@xmath written in a different polynomial form that facilitates the
determination of its zeros see Hong and Teo [ 272 ] .

#### 7.6 Summary and discussion

Following the limiting approach first introduced by Ginsparg and Perry [
97 ] , we have analyzed the extremal limits of the dS, flat and AdS
C-metrics. Among other new exact solutions, we have generated the Nariai
C-metric, the Bertotti-Robinson C-metric, the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson
C-metric and the anti-Nariai C-metric. These solutions are the C-metric
counterparts of the well know solutions found in the 1950’s. They are
specified by an extra parameter: the acceleration parameter @xmath of
the C-metric from which they are generated. When we set @xmath the
solutions found in this paper reduce to the Nariai, the
Bertotti-Robinson, the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson and the anti-Nariai
solutions.

One of the features of these @xmath solutions is the fact that they are
topologically the direct product of two 2-dimensional manifolds of
constant curvature. Their C-metric counterparts are conformal to this
topology, with the conformal factor depending on the angular coordinate.
Moreover, the angular surfaces of these new C-solutions have a fixed
size, but they lose the symmetry of the @xmath counterparts. For
example, while the angular surfaces of the Nariai and Bertotti-Robinson
solutions are round 2-spheres, the angular surfaces of their C-metric
counterparts are deformed 2-spheres - they are compact but not round.
Another important difference between the @xmath and @xmath solutions is
the fact that the @xmath solutions have, in general, a conical
singularity at least at one of the poles of their angular surfaces. This
conical singularity is a reminiscence of the conical singularity that is
present in the C-metric from which they were generated. In the C-metric
these conical singularities are associated to the presence of a strut or
string that furnishes the acceleration of the near-extremal black holes.
In this context, we find that the Nariai C-metric generated from a
extremal limit of the dS C-metric describes a spacetime that is
conformal to the product @xmath . To each point in the deformed 2-sphere
corresponds a @xmath spacetime, except for one point which corresponds a
@xmath spacetime with an infinite straight strut or string, with a mass
density and pressure satisfying @xmath . Analogously, the Nariai
Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric describes a spacetime that is conformal to
the product @xmath . To each point in the deformed 2-sphere corresponds
a @xmath spacetime, except for one point which corresponds a @xmath
spacetime with an infinite straight strut or string. In the case of the
Bertotti-Robinson dS C-metric (topologically conformal to @xmath ), the
strut or string does not survive to the Ginsparg-Perry limiting
procedure, and thus in the end of the process we only have a conical
singularity.

In what concerns the causal structure, the Carter-Penrose diagrams of
the @xmath solutions are equal to those of the @xmath solutions. For
example, the diagram of the Nariai C-metric is equal to the one that
describes the (1+1)-dimensional dS solution, the diagram of the
Bertotti-Robinson C-metric and of the anti-Nariai C-metric is equal to
the one that describes the (1+1)-dimensional AdS solution, and the
diagram of the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson C-metric is given by the Rindler
diagram.

Some of these solutions, perhaps all, are certainly of physical
interest. Indeed, it is known that the Nariai solution ( @xmath ) is
unstable and, once created, it decays through the quantum tunnelling
process into a slightly non-extreme black hole pair [ 129 ] . We then
expect that the Nariai C-metric is also unstable and that it will decay
into a slightly non-extreme pair of black holes accelerated by a strut
or by a string. The solutions found in this paper also play an important
role in the decay of the dS or AdS spaces, and therefore can mediate the
Schwinger-like quantum process of pair creation of black holes. Indeed,
the Nariai, and the dS Nariai Bertotti-Robinson instantons ( @xmath )
are one of the few Euclidean solutions that are regular, and have thus
been used [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 , 172 ] to study the pair creation of
dS black holes materialized and accelerated by the cosmological constant
background field (an instanton is a solution of the Euclidean field
equations that smoothly connects the spacelike sections of the initial
state, the pure dS space in this case, and the final state, the dS black
hole pair in this case). Moreover, the Euclidean “Nariai” flat C-metric
and Ernst solution (see section 9.2 ) have been used to analyze the
process of pair production of @xmath black holes, accelerated by a
string or by an electromagnetic external field, respectively. Therefore,
its natural to expect that the Euclidean extremal limits of the dS
C-metric and AdS C-metric found in this paper mediate the process of
pair creation of black holes in a cosmological background, that are then
accelerated by a string, in addition to the cosmological field
acceleration. For the Nariai case, e.g., the picture would be that of
the nucleation, in a dS background, of a Nariai C universe, whose string
then breaks down and a pair of dS black holes is created at the
endpoints of the string. This expectation is confirmed in [ 131 ] .

### Chapter 8 False vacuum decay: effective one-loop action for pair
creation of domain walls

] ] \minitoc

This chapter can be seen as an introductory toy model for the black hole
pair creation analysis that will be done in chapter 9 . We propose an
effective one-loop action to describe the domain wall pair creation
process that accompanies the false vacuum decay of a scalar field (in
the absence of gravity). We compute the pair creation rate of the
process, including the one-loop contribution, using the instanton method
that is also applied in the computation of black hole pair creation
rates.

#### 8.1 The false vacuum decay process

Stone [ 144 ] has studied the problem of a scalar field theory in
(1+1)-dimensions with a metastable vacuum, i.e., with a scalar potential
that has a false vacuum, @xmath , and a true vacuum, @xmath , separated
by an energy density difference, @xmath . Stone has noticed that the
decay process can be interpreted as the false vacuum decaying into the
true vacuum plus a creation of a soliton-antisoliton pair: @xmath The
energy necessary for the materialization of the pair comes from the
energy density difference between the two vacua. The soliton-antisoliton
pair production rate per unit time and length, @xmath , can then be
identified with the decay rate of the false vacuum and is given by (
@xmath ) [ 144 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the soliton mass and prefactor @xmath is a functional
determinant whose value was first calculated by Kiselev and Selivanov [
145 , 146 ] and later by Voloshin [ 148 ] . Extensions to this decay
problem, such as induced false vacuum decay, have been studied by
several authors (for a review and references see, e.g., [ 149 , 147 ] ).

The method used in [ 144 , 145 , 146 , 148 ] is based on the instanton
method introduced by Langer in his work about decay of metastable
termodynamical states [ 139 ] . This powerful method has been applied to
several different studies, namely: Coleman and Callan [ 140 , 141 ] have
computed the bubble production rate that accompanies the cosmological
phase transitions in a (3+1)-dimensional scalar theory (this was indeed
previously calculated by other methods by Voloshin, Kobzarev and Okun [
143 ] ); Affleck and Manton [ 152 ] have studied monopole pair
production in a weak external magnetic field and Affleck, Alvarez and
Manton [ 153 ] , have studied @xmath boson pair production in a weak
external electric field. Recent developments studying pair production of
boson and spinorial particles in external Maxwell’s fields have been
performed by several authors using different methods [ 274 , 275 , 276 ]
. Similar results in the Euler-Heisenberg theory, a modified Maxwell
theory, have been also obtained [ 277 ] .

In this chapter, following our work [ 150 ] , we propose an effective
one-loop action built from the soliton field itself to study the problem
of Stone [ 144 ] , Kiselev and Selivanov [ 145 , 146 ] and Voloshin [
148 ] . The action consists of the usual mass term and a kinetic term in
which the simple derivative of the soliton field is replaced by a kind
of covariant derivative. In this effective action the soliton charge is
treated no longer as a topological charge but as a Noether charge. This
procedure of working with an effective action for the soliton field
itself has been introduced by Coleman [ 273 ] where the equivalence
between the Sine-Gordon model and the Thirring model was shown, and by
Montonen and Olive [ 278 ] who have proposed an equivalent dual field
theory for the Prasad-Sommerfield monopole soliton. More connected to
our problem, Manton [ 279 ] has proposed an effective action built from
the soliton field itself which reproduces the soliton physical
properties of (1+1)-dimensional nonlinear scalar field theories having
symmetric potentials with degenerate minima. In this paper we deal
instead with a potential with non-degenerate minima in a
(1+1)-dimensional scalar field theory. Thus, our effective action is new
since Manton was not dealing with the soliton pair production process.

Using the effective one-loop action and the method presented in [ 153 ]
, we calculate the soliton-antisoliton pair production rate, ( 8.1 ).
One recovers Stone’s exponential factor @xmath [ 144 ] and the prefactor
@xmath of Kiselev and Selivanov [ 145 , 146 ] and Voloshin [ 148 ] .

#### 8.2 Effective one-loop action

In order to present some useful soliton properties let us consider a
scalar field theory in a (1+1)-dimensional spacetime, whose dynamics is
governed by the action (see, e.g., [ 280 ] ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a generic potential. A particular important case is when
@xmath is a symmetric potential, @xmath , with two or more degenerate
minima. In the @xmath theory the potential is @xmath , with @xmath and
@xmath . Stationarizing the action one obtains the solutions of the
theory which have finite and localized energy. The solutions are the
soliton

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the antisoliton @xmath . From the hamiltonian density, @xmath , one
can calculate the mass of the soliton and antisoliton

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can also define the topological charge, @xmath , (conserved in time)
which has the positive value @xmath in the case of the soliton and the
negative value @xmath in the case of the antisoliton. To this charge one
associates the topological current @xmath which is conserved, @xmath ,
and such that @xmath .

Now, let us consider a non-degenerate potential @xmath in action ( 8.2 )
by adding to @xmath a small term that breaks its symmetry [ 144 , 141 ]
: @xmath , where @xmath is the energy density (per unit length)
difference between the true ( @xmath ) and false ( @xmath ) vacua. As
noticed in [ 144 , 145 , 146 ] , @xmath is responsible for both the
decay of false vacuum and soliton-antisoliton pair creation.

We want to find an effective one-loop action built from the soliton
field itself and that describes the above pair creation process. The
soliton field should be a charged field since the system admits two
charges, @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the action should contain the
mass term @xmath , where @xmath is the soliton mass given in ( 8.4 ),
and the kinetic term @xmath . Thus, the free field effective action is
@xmath . However, if one demands local gauge invariance one has to
introduce an “electromagnetic” 2-vector potential @xmath which
transforms the common derivative @xmath into a covariant derivative
@xmath . As is well known, the field @xmath itself should contribute to
the action. This contribution must be gauge invariant since the
covariant kinetic term plus the mass term are already gauge invariant.
This is achieved by defining the invariant 2-form field, @xmath . In two
dimensions, an anti-symmetric field can only be of the form: @xmath ,
where @xmath is the Levi-Civita tensor and @xmath a function. Therefore
the effective one-loop action should be @xmath .

Note now that the charged soliton acts also as a source, thus modifying
the surrounding field. As a first approximation we shall neglect this
effect and assume @xmath fixed by external conditions. This allows us to
drop the contribution of the term @xmath in the effective action.
Moreover, the external field responsible for the pair creation is
essentially represented by the energy density difference @xmath so we
postulate that @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is given by @xmath .

Finally, if the system is analytically continued to Euclidean spacetime
@xmath ; @xmath one obtains the Euclidean effective one-loop action for
the soliton pair creation problem

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the next section this Euclidean effective one-loop action is going to
be used to calculate the soliton-antisoliton pair production rate ( 8.1
). Although the calculations are now similar to those found in Affleck,
Alvarez and Manton pair creation problem [ 153 ] , we present some
important steps and results since in two dimensions they are slightly
different.

#### 8.3 Pair production rate

The soliton-antisoliton pair production rate per unit time is equal to
the false vacuum decay rate per unit time

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the vacuum energy, @xmath , is given by the Euclidean functional
integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

As it will be verified, @xmath will receive a small imaginary
contribution from the negative-mode associated to the quantum
fluctuations about the instanton (which stationarizies the action) and
this fact is responsible for the decay. Combining ( 8.6 ) and ( 8.7 )
one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by ( 8.5 ). Integrating out @xmath and @xmath in (
8.8 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The logarithm in ( 8.9 ) can be written as a “Schwinger proper time
integral”, @xmath . Taking @xmath , yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that now the trace is of the form @xmath , with @xmath being the
Hamiltonian for a particle subjected to the interaction with the
external scalar field in a (2+1)-dimensional spacetime, and the proper
time playing the role of a time coordinate. One has started with a
scalar field theory in a Euclidean 2-dimensional spacetime and now one
has found an effective theory for particles in a 3D spacetime. It is in
this new context that the pair production rate is going to be
calculated. The gain in having the trace in the given form is that it
can be written as a path integral @xmath , where @xmath is the
Lagrangian associated with our Hamiltonian. Thus,

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.11)
  -- -- -- --------

Rescaling the proper time variable, @xmath , and noticing that the path
integral is over all the paths, @xmath , such that @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath integral can be calculated expanding the function about the
stationary point @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then ( 8.12 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This integral can be solved using the instanton method.
Stationarizing the action, one gets the equation of motion in the (2+1)D
spacetime

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.15)
  -- -- -- --------

The instanton, @xmath , i.e., the solution of the Euclidean equation of
motion that obeys the boundary conditions @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The instanton represents a particle describing a loop of radius @xmath
in the plane defined by the time @xmath and by the direction @xmath .
The loop is a thin wall that separates the true vacuum located inside
the loop from the false vacuum outside.

The Euclidean action of the instanton is given by @xmath . The first
term is the rest energy of the particle times the orbital length and the
second term represents the interaction of the particle with the external
scalar field. The loop radius, @xmath , stationarizies the instanton
action. The action is then @xmath .

The second order variation operator is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The eigenvectors @xmath , and the eigenvalues @xmath , associated with
the operator @xmath are such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this one concludes that:
@xmath the positive eigenmodes are:
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath , @xmath ;
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath , @xmath ;
@xmath there are two zero-modes associated with the translation of the
loop along the @xmath and @xmath directions: @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath ;
@xmath there is a zero-mode associated with the translation along the
proper time, @xmath : @xmath with @xmath ;
@xmath there is a single negative mode associated to the change of the
loop radius @xmath : @xmath with @xmath .

Now, we consider small fluctuations about the instanton, i.e., we do
@xmath . The Euclidean action is expanded to second order so that the
path integral ( 8.14 ) can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The path integral in equation ( 8.19 ) is the one-loop factor and is
given by @xmath , where @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath
is a normalization factor that will not be needed. To overcome the
problem that arises from having an infinite product of eigenvalues, one
compares our system with the free particle system

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the second variation operator of the free system with
eigenvalues @xmath (each with multiplicity 4). In equation ( 8.20 ) the
first factor is the path integral of a free particle in a 3-dimensional
Euclidean spacetime

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.21)
  -- -- -- --------

In the productory, one omits the zero eigenvalues, but one has to
introduce the normalization factor @xmath which is associated with the
proper time eigenvalue. In addition, associated with the negative
eigenvalue one has to introduce a factor of @xmath which accounts for
the loops that do expand. The other half contracts (representing the
annihilation of recently created pairs) and so does not contribute to
the creation rate. So, the one-loop factor becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Written like this, the one loop factor accounts only for the
contribution of the instanton centered in @xmath . The translational
invariance in the @xmath and @xmath directions requires that one
multiplies ( 8.22 ) by the spacetime volume factor @xmath , which
represents the spacetime region where the instanton might be localized.
So, the correct one-loop factor is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting ( 8.23 ) into ( 8.19 ), using @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , one
finally has that the soliton-antisoliton pair production rate per unit
time and length is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have recovered Stone’s exponential factor @xmath [ 144 ] as well as
the prefactor @xmath of Kiselev and Selivanov [ 145 , 146 ] and Voloshin
[ 148 ] .

Note the difference to the 4D problem of Affleck et al [ 153 ] and
Schwinger [ 130 ] , who have found for the factor @xmath the value
@xmath which is quadratic in @xmath and not linear, as in our case. This
difference has to do with the dimensionality of the problems.

It is well known that a one-particle system in 2D can be transformed
straightforwardly to a thin line in 3D and a thin wall in 4D, where now
the mass @xmath of the soliton should be interpreted as a line density
and surface density, respectively. In fact, a particle in (1+1)D, as
well as an infinite line in (2+1)D, can be considered as walls as seen
from within the intrinsic space dimension, justifying the use of the
name wall for any dimension. Our calculations apply directly to the
domain wall pair creation problem in any dimension.

#### 8.4 Summary and discussion

The equation for the loop of radius @xmath in 2-dimensional Euclidean
spacetime is given by @xmath , where we have put @xmath and @xmath . One
can make an analytical continuation of the Euclidean time ( @xmath ) to
the Minkowskian time ( @xmath ) and obtain the solution in 2-dimensional
Minkowski spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

At @xmath the system makes a quantum jump and a soliton-antisoliton pair
materializes at @xmath . After the materialization, the soliton and
antisoliton are accelerated, driving away from each other, as ( 8.25 )
shows. To check these statements note first that the energy necessary
for the materialization of the pair at rest is @xmath , where @xmath is
the soliton mass. This energy comes from the conversion of false vacuum
into true vacuum. Since @xmath is the energy difference per unit length
between the two vacua, we conclude that an energy of value @xmath is
released when this conversion occurs in the region ( @xmath ) within the
pair. So, the pair materialization should occur only when @xmath is such
that the energy released is equal to the rest energy: @xmath . This
value agrees with the one that has been determined in section 8.3 .

After the materialization the pair is accelerated so that its energy is
now @xmath . Differentiating ( 8.25 ), we get the velocity @xmath . The
energy of the pair is then given by @xmath . Notice now that @xmath is
the energy released in the conversion of false vacuum into true vacuum.
So, after pair creation, all the energy released in the conversion
between the two vacua is used to accelerate the soliton-antisoliton
pair.

This discussion agrees with the interpretation of the process as being
the false vacuum decaying to the true vacuum plus a creation of a
soliton-antisoliton pair. It also justifies the presence of the
interaction term @xmath present in the covariant derivative of the
proposed effective one-loop action, ( 8.5 ), since @xmath is the energy
released in the decay and responsible for the creation and acceleration
of the pair.

With the proposed effective one-loop action ( 8.5 ) we have recovered
Stone’s exponential factor @xmath [ 144 ] of the pair creation rate in (
8.1 ), and the prefactor @xmath of Kiselev and Selivanov [ 145 , 146 ]
and Voloshin [ 148 ] . In the proposed effective one-loop action the
soliton charge is treated no longer as a topological charge but as a
Noether charge. Such an interchange between the topological and the
Noether charges was already present in [ 273 , 278 ] .

The problem of false vacuum decay coupled to gravity has been introduced
in [ 142 ] and also discussed in [ 281 , 282 ] . With the proposed
effective one-loop action ( 8.5 ) it would be interesting to further
analyze this problem.

### Chapter 9 Pair creation of black holes on a cosmic string background

] ] \minitoc

A process that allows the formation of black holes (even with Plank
sizes) is the gravitational analogue of the Schwinger quantum process of
pair creation of particles in an external electric field. This
gravitational black hole pair creation process has first proposed by
Gibbons (1986). In order to turn the pair of virtual black holes real
one needs a background field that provides the energy needed to
materialize the pair, and that provides the force necessary to
accelerate away the black holes once they are created. This background
field can be: (i) an external electromagnetic field with its Lorentz
force [ 157 ] - [ 181 ] , (ii) the positive cosmological constant @xmath
, or inflation [ 181 ] - [ 174 ] , (iii) a cosmic string with its
tension [ 133 ] - [ 166 ] , (iv) a domain wall with its gravitational
repulsive energy [ 176 ] - [ 178 ] . One can also have a combination of
the above fields, for example, a process involving cosmic string
breaking in a background magnetic field [ 175 ] , or a scenario in which
a cosmic string breaks in a cosmological background [ 132 , 131 ] . We
have already made a historical overview of these processes in section
1.3.3 , and we will now analyze some of these processes in great detail.
To study these processes we must have exact solutions of the Einstein
equations that describe the pair of uniformly accelerated black holes in
the external field, after they are created. These solutions, the
C-metric and Ernst solution, exist and we have already studied them in
chapters 6 and 7 . Finally, an important process that accompanies the
production of the black hole pair is the emission of radiation. An
estimate for the amount of gravitational radiation released during the
pair creation period will be explicitly computed in chapter 12 .

The particular process we are going to study in this chapter is the
quantum process in which a cosmic string breaks, and a pair of black
holes is created at the ends of the string (see Fig. 1.9 ). In a flat
background this process has been analyzed by Hawking and Ross [ 133 ] ,
with the support provided by [ 134 , 135 , 136 ] . We will discuss the
main results of [ 133 ] in section 9.2 , including the explicit values
of the pair creation rates which have not been written in [ 133 ] . In
section 9.1 , we will discuss in detail the same process but in an AdS
background, following your work [ 132 ] . Finally, in section 9.3 , we
will analyze the black hole pair creation probability when a string
breaks in an dS background, following your work [ 131 ] .

The energy to materialize and accelerate the black holes comes from the
strings’ tension. In the dS case the cosmological background
acceleration also makes a positive contribution to the process, while in
the AdS case the cosmological background acceleration contributes
negatively. Thus, pair creation of black holes in a dS background is
possible even when there is no string, and this process has been
analyzed in [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 170 , 172 , 173 ] . Due to the negative
cosmological background contribution, in the AdS case, pair creation of
black holes is possible only when the acceleration provided by the
strings tension is higher than @xmath .

We remark that in principle our explicit values for the pair creation
rates [ 132 , 131 ] also apply to the process of pair creation in an
external electromagnetic field, with the acceleration being provided in
this case by the Lorentz force instead of being furnished by the string
tension. There is no Ernst solution in a cosmological constant
background, and thus we cannot discuss analytically the process.
However, physically we could in principle consider an external
electromagnetic field that supplies the same energy and acceleration as
our strings and, from the results of the @xmath case (where the pair
creation rates in the string and electromagnetic cases agree), we expect
that the results found in [ 131 , 132 ] do not depend on whether the
energy is being provided by an external electromagnetic field or by
strings.

#### 9.1 Pair creation of anti-de Sitter black holes on a cosmic string
background

In this section we want to analyze the process in which a cosmic string
breaks and a pair of black holes is produced at the ends of the string,
in an anti-de Sitter (AdS) background ( @xmath ). Therefore, the energy
to materialize and accelerate the pair comes from the strings’ tension.
In an AdS background this will be the only study done in the process of
production of a pair of correlated black holes with spherical topology.
The instantons for this process can be constructed by analytically
continuing the AdS C-metric found in [ 86 ] and analyzed in detail in [
121 ] - [ 87 ] . Contrary to the @xmath [ 84 ] and @xmath [ 88 ] cases,
the AdS describes a pair of accelerated black holes only when the
acceleration supplied by the strings is greater than @xmath [ 87 ] .
Hence we expect that pair creation of black holes in an AdS background
is possible only when @xmath . We will confirm this expectation. The
quantum production of uncorrelated AdS black holes has been studied in [
180 ] , and the pair creation process of correlated topological AdS
black holes (with hyperbolic topology) has been analyzed in [ 178 ] in a
domain wall background.

The plan of this chapter is as follows. The AdS C-metric represents two
accelerating black holes in an AdS background (see previous section 6.1
), and in section 9.1.1 we construct, from the AdS C-metric, the regular
instantons that describe the pair creation process. We find an instanton
that mediates pair creation of nonextreme black holes and other that
mediates the production of extreme black holes. Then, in section 9.1.2 ,
we explicitly evaluate the pair creation rate for each one of the cases
discussed in section 9.1.1 .

##### 9.1.1 The AdS C-metric instantons

The AdS C-metric has been discussed in detail in section 6.1 . When
@xmath , and only in this case, the AdS C-metric describes a pair of
uniformly accelerated black holes in an anti-de Sitter background, with
the acceleration being provided by two strings, from each one of the
black holes towards infinity, that pulls them away. Since we are
interested in black hole pair creation, onwards we will deal only with
the @xmath case. The presence of the string is associated to the conical
singularity that exists in the south pole of the AdS C-metric (see
subsections 6.1.1.c and 6.1.3.a ).

Before we proceed, let us refresh some basic properties that will be
really needed later. The AdS C-metric ( 6.3 )-( 6.6 ) has a curvature
singularity at @xmath where the matter source is and, in the Lorentzian
sector, @xmath must belong to the range @xmath . The point @xmath
corresponds to a point that is infinitely far away from the curvature
singularity, thus as @xmath increases we approach the curvature
singularity and @xmath is the inverse of a radial coordinate. The south
pole, @xmath , points towards the infinity, while the north pole points
towards the other black hole. At most, @xmath can have four real zeros
which we label in ascending order by @xmath . The roots @xmath and
@xmath are, respectively, the inner and outer charged black hole
horizons, and @xmath and @xmath are acceleration horizons. Later on it
will be crucial to note that the number and nature of the horizons
crossed by an observer that travels into the black hole singularity
depends on the angular direction @xmath that he is following. This
peculiar feature is due to the lower restriction on the value of @xmath
( @xmath ). Thus, for @xmath , we have to consider separately five
distinct sets of angular directions, namely (a) @xmath , (b) @xmath ,
(c) @xmath , (d) @xmath and (e) @xmath . For example, when the observer
is travelling towards the the black hole singularity following an
angular direction in the vicinity of the south pole [case (a)] we will
cross only the outer ( @xmath ) and inner ( @xmath ) black hole
horizons. When he does this trip following an angular direction in the
vicinity of the equator [case (c)], he crosses the acceleration horizon
@xmath before passing through the black hole horizons @xmath and @xmath
. If this trip is done following an angular direction in the vicinity of
the north pole [case (e)] we will cross two accelerations horizons,
@xmath and @xmath and then the black hole horizons @xmath and @xmath .
The angular coordinate @xmath belongs to the range @xmath for which
@xmath . By doing this we guarantee that the Euclidean metric has the
correct signature @xmath , and that the angular surfaces are compact. In
order to avoid a conical singularity in the north pole, the period of
@xmath must be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and this leaves a conical singularity in the south pole given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

that signals the presence of a string with mass density, @xmath , and
with pressure @xmath .

Now, in order to evaluate the black hole pair creation rate we need to
find the instantons of the theory. I.e., we must look into the euclidean
section of the AdS C-metric and choose only those euclidean solutions
which are regular in a way that will be explained soon. To obtain the
euclidean section of the AdS C-metric from the lorentzian AdS C-metric
we simply introduce an imaginary time coordinate @xmath in ( 6.3 ), (
6.5 ), and ( 6.6 ). Then the gravitational field of the euclidean AdS
C-metric is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the euclidean Maxwell field in the magnetic case is still given by (
6.5 ), while in the electric case it is now given by @xmath .

To have a positive definite euclidean metric we must require that @xmath
belongs to @xmath . In general, when @xmath , one then has conical
singularities at the horizons @xmath and @xmath . In order to obtain a
regular solution we have to eliminate the conical singularities at both
horizons, ensuring in this way that the system is in thermal
equilibrium. This is achieved by imposing that the period of @xmath is
the same for the two horizons, and is equivalent to requiring that the
Hawking temperature of the two horizons be equal. To eliminate the
conical singularity at @xmath the period of @xmath must be @xmath (where
@xmath is the surface gravity of the acceleration horizon),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This choice for the period of @xmath also eliminates simultaneously the
conical singularity at the outer black hole horizon, @xmath , if and
only if the parameters of the solution are such that the surface
gravities of the black hole and acceleration horizons are equal ( @xmath
), i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This condition is satisfied by a regular euclidean solution with @xmath
that will be referred to as nonextreme AdS instanton. This solution
requires the presence of an electromagnetic charge.

We now turn our attention to the case @xmath (and @xmath ), which
obviously requires the presence of charge. When this happens the allowed
range of @xmath in the euclidean sector is simply @xmath . This occurs
because when @xmath the proper distance along spatial directions between
@xmath and @xmath goes to infinity. The point @xmath disappears from the
@xmath section which is no longer compact but becomes topologically
@xmath . Thus, in this case we have a conical singularity only at @xmath
, and so we obtain a regular euclidean solution by simply requiring that
the period of @xmath be equal to ( 9.5 ). We will label this solution by
extreme AdS instanton.

In a de Sitter background there is another @xmath instanton which
satisfies @xmath . It is called Nariai instanton and exists with or
without charge. Moreover, in the dS background, there is also a special
solution that satisfies @xmath . It is called ultracold instanton. In
the AdS C-metric case, the counterparts of these dS instantons are of no
interest for the pair creation process because they are out of the
allowed range of the angular direction @xmath .

Below, we will describe in detail the nonextreme AdS instanton with
@xmath and the extreme AdS instanton. These instantons are the natural
AdS C-metric counterparts of the lukewarm dS C and cold dS C instantons
constructed in [ 88 ] . Thus, these instantons could also be labelled as
lukewarm AdS C and cold AdS C instantons. These two families of
instantons will allow us to calculate the pair creation rate of
accelerated AdS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black holes in section 9.1.2 .

As is clear from the above discussion, when the charge vanishes we have
no regular instanton available. Therefore, in the instanton context, we
cannot discuss the pair creation of accelerated AdS-Schwarzchild black
holes. In the dS background the instanton that describes this process is
the neutral Nariai instanton [ 97 , 169 , 170 , 172 ] , whose AdS
counterpart is not well-behaved as we said.

###### 9.1.1.a The nonextreme AdS instanton with @xmath

As we said above, for the nonextreme AdS instanton the gravitational
field is given by ( 6.73 ) with the requirement that @xmath satisfies
@xmath and @xmath . In this case we can then write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.7)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , written as a
function of @xmath and @xmath , are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, the mass and the charge of the nonextreme AdS instanton are
necessarily equal, @xmath , as occurs with its flat [ 114 , 160 , 181 ]
and dS counterparts [ 167 , 169 , 88 ] . The demand that @xmath is real
requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, as already anticipated, the nonextreme AdS instanton is
available only when ( 9.11 ) is satisfied.

As we said, the allowed range of @xmath in the Euclidean sector is
@xmath . Then, the period of @xmath , ( 9.5 ), that avoids the conical
singularity at both horizons is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the common temperature of the two horizons.

Using the fact that @xmath [see ( 9.4 )] we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the roots of @xmath we are interested in are the south and north
pole (represented, respectively, as @xmath and @xmath in Fig. 6.5 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath and @xmath go to zero we have @xmath and @xmath . This is
the reason why we decided to work in between the roots @xmath and @xmath
, instead of working in between the roots @xmath and @xmath also
represented in Fig. 6.5 . Indeed, when @xmath and @xmath these two last
roots disappear, and our instanton has no vacuum counterpart. Now, the
requirement that @xmath is real demands that @xmath [note that @xmath ,
see ( 9.10 )]. If this requirement is not fulfilled then @xmath has only
two real roots that are represented as @xmath and @xmath in Fig. 6.5
and, as we have just said, in this case the solution has no counterpart
in the @xmath and @xmath case. Therefore we discard the solutions that
satisfy @xmath , and hereafter when we refer to the mass of the
nonextreme AdS instanton we will be working in the range

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The period of @xmath , ( 9.76 ), that avoids the conical singularity at
the north pole (and leaves one at the south pole responsible for the
presence of the string) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath and @xmath go to zero we have @xmath and the conical
singularity disappears.

The topology of the nonextreme AdS instanton is @xmath , where @xmath
represents @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , but we have to remove
the region, @xmath . The Lorentzian sector of this nonextreme instanton
describes two charged AdS black holes being accelerated by the strings,
so this instanton describes pair creation of nonextreme black holes with
@xmath .

###### 9.1.1.b The extreme AdS instanton with @xmath

The gravitational field of the extreme AdS instanton is given by ( 6.73
) with the requirement that the size of the outer charged black hole
horizon @xmath is equal to the size of the inner charged horizon @xmath
. Let us label this degenerated horizon by @xmath : @xmath and @xmath .
In this case, the function @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, as occurred with the nonextreme AdS instanton, the extreme
AdS instanton is also available only when @xmath . The roots @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
     @xmath      (9.20)
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass and the charge of the solution are written as a function of
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, for a fixed @xmath and @xmath , the ratio @xmath is higher than
@xmath . The conditions @xmath and @xmath require that, for the extreme
AdS instanton, the allowed range of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value of @xmath decreases monotonically with @xmath and we have
@xmath . The mass and the charge of the extreme AdS instanton are also
monotonically decreasing functions of @xmath , and as we come from
@xmath into @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

so, for a fixed @xmath , as the acceleration parameter @xmath grows the
maximum value of the mass and of the charge decreases monotonically. For
a fixed @xmath and for a fixed mass below @xmath , the maximum value of
the acceleration is @xmath .

As we have already said, the allowed range of @xmath in the Euclidean
sector is @xmath and does not include @xmath . Then, the period of
@xmath , ( 9.5 ), that avoids the conical singularity at the only
horizon of the extreme AdS instanton is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the temperature of the acceleration horizon.

In what concerns the angular sector of the extreme AdS instanton, @xmath
is given by ( 9.4 ), and its only real zeros are the south and north
pole (represented, respectively, as @xmath and @xmath in Fig. 6.5 ;
@xmath and @xmath also represented in this figure become complex roots
in the extreme case),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are fixed by ( 9.22 ), for a given @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . When @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath .
The period of @xmath that avoids the conical singularity at the north
pole (and leaves one at the south pole responsible for the presence of
the strings) is given by ( 9.76 ) with @xmath defined in ( 9.27 ).

The topology of the extreme AdS instanton is @xmath , where @xmath
represents @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , but we have to remove
the region, @xmath . Since @xmath is at an infinite proper distance, the
surface @xmath is an internal infinity boundary. The Lorentzian sector
of this extreme case describes two extreme ( @xmath ) charged AdS black
holes being accelerated by the strings, and the extreme AdS instanton
describes the pair creation of these extreme black holes.

###### 9.1.1.c The nonextreme AdS instanton with @xmath

The AdS C-metric instantons studied in the two last subsections, namely
the nonextreme instantons with @xmath and the extreme instantons with
@xmath , are saddle point solutions free of conical singularities both
in the @xmath and @xmath horizons. The corresponding black holes may
then nucleate in the AdS background when a cosmic string breaks, and we
will compute their pair creation rates in Sec. 9.1.2 . However, these
particular black holes are not the only ones that can be pair created.
Indeed, it has been shown in [ 155 , 156 ] that Euclidean solutions with
conical singularities may also be used as saddle points for the pair
creation process. These nonextreme instantons have @xmath and describe
pair creation of nonextreme black holes with @xmath .

In what follows we will find the range of parameters for which one has
nonextreme black holes with conical singularities, i.e., with @xmath .
First, when @xmath and @xmath , we require that @xmath belongs to the
interval @xmath (sketched in Fig. 6.5 ) for which the charged solutions
are in the same sector of the @xmath and @xmath solutions. Defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the above requirement is fulfilled by the parameter range

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

for which @xmath , with @xmath being the less negative @xmath where the
derivative of @xmath vanishes. Second, in order to insure that one has a
nonextreme solution we must require that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

for which @xmath , with @xmath being the point in between @xmath and
@xmath where the derivative of @xmath vanishes. We have @xmath except at
@xmath where these two functions are equal; @xmath is always positive;
and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The nonextreme black holes
with conical singularities are those that satisfy ( 9.30 ), ( 9.31 ) and
@xmath . The range of parameters of these nonextreme black holes with
@xmath are sketched in Fig. 9.1 .

In order to compute the pair creation rate of the nonextreme black holes
with @xmath , we will need the relation between the parameters @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and the horizons @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
In general, for a nonextreme solution with horizons @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be expressed as a
function of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.34)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The allowed values of parameters @xmath and @xmath are those contained
in the interior region sketched in Fig. 9.1 .

The topology of these nonextreme AdS instantons with @xmath is @xmath ,
where @xmath represents @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , but we
have to remove the region, @xmath . These instantons describe the pair
creation of nonextreme black holes with @xmath .

###### 9.1.1.d Initial system: AdS background with a string

So far, we have described the solution that represents a pair of black
holes accelerated by the strings tension. This solution describes the
evolution of the black hole pair after its creation. Now, we want to
find a solution that represents a string in a AdS background. This
solution will describe the initial system, before the breaking of the
cosmic string that leads to the formation of the black hole pair. In
order to achieve our aim we note that at spatial infinity the
gravitational field of the Euclidean AdS C-metric reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Maxwell field goes to zero. @xmath is a constant that represents
a freedom in the choice of coordinates, and @xmath . We want that this
metric also describes the solution before the creation of the black hole
pair, i.e., we demand that it describes a string with its conical
deficit in an AdS background. Now, if we want to maintain the intrinsic
properties of the string during the process we must impose that its mass
density and thus its conical deficit remains constant. After the pair
creation we already know that the conical deficit is given by ( 9.2 ).
Hence, the requirement that the background solution describes an AdS
spacetime with a conical deficit angle given exactly by ( 9.2 ) leads us
to impose that in ( 9.35 ) one has

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.36)
  -- -- -- --------

The arbitrary parameter @xmath can be fixed as a function of @xmath by
imposing a matching between ( 6.73 ) and ( 9.35 ) at large spatial
distances. We will do this matching in the following section.

##### 9.1.2 Calculation of the black hole pair creation rates

The black hole pair creation rate is given by the path integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the induced metric and electromagnetic
potential on the boundary @xmath of a compact manifold @xmath , @xmath
is a measure on the space of the metrics @xmath and @xmath is a measure
on the space of Maxwell field @xmath , and @xmath is the Euclidean
action of the instanton that mediates the process. In our case this
action is the Einstein-Maxwell action with a negative cosmological
constant @xmath . The path integral is over all compact metrics and
potentials on manifolds @xmath with boundary @xmath , which agree with
the boundary data on @xmath . @xmath is the action for the background
reference spacetime, the AdS background with the string, specified by
@xmath and @xmath (see Sec. 9.1.1.d ). Its presence is required because
it describes the initial system. Moreover, the geometry of the final
system with the black hole pair is noncompact, that is @xmath diverges.
However, the physical action @xmath is finite for fields @xmath , @xmath
that approach asymptotically @xmath , @xmath in an appropriate way [ 165
] . Specifically, one fixes a boundary near infinity, @xmath , and
demands that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath induce fields on this
boundary that agree to sufficient order, so that their difference does
not contribute to the action in the limit that @xmath goes to infinity [
165 ] .

In the semiclassical instanton approximation, the dominant contribution
to the path integral ( 9.37 ) comes from metrics and Maxwell fields
which are near the solutions (instantons) that extremalize the Euclidean
action and satisfy the boundary conditions. In this approximation, the
pair creation rate of AdS black holes is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath includes already the contribution from the background
reference spacetime. @xmath is the one-loop prefactor that accounts for
the fluctuations in the gravitational and matter fields, and its
evaluation will not be considered in this paper (see [ 171 , 172 , 138 ,
162 ] [ 284 ] - [ 288 ] for a treatment of this factor in some
backgrounds).

Hawking and Horowitz [ 165 ] (see also Brown and York [ 289 ] ) have
shown that the Euclidean action of the instanton that mediates pair
creation of nonextreme black holes can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the difference in area of the acceleration horizon
between the AdS C-metric and the background, and @xmath is the area of
the black hole horizon present in the instanton. The Euclidean action of
the instanton that describes pair creation of extreme black holes can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

In these relations, @xmath is the period of the Euclidean time, and
@xmath represents the Hamiltonian of the system which, for static
solutions, is given by [ 165 , 289 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The boundary @xmath consists of an initial and final spacelike surface,
@xmath , of constant @xmath with unit normal @xmath ( @xmath ) and with
intrinsic metric @xmath plus a timelike surface near infinity, @xmath ,
with unit normal @xmath ( @xmath , and @xmath ) and with intrinsic
metric @xmath . This surface @xmath needs not to be at infinity. It can
also be at a black hole horizon or at an internal infinity, but we will
generally label it by @xmath . This surface @xmath is foliated by a
family of 2-surfaces @xmath that result from the intersection between
@xmath and @xmath . In ( LABEL:hamiltonian ), @xmath and @xmath are the
lapse functions of the system with the pair and of the background,
respectively, and @xmath in the boundary near infinity, @xmath . @xmath
is the hamiltonian constraint that contains contributions from the
gravitational and Maxwell fields, and vanishes for solutions of the
equations of motion. Then, the Hamiltonian is simply given by the
boundary surface term. In this surface term, @xmath represents the trace
of the extrinsic curvature of the surface imbedded in the AdS C-metric,
and @xmath is the extrinsic curvature of the surface imbedded in the
background spacetime.

We will now verify that the boundary surface term in the Hamiltonian (
LABEL:hamiltonian ) is also zero, and thus the Hamiltonian makes no
contribution to ( 9.39 ) and ( 9.40 ). We follow the technical procedure
applied by Hawking, Horowitz and Ross [ 164 ] in the Ernst solution and
by Hawking and Ross [ 133 ] in the flat C-metric. As we said above, one
will require that the intrinsic metric @xmath on the boundary @xmath as
embedded in the AdS C-metric agrees (to sufficient order) with the
intrinsic metric on the boundary @xmath as embedded in the background
spacetime, in order to be sure that one is taking the same near infinity
boundary in the evaluation of the quantities in the two spacetimes. In
the AdS C-metric one takes this boundary to be at @xmath , where @xmath
. The background reference spacetime is described by ( 9.35 ), subjected
to @xmath , @xmath and ( 9.36 ). In this background spacetime we take
the boundary @xmath to be at @xmath , where @xmath .

We are now interested in writing the intrinsic metric in the boundary
@xmath (the 2-surface @xmath const and @xmath ). In the AdS C-metric (
6.73 ) one performs the coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order that @xmath , and the analytic continuation of @xmath has
period @xmath , i.e., @xmath . Furthermore, one takes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . By making the evaluations up to second order in @xmath
(since higher order terms will not contribute to the Hamiltonian in the
final limit @xmath ), the intrinsic metric on the boundary @xmath is
then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, for the background spacetime ( 9.35 ) one sets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the intrinsic metric on the boundary @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

These two intrinsic metrics on the boundary will agree (up to second
order in @xmath ) as long as we take the period of @xmath to be given by
( 9.36 ) and the following matching conditions are satisfied,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the Maxwell fields of the two solutions agree trivially at the
near infinity boundary @xmath .

In what concerns the lapse function of the AdS C-metric, we evaluate it
with respect to the time coordinate @xmath defined in ( 9.42 ) and,
using @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Analogously, an evaluation with respect to the time coordinate @xmath
defined in ( 9.35 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that these two lapse functions are also matched by the conditions (
9.47 ) and ( 9.48 ).

The extrinsic curvature to @xmath as embedded in @xmath is @xmath (where
@xmath represents the covariant derivative with respect to @xmath ), and
the trace of the extrinsic curvature is @xmath . The extrinsic curvature
of the boundary embedded in the AdS C-metric is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the extrinsic curvature of the boundary embedded in the background
reference spacetime is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are now in position to compute the contribution from the surface
boundary term in ( LABEL:hamiltonian ). The evaluation in the AdS
C-metric yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for the background reference spacetime we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the matching conditions ( 9.47 ) and ( 9.48 ) we conclude that
these two boundary terms are equal. Hence, the surface term and the
Hamiltonian ( LABEL:hamiltonian ) vanish. The Euclidean action ( 9.39 )
of the nonextreme AdS instanton that mediates pair creation of
nonextreme black holes is then simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the Euclidean action ( 9.39 ) of the extreme AdS instanton that
mediates pair creation of nonextreme black holes is just given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus as occurs in the Ernst case, in the flat C-metric case, in the de
Sitter case and in the dS C-metric case, the pair creation of nonextreme
black holes is enhanced relative to the pair creation of extreme black
holes by a factor of @xmath .

In the next two subsections we will explicitly compute ( 9.55 ) using
the results of subsection 9.1.1.a , and ( 9.56 ) using the results of
subsection 9.1.1.b . In subsection 9.1.2.c we analyze the pair creation
rate of black holes discussed in subsection 9.1.1.c . Remark that the
only horizons that contribute with their areas to ( 9.55 ) and ( 9.56 )
are those that belong to the instanton responsible for the pair
creation, i.e, only those horizons that are in the Euclidean sector of
the instanton will make a contribution.

The domain of validity of our results is the particle limit, @xmath ,
for which the radius of the black hole, @xmath , is much smaller than
the typical distance between the black holes at the creation moment,
@xmath (this value follows from the Rindler motion @xmath that describes
the uniformly accelerated motion of the black holes).

###### 9.1.2.a Pair creation rate in the nonextreme case with @xmath

In the nonextreme case, the instanton has two horizons in its Euclidean
section, namely the acceleration horizon at @xmath and the black hole
horizon at @xmath (the horizons @xmath and @xmath do not belong to the
instanton, see Fig. 6.5 ). The black hole horizon covers the whole range
of the angular coordinate @xmath , @xmath , and its area is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is given in ( 9.8 ), @xmath and @xmath are defined by (
9.14 ), and @xmath is given by ( 9.16 ).

The acceleration horizon, @xmath defined in ( 9.8 ), of the nonextreme
AdS instanton covers the angular range @xmath (i.e., it is not present
in the vicinity of the south pole), and is noncompact, i.e., its area is
infinite. We have to deal appropriately with this infinity. In order to
do so, we first introduce a boundary at @xmath ( @xmath ), and compute
the area inside of this boundary, which yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.58)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

When we let @xmath , the term @xmath diverges, and the acceleration
horizon has an infinite area. This area is renormalized with respect to
the area of the acceleration horizon of the background reference
spacetime ( 9.35 ). This background reference spacetime has an
acceleration horizon at @xmath which is the direct counterpart of the
above acceleration horizon of the nonextreme AdS instanton, and it
covers the angular range @xmath . The area inside a boundary at @xmath
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.59)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the last step we have replaced @xmath by ( 9.36 ). When @xmath
, the term @xmath diverges, and thus the area of this background
acceleration horizon is also infinite. Now, we have found that the
intrinsic metrics at the near infinity boundary match together if ( 9.47
) and ( 9.48 ) are satisfied. Our next task is to verify that these
matching conditions between ( @xmath ) and ( @xmath ) are such that the
divergent terms in ( 9.58 ) and ( 9.59 ) cancel each other. It is
straightforward to show that @xmath yields a finite value if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the matching conditions ( 9.47 ) and ( 9.48 ) satisfy condition (
9.60 ), i.e., they indeed eliminate the divergencies in @xmath . It is
worthy to remark that with the choices ( 9.47 ) and ( 9.48 ) the proper
lengths of the boundaries @xmath and @xmath , (given, respectively, by
@xmath and @xmath ) do not match. This is in contrast with the flat case
[ 133 ] , where the choice of the matching parameters that avoids the
infinities in @xmath , also leads to @xmath . In the AdS case, our main
goal was to remove the infinities in @xmath . We have achieved this aim
by comparing the appropriate acceleration horizons in the instanton and
in the reference background. The fact that the matching relations then
lead to @xmath is not a problem at all ^(a) ^(a) a This question
deserves a physical interpretation. Both in the flat and AdS cases, the
proper lengths in the C-metric instanton and in the background are
equal, @xmath , at the south pole boundaries, @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Now, a string is present when the ratio between the
perimeter of a circle and its radius is not @xmath , i.e., one has a
deficit angle. The fact that for a same radius one has @xmath at the
south pole confirms that the string before and after the pair creation
has the same properties, as expected from the discussion of subsection
9.1.1.d . In the flat case, but not in the AdS one, the south pole
boundary coincides with the acceleration boundary, i.e., @xmath , and
this is the reason why in the flat case one has @xmath at the horizon
boundary. . Replacing ( 9.47 ) and ( 9.48 ) in ( 9.59 ) yields for
@xmath the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Adding ( 9.57 ) and ( 9.61 ), and using the results of Sec. 9.1.1.a
yields finally the total area of the nonextreme AdS instanton with
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are defined in ( 9.14 ), @xmath is given by (
9.8 ), and condition ( 9.15 ) must be satisfied. The pair creation rate
of nonextreme AdS black holes with @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fixing @xmath and @xmath one concludes that the pair creation rate
decreases as the mass of the black holes increases (see Fig. 9.2 ).
Moreover, fixing @xmath and @xmath , in the domain of validity of our
results, @xmath and @xmath , as @xmath increases the pair creation rate
increases (see Fig. 9.2 ). Hence, the general behavior of the pair
creation rate of nonextreme black holes with @xmath in the AdS case is
analogous to the corresponding behavior in the flat case [ 133 ] (see
also section 9.2 ).

###### 9.1.2.b Pair creation rate in the extreme case (@xmath)

In the extreme AdS case, the instanton has a single horizon, the
acceleration horizon at @xmath , in its Euclidean section, since @xmath
is an internal infinity. The pair creation rate of extreme AdS black
holes with @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by ( 9.61 ), with @xmath defined in ( 9.21 ),
@xmath and @xmath given by ( 9.27 ), and condition ( 9.25 ) must be
satisfied. The pair creation rate decreases as the mass of the black
holes increases, and the pair creation rate increases when @xmath
increases (see Fig. 9.3 ). The general behavior of the pair creation
rate of extreme black holes as a function of @xmath and @xmath in the
AdS case is also analogous to the behavior of the flat case, discussed
in [ 133 ] (see also section 9.2 ).

###### 9.1.2.c Pair creation rate in the nonextreme case with @xmath

The nonextreme instantons, that mediate the pair creation of nonextreme
black holes with @xmath (including the case @xmath ), have two horizons
in their Euclidean section, namely the acceleration horizon at @xmath
and the black hole horizon at @xmath . The pair creation rate of
nonextreme AdS black holes with @xmath is then @xmath , with @xmath
given by ( 9.57 ) and @xmath given by ( 9.61 ), subjected to the results
found in Sec. 9.1.1.c . The pair creation rate decreases as the mass of
the black holes increases, and the pair creation rate increases when
@xmath increases.

##### 9.1.3 Heuristic derivation of the nucleation rates

In order to clarify the physical interpretation of the results, in this
subsection we heuristically derive some results discussed in the main
body of section 9.1 . In particular, we find heuristically the pair
creation rates.

In an AdS background, pair creation of black holes is possible only when
the acceleration provided by the strings satisfies @xmath . To
understand this result one can argue as follows. In general, the
time-time component of the gravitational field is given by @xmath ,
where @xmath is the Newtonian potential. In the AdS spacetime, one has
@xmath and its derivative yields the force per unit mass or acceleration
of the AdS spacetime, @xmath , where we have replaced @xmath by the
characteristic AdS radius @xmath . The minus sign indicates that the AdS
background is attractive and thus, if one wants to have a pair of
accelerated black holes driving away from each other, the cosmic string
will have to provide a sufficient acceleration @xmath that overcomes the
AdS background attraction, i.e., @xmath .

An estimate for the black hole pair creation probability can be given by
the Boltzmann factor, @xmath , where @xmath is the energy of the system
that nucleates and @xmath is the work done by the external force @xmath
, that provides the energy for the nucleation, through the typical
distance @xmath separating the created pair. First we ask what is the
probability that a black hole pair is created in a @xmath background
when a string breaks. This process has been discussed in [ 133 ] (see
also section 9.2 ) where it was found that the pair creation rate is
@xmath . In this case, @xmath , where @xmath is the rest energy of the
black hole, and @xmath is the work provided by the strings. To derive
@xmath one can argue as follows. The acceleration provided by the string
is @xmath , the characteristic distance that separates the pair at the
creation moment is @xmath (this value follows from the Rindler motion
@xmath that describes the uniformly accelerated motion of the black
holes), and the characteristic mass of the system is A by the Compton
relation. Thus, the characteristic work is @xmath . So, from the
Boltzmann factor we indeed expect that the creation rate of a black hole
pair when a string breaks in a @xmath background is given by @xmath .

Now we ask what is the probability that a string breaks in an AdS
background and a pair of black holes is produced. As we saw just above,
the presence of the AdS background leads in practice to a problem in
which we have a net acceleration that satisfies @xmath , this is, @xmath
makes a negative contribution to the process. Heuristically, we may then
apply the same arguments that have been used in the last paragraph, with
the replacement @xmath . At the end, the Boltzmann factor tells us that
the creation rate for the process is @xmath . So, given @xmath and
@xmath , when the acceleration provided by the string grows the pair
creation rate increases, as the explicit calculations done in the main
body of section 9.2 .

##### 9.1.4 Summary and discussion

We have studied in detail the quantum process in which a cosmic string
breaks in an anti-de Sitter (AdS) background and a pair of black holes
is created at the ends of the string. The energy to materialize and
accelerate the black holes comes from the strings’ tension. The analysis
of this process in a flat background ( @xmath ) has been carried in [
133 ] , while in a de Sitter background ( @xmath ) it has been done in [
131 ] . In an AdS background this is the only study done in the process
of production of a pair of correlated black holes with spherical
topology. Note that in a cosmological background, the transformation
used by Ernst to generate an exact solution in an electromagnetic
background does not work, since it does not leave invariant the
cosmological term in the action. Thus Ernst’s trick cannot be used, and
we do not have an exact AdS Ernst solution available to study
analytically the process in which a pair of black holes is produced and
accelerated by the electromagnetic force. However, in principle, we
could find a perturbative AdS Ernst solution that supplies the same
energy and acceleration as our strings and, from the results of the
@xmath case we expect that the results found in this paper would not
depend on whether the energy is being furnished by an external
electromagnetic field or by strings.

It is well known that the AdS background is attractive, i.e., an
analysis of the geodesic equations indicates that particles in this
background are subjected to a potential well that attracts them.
Therefore, if we have a virtual pair of black holes and we want to turn
them real, we will have to furnish a sufficient force that overcomes
this cosmological background attraction. We then expect that pair
creation is possible only if the strings’ tension and the associated
acceleration @xmath is higher than a critical value. We have confirmed
that this is indeed the case: in the AdS background, black holes with
spherical topology can be produced only with an acceleration higher than
@xmath . This result was also expected from the AdS C-metric properties,
which describes the evolution of the system after the creation process.
Indeed, in [ 87 ] we have shown that it only describes a pair of black
holes if @xmath , otherwise it represents a single accelerated black
hole.

We have constructed the instantons that mediate the pair creation
process through the analytic continuation of some special cases of the
AdS C-metric. The regularity condition imposed to these instantons
restricts the mass @xmath and the charge @xmath of the black holes that
are produced, and physically it means that the only black holes that can
be pair produced are those that are in thermodynamic equilibrium.
Concretely, we have found two charged regular instantons. One mediates
the pair creation of nonextreme black holes with @xmath , and the other
mediates the pair creation of extreme black holes. These instantons are
the natural AdS C-metric counterparts of the instantons found in
previous works on the subject. We note that the Nariai instanton, and
the ultracold instanton that are available in the de Sitter background,
are not present in the AdS case since they are out of the allowed range
of the angular direction @xmath . The instantons constructed from the
@xmath and @xmath C-metric are noncompact (contrary to what occurs with
the @xmath instantons), in the sense that they have an acceleration
horizon with an infinite area. Thus when dealing with them, we have to
eliminate this infinity by normalizing this area relative to the
acceleration horizon area of an appropriate background reference
spacetime.

We have explicitly computed the pair creation rate for the nonextreme
and extreme black holes. In both cases, the AdS pair creation rate
reduces to the corresponding ones of the flat case when we set @xmath [
133 ] (see also section 9.2 ). In the two cases, the pair creation rate
decreases monotonically, as the mass (and charge) of the black holes
increases (see Figs. 9.2 .(a) and 9.3 .(a) for the nonextreme and
extreme cases, respectively). This is the physically expected result
since an higher mass demands an higher energy. In what concerns the
evolution of the pair creation rate with the acceleration @xmath , we
found that the pair creation rate increases monotonically with @xmath
(see Figs. 9.2 .(b) and 9.3 .(b) for the nonextreme and extreme cases,
respectively). The physical interpretation of this result is clear: the
acceleration @xmath of the black hole pair is provided by the string.
When the energy of the string is higher (i.e., when its mass density or
the acceleration that it provides is higher), the probability that it
breaks and produces a black hole pair with a given mass is also higher.
This behavior is better understood if we make a analogy with a
thermodynamical system, with the mass density of the string being the
analogue of the temperature @xmath . Indeed, from the Boltzmann factor,
@xmath (where @xmath is the Boltzmann constant), one knows that a higher
background temperature @xmath turns the nucleation of a particle with
energy @xmath more probable. Similarly, a background string with a
higher mass density turns the creation of a black hole pair with mass
@xmath more probable.

We have also verified that (as occurs with pair creation in other
backgrounds) the pair production of nonextreme black holes is enhanced
relative to the pair creation of extreme black holes by a factor of
@xmath , where @xmath is the gravitational entropy of the black hole.

#### 9.2 Pair creation of flat black holes on a cosmic string background

In a flat background ( @xmath ), the analysis of the process of pair
creation of black holes when a cosmic string breaks has been analyzed by
Hawking and Ross [ 133 ] . In this case, there is a direct @xmath
counterpart of the nonextreme AdS instanton and of the extreme AdS
instanton discussed in our AdS case. These instantons describe pair
creation of nonextreme (with @xmath ) and extreme black holes with
@xmath , respectively [ 133 ] . The total area of these @xmath
instantons can be found in [ 133 ] , and can be obtained by taking the
direct @xmath limit of ( 9.57 ) and ( 9.61 ), together with the
replacement @xmath . This procedure yields that ( 9.57 ) also holds in
the @xmath case, while @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 133 ] the explicit numerical value of @xmath and @xmath has not
been computed. We will do it here.

For the @xmath nonextreme case, the discussion of Sec. 9.1.1.a applies
generically, as long as we set @xmath in the corresponding equations.
With this data we find the explicit value of the total area of the
nonextreme flat instanton

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the particle limit, @xmath , the above relation reduces to @xmath and
the mass density of the string is given by @xmath . The pair creation
rate is then @xmath . Thus, as occurs with the AdS case, the pair
creation rate decreases when @xmath increases and the rate increases
when @xmath or @xmath increase [see Fig. 9.4 ].

We remark that for @xmath , and as occurs in the corresponding AdS case,
the pair creation rate associated to ( LABEL:area_TOTAL-flat ) starts
decreasing when @xmath increases. This is a physically unexpected result
since a higher acceleration provided by the string background should
favor the nucleation of a fixed black hole mass. The sector @xmath must
then be discarded and the reason is perfectly identified: the domain of
validity of the rates is @xmath , for which the radius of the black
hole, @xmath , is much smaller than the typical distance between the
black holes at the creation moment, @xmath (this value follows from the
Rindler motion @xmath that describes the uniformly accelerated motion of
the black holes). So, for @xmath one has @xmath and the black holes
start interacting with each other.

In what concerns the pair creation rate of extreme and nonextreme with
@xmath @xmath black holes, an explicit computation shows that its
general behavior with @xmath and @xmath is also similar to the one of
the AdS case, i.e., the rate decreases when @xmath or @xmath increase,
and the rate increases when @xmath increases.

#### 9.3 Pair creation of de Sitter black holes on a cosmic string
background

In this section we want to analyze the process in which a cosmic string
breaks and a pair of black holes is produced at the ends of the string,
in a de Sitter (dS) background. Therefore, the energy to materialize and
accelerate the pair comes from the positive cosmological constant and,
in addition, from the string tension. This process is a combination of
the processes considered in [ 167 ] - [ 172 ] and in [ 133 ] - [ 136 ] .
The instantons for this process can be constructed by analytically
continuing the dS C-metric found by Plebański and Demiański [ 86 ] and
analyzed by Podolský and Griffiths [ 120 ] , and in detail by Dias and
Lemos [ 88 ] .

The plan of this section is as follows. In section 9.3.1 , we describe
the semiclassical instanton method used to evaluate the pair creation
rate. In section 9.3.2 we construct, from the dS C-metric studied in
section 6.3 , the regular instantons that describe the pair creation
process. Then, in section 9.3.3 , we explicitly evaluate the pair
creation rate for each one of the cases discussed in section 9.3.2 . In
section 9.3.4 we verify that the usual relation between pair creation
rate, entropy and total area holds also for the pair creation process
discussed in this section. Finally, in section 9.3.6 concluding remarks
are presented.

##### 9.3.1 Black hole pair creation rate: the instanton method

The pair creation of black holes in a de Sitter (dS) background is
described, according to the no-boundary proposal of Hartle and Hawking [
283 ] , by the propagation from nothing to a 3-surface boundary @xmath .
The amplitude for this process is given by the wave function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the induced metric and electromagnetic
potential on the boundary @xmath of a compact manifold @xmath , @xmath
is a measure on the space of the metrics @xmath and @xmath is a measure
on the space of the Maxwell field @xmath , and @xmath is their Euclidean
action. The path integral is over all compact metrics and potentials on
manifolds @xmath with boundary @xmath , which agree with the boundary
data on @xmath . For a nice detailed discussion of the no-boundary
proposal applied to the study of black hole pair creation see Bousso and
Chamblin [ 177 ] .

In the semiclassical instanton approximation, the dominant contribution
to the path integral comes from metrics and Maxwell fields which are
near the solutions (instantons) that extremalize the Euclidean action
and satisfy the boundary conditions. Thus, considering small
fluctuations around this solution, @xmath and @xmath , the action
expands as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are quadratic in @xmath and @xmath , and dots denote higher
order terms. The wave function, that describes the creation of a black
hole pair from nothing, is then given by @xmath , where @xmath is the
classical action of the gravitational instanton that mediates the pair
creation of black holes, and the prefactor @xmath is the one loop
contribution from the quantum quadratic fluctuations in the fields,
@xmath . Similarly, the wave function that describes the nucleation of a
dS space with a string from nothing is @xmath , and the wave function
describing the nucleation of a dS space from nothing is @xmath . The
nucleation probability of the dS space from nothing, of the dS space
with a string from nothing, and of a space with a pair of black holes
from nothing is then given by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

We may now ask four questions: what is the probability for (i) pair
creation of black holes in a dS spacetime, (ii) the nucleation of a
string in a dS background, (iii) the process in which a string in a dS
background breaks and a pair of black holes is created, and (iv) the
combined process (ii)+(iii). In the process (i) the energy to
materialize the pair comes only from the positive cosmological constant
background, @xmath . The system does not contain a string and the
probability for this process has been found in [ 169 ] . The aim of the
present paper is to compute explicitly the probability for processes
(ii)-(iv). It is important to note that in the process (iii), one
assumes that the initial background contains a string, i.e. , the
question that is being asked is: given that the string is already
present in our initial system, what is the probability that it breaks
and a pair of black holes is produced and accelerated apart by @xmath
and by the string tension? On the other side, in (iv) one is asking:
starting from a pure dS background, what is the probability that a
string nucleates on it and then breaks forming a pair of black holes?
Naturally, the probability for process (iv) is the product of the
probability for process (ii) and the probability for process (iii).

According to the no-boundary proposal, the nucleation rate of a string
in a dS background is proportional to @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pair creation rate of black holes when a string breaks in a dS
background is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the pair creation rate of black holes when process (iv) occurs is
given by the product of ( 9.69 ) and ( 9.70 ), i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will find @xmath and @xmath in the next subsections. In the three
relations above, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are one-loop prefactors
which will not be considered in this paper. The evaluation of this
one-loop prefactor has been done only in a small number of cases, namely
for the vacuum background by Gibbons, Hawking and Perry [ 284 ] , for
the Schwarzschild instanton by Gross, Perry and Yaffe [ 138 ] , for
other asymptotically flat instantons by Young [ 287 ] , for the dS
background by Gibbons and Perry [ 285 ] and Christensen and Duff [ 286 ]
, for the dS-Schwarzschild instanton by Ginsparg and Perry [ 97 ] ,
Young [ 288 ] , Volkov and Wipf [ 172 ] and Garattinni [ 171 ] , and for
the Ernst instanton by Yi [ 162 ] .

At this point we must specify the Euclidean action needed to compute the
path integral ( 9.67 ). This issue was analyzed and clarified in detail
by Hawking and Ross [ 181 ] and by Brown [ 163 ] . Now, due to its
relevance for the present paper, we briefly discuss the main results of
[ 181 , 163 ] . One wants to use an action for which it is natural to
fix the boundary data on @xmath specified in ( 9.67 ). That is, one
wants to use an action whose variation gives the Euclidean equations of
motion when the variation fixes these boundary data on @xmath [ 289 ] .
In the magnetic case this Euclidean action is the Einstein-Maxwell
action with a positive cosmological constant @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of the Euclidean metric, @xmath is the
determinant of the induced metric on the boundary @xmath , @xmath is the
Ricci scalar, @xmath is the trace of the extrinsic curvature @xmath of
the boundary, and @xmath is the Maxwell field strength of the gauge
field @xmath . Variation of ( 9.72 ) yields @xmath , where @xmath
represents terms giving the equations of motion plus gravitational
boundary terms that are discussed in [ 289 ] , and @xmath is the unit
outward normal to @xmath . Thus, variation of ( 9.72 ) gives the
equations of motion as long as it is at fixed gauge potential @xmath on
the boundary. Now, for magnetic black hole solutions, fixing the
potential fixes the charge on each of the black holes, since the
magnetic charge is just given by the integral of @xmath over a 2-sphere
lying in the boundary. However, in the electric case, fixing @xmath can
be regarded as fixing a chemical potential @xmath which is conjugate to
the charge [ 181 ] . Holding the electric charge fixed is equivalent to
fixing @xmath on @xmath , as the electric charge is given by the
integral of the dual of @xmath over a 2-sphere lying in @xmath .
Therefore in the electric case the appropriate Euclidean action is [ 181
]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 9.72 ). Variation of action ( 9.73 ) yields
@xmath , and thus it gives the equations of motion when @xmath , and so
the electric charge, is held fixed. Since @xmath has opposite signs for
dual magnetic and electric solutions, if we took ( 9.72 ) to evaluate
both the magnetic and electric actions we would conclude that the pair
creation of electric black holes would be enhanced relative to the pair
creation of magnetic black holes. This physically unexpected result does
not occur when one considers the appropriate boundary conditions and
includes the extra Maxwell boundary term in ( 9.73 ).

We have to be careful [ 290 , 181 ] when computing the extra Maxwell
boundary term in the electric action ( 9.73 ). Indeed, we have to find a
vector potential, @xmath , that is regular everywhere in the instanton,
including at the horizons. Usually, as we shall see, this requirement
leads to unusual choices for @xmath . The need of this requirement is
easily understood if we take the example of the electric
Reissner-Nordström solution [ 290 , 181 ] . In this case, normally, the
gauge potential in Schwarzschild coordinates is taken to be @xmath .
However, this potential is not regular at the horizon @xmath , since
@xmath diverges there. An appropriate choice that yields a regular
electromagnetic potential everywhere, including at the horizon is @xmath
or, alternatively, @xmath . To all these potentials corresponds the
field strength @xmath .

Before we finish this section, note that since the dS C-metric
instantons that we will consider in this paper are all compact we do not
have to define their action relative an appropriate background solution,
contrarily to what happens with the non-compact @xmath instantons [ 159
] - [ 166 ] .

##### 9.3.2 The dS C-metric instantons

The dS C-metric has been studied in detail in section 6.3 . It describes
a pair of uniformly accelerated black holes in a dS background, with the
acceleration being provided by the cosmological constant and, in
addition, by a string that connects the two black holes along their
south poles and pulls them away. The presence of the string is
associated to the conical singularity that exists in the south pole of
the dS C-metric.

Following section 9.3.1 , in order to evaluate the black hole pair
creation rate we need to find the instantons of the theory, i.e., we
must look into the Euclidean section of the dS C-metric and choose only
those Euclidean solutions which are regular in a way that will be
explained soon. To obtain the Euclidean section of the dS C-metric from
the Lorentzian dS C-metric we simply introduce an imaginary time
coordinate @xmath . Then the gravitational field of the Euclidean dS
C-metric is given by (see, e.g., [ 88 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given by ( 6.74 ). The Maxwell field in the
magnetic case is still given by ( 6.5 ), while in the electric case it
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall some basic properties that will be needed. The solution has a
curvature singularity at @xmath where the matter source is. The point
@xmath corresponds to a point that is infinitely far away from the
curvature singularity, thus as @xmath increases we approach the
curvature singularity and @xmath is the inverse of a radial coordinate.
At most, @xmath can have four real zeros which we label in ascending
order by @xmath . The roots @xmath and @xmath are respectively the inner
and outer charged black hole horizons, and @xmath is an acceleration
horizon which coincides with the cosmological horizon and has a
non-spherical shape. The negative root @xmath satisfies @xmath and thus
has no physical significance. The angular coordinate @xmath belongs to
the range @xmath for which @xmath (when we set @xmath we have @xmath and
@xmath ). In order to avoid a conical singularity in the north pole, the
period of @xmath must be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

and this leaves a conical singularity in the south pole with deficit
angle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

that signals the presence of a string with mass density @xmath , and
with pressure @xmath . When we set the acceleration parameter @xmath
equal to zero, the dS C-metric reduces to the usual dS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström or dS-Schwarzschild solutions without conical
singularities.

So far, we have described the solution that represents a pair of black
holes accelerated by the cosmological constant and by the string
tension. This solution describes the evolution of the black hole pair
after its creation. Now, we want to find a solution that represents a
string in a dS background. This solution will describe the initial
system, before the breaking of the cosmic string that leads to the
formation of the black hole pair. In order to achieve our aim we note
that at spatial infinity the gravitational field of the Euclidean dS
C-metric reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.78)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the Maxwell field goes to zero. @xmath is a constant that represents
a freedom in the choice of coordinates, and @xmath . We want that this
metric also describes the solution before the creation of the black hole
pair, i.e., we demand that it describes a string with its conical
deficit in a dS background. Now, if we want to maintain the intrinsic
properties of the string during the process we must impose that its mass
density and thus its conical deficit remains constant. After the pair
creation we already know that the conical deficit is given by ( 9.77 ).
Hence, the requirement that the background solution describes a dS
spacetime with a conical deficit angle given exactly by ( 9.77 ) leads
us to impose that in ( 9.78 ) one has

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.79)
  -- -- -- --------

The arbitrary parameter @xmath can be fixed by imposing a matching
between ( 9.74 ) and ( 9.78 ) at large spatial distances [ 164 , 133 ] ,
yielding @xmath .

Returning back to the euclidean dS C-metric ( 9.74 ), in order to have a
positive definite Euclidean metric we must require that @xmath belongs
to @xmath . In general, when @xmath , one then has conical singularities
at the horizons @xmath and @xmath . In order to obtain a regular
solution we have to eliminate the conical singularities at both
horizons. This is achieved by imposing that the period of @xmath is the
same for the two horizons, and is equivalent to requiring that the
Hawking temperature of the two horizons be equal. To eliminate the
conical singularity at @xmath the period of @xmath must be @xmath (where
@xmath is the surface gravity of the acceleration horizon),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

This choice for the period of @xmath also eliminates simultaneously the
conical singularity at the outer black hole horizon, @xmath , if and
only if the parameters of the solution are such that the surface
gravities of the black hole and acceleration horizons are equal ( @xmath
), i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are two ways to satisfy this condition. One is a regular Euclidean
solution with @xmath , and will be called lukewarm C instanton. This
solution requires the presence of an electromagnetic charge. The other
way is to have @xmath , and will be called Nariai C instanton. This last
solution exists with or without charge. When we want to distinguish
them, they will be labelled by charged Nariai and neutral Nariai C
instantons, respectively.

We now turn our attention to the case @xmath and @xmath , which
obviously requires the presence of charge. When this happens the allowed
range of @xmath in the Euclidean sector is simply @xmath . This occurs
because when @xmath the proper distance along spatial directions between
@xmath and @xmath goes to infinity. The point @xmath disappears from the
@xmath section which is no longer compact but becomes topologically
@xmath . Thus, in this case we have a conical singularity only at @xmath
, and so we obtain a regular Euclidean solution by simply requiring that
the period of @xmath be equal to ( 9.80 ). We will label this solution
by cold C instanton. Finally, we have a special solution that satisfies
@xmath and that is regular when condition ( 9.80 ) is satisfied. This
instanton will be called ultracold C instanton and can be viewed as a
limiting case of both the charged Nariai C instanton and cold C
instanton.

Below, we will describe in detail each one of these four C instantons,
following the order: (A) lukewarm C instanton, (B) cold C instanton, (C)
Nariai C instanton, and (D) ultracold C instanton. These instantons are
the C-metric counterparts ( @xmath ) of the @xmath instantons that have
been constructed from the Euclidean section of the dS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström solution ( @xmath ) [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ] . The
original name of the @xmath instantons is associated to the relation
between their temperatures: @xmath . This relation is preserved by their
C-metric counterparts discussed in this paper, and we preserve the
@xmath nomenclature. The ultracold instanton could also, very
appropriately, be called Nariai Bertotti-Robinson instanton (see [ 89 ]
). These four families of instantons will allow us to calculate the pair
creation rate of accelerated dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black holes in
section 9.3.3 .

As is clear from the above discussion, when the charge vanishes the only
regular Euclidean solution that can be constructed is the neutral Nariai
C instanton. The same feature is present in the @xmath case where only
the neutral Nariai instanton is available [ 97 , 169 , 170 , 172 ] .

###### 9.3.2.a The lukewarm C instanton

For the lukewarm C instanton the gravitational field is given by ( 9.74
) with the requirement that @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath . In this
case we can then write (onwards the subscript “ @xmath ” means lukewarm)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , written as a
function of @xmath and @xmath , are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the mass and the charge of the lukewarm C instanton are
necessarily equal, @xmath , as occurs with its @xmath counterpart, the
lukewarm instanton [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ] . The demand that @xmath is
real requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the lukewarm C instanton has a lower maximum mass and a lower maximum
charge than the @xmath lukewarm instanton [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ] and,
for a fixed @xmath , as the acceleration parameter @xmath grows this
maximum value decreases monotonically. For a fixed @xmath and for a
fixed mass below @xmath , the maximum value of the acceleration is
@xmath .

As we said, the allowed range of @xmath in the Euclidean sector is
@xmath . Then, the period of @xmath , ( 9.80 ), that avoids the conical
singularity at both horizons is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the common temperature of the two horizons.

Using the fact that @xmath [see ( 6.74 )] we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the only real zeros of @xmath are the south and north pole

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath goes to zero we have @xmath and @xmath . The period of
@xmath , ( 9.76 ), that avoids the conical singularity at the north pole
(and leaves one at the south pole responsible for the presence of the
string) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath goes to zero we have @xmath and the conical singularity
disappears.

The topology of the lukewarm C instanton is @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath ). The Lorentzian sector describes two dS black
holes being accelerated by the cosmological background and by the
string, so this instanton describes pair creation of nonextreme black
holes with @xmath .

###### 9.3.2.b The cold C instanton

The gravitational field of the cold C instanton is given by ( 9.74 )
with the requirement that the size of the outer charged black hole
horizon @xmath is equal to the size of the inner charged horizon @xmath
. Let us label this degenerated horizon by @xmath : @xmath and @xmath .
In this case, the function @xmath can be written as (onwards the
subscript “ @xmath ” means cold)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the roots @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.92)
     @xmath      (9.93)
     @xmath      (9.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass and the charge parameters of the solution are written as a
function of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, for a fixed @xmath and @xmath , the ratio @xmath is higher than
@xmath . The conditions @xmath and @xmath require that, for the cold C
instanton, the allowed range of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value of @xmath decreases monotonically with @xmath and we have
@xmath . The mass and the charge of the cold C instanton are also
monotonically decreasing functions of @xmath , and as we come from
@xmath into @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.97)
     @xmath      (9.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the cold C instanton has a lower maximum mass and a lower maximum
charge than the @xmath cold instanton, and, for a fixed @xmath , as the
acceleration parameter @xmath grows this maximum value decreases
monotonically. For a fixed @xmath and for a fixed mass below @xmath ,
the maximum value of the acceleration is @xmath .

As we have already said, the allowed range of @xmath in the Euclidean
sector is @xmath and does not include @xmath . Then, the period of
@xmath , ( 9.80 ), that avoids the conical singularity at the only
horizon of the cold C instanton is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the temperature of the acceleration horizon.

In what concerns the angular sector of the cold C instanton, @xmath is
given by ( 6.74 ), and its only real zeros are the south and north pole,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.100)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.101)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are fixed by ( 9.95 ), for a given @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . When @xmath goes to zero we have @xmath and @xmath .
The period of @xmath , @xmath , that avoids the conical singularity at
the north pole (and leaves one at the south pole responsible for the
presence of the string) is given by ( 9.76 ) with @xmath defined in (
9.100 ).

The topology of the cold C instanton is @xmath , since @xmath is at an
infinite proper distance ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ). The
surface @xmath is then an internal infinity boundary that will have to
be taken into account in the calculation of the action of the cold C
instanton (see section 9.3.3.b ). The Lorentzian sector of this cold
case describes two extreme ( @xmath ) dS black holes being accelerated
by the cosmological background and by the string, and the cold C
instanton describes pair creation of these extreme black holes.

###### 9.3.2.c The Nariai C instanton

In the case of the Nariai C instanton, we require that the size of the
acceleration horizon @xmath is equal to the size of the outer charged
horizon @xmath . Let us label this degenerated horizon by @xmath :
@xmath and @xmath . In this case, the function @xmath can be written as
(onwards the subscript “ @xmath ” means Nariai)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined by ( 9.91 ), the roots @xmath and @xmath are
given by ( 9.92 ) and ( 9.93 ), and @xmath is given by @xmath . The mass
and the charge of the solution are defined as a function of @xmath by (
9.95 ). The conditions @xmath and @xmath require that for the Nariai C
instanton, the allowed range of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The value of @xmath decreases monotonically with @xmath and we have
@xmath . Contrary to the cold C instanton, the mass and the charge of
the Nariai C instanton are monotonically increasing functions of @xmath
, and as we go from @xmath to @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that @xmath implies @xmath . For a fixed @xmath and for a mass
fixed between @xmath , the acceleration varies as @xmath .

At this point, one has apparently a problem that is analogous to the one
that occurs with the @xmath neutral Nariai instanton [ 97 ] and with the
@xmath charged Nariai instanton [ 169 , 181 ] . Indeed, as we said in
the beginning of this section, the allowed range of @xmath in the
Euclidean sector is @xmath in order to obtain a positive definite
metric. But in the Nariai case @xmath , and so it seems that we are left
with no space to work with in the Euclidean sector. However, as in [ 97
, 169 , 181 ] , the proper distance between @xmath and @xmath remains
finite as @xmath , as is shown in detail in [ 89 ] where the Nariai
C-metric is constructed and analyzed. In what follows we briefly exhibit
the construction. We first set @xmath and @xmath , in order that @xmath
measures the deviation from degeneracy, and the limit @xmath is obtained
when @xmath . Now, we introduce a new time coordinate @xmath , @xmath ,
and a new radial coordinate @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
correspond, respectively, to the horizons @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Condition ( 9.103 ) implies @xmath with @xmath . Then, in the limit
@xmath , from ( 9.74 ) and ( 9.102 ), we obtain the gravitational field
of the Nariai C instanton

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.107)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the new coordinates @xmath and @xmath , the Maxwell field for the
magnetic case is still given by ( 6.5 ), while in the electric case we
have now

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The period of @xmath of the Nariai C instanton is simply @xmath . The
function @xmath is given by ( 6.74 ), with @xmath and @xmath fixed by (
9.95 ) for a given @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Under these conditions
the south and north pole (which are the only real roots) are also given
by ( 9.100 ) and ( 9.101 ). The period of @xmath , @xmath , that avoids
the conical singularity at the north pole (and leaves one at the south
pole responsible for the presence of the string) is given by ( 9.76 )
with @xmath defined in ( 9.100 ).

The topology of the Nariai C instanton is @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath ). The Nariai C instanton transforms into the Nariai
instanton when we take the limit @xmath [ 89 ] . The Lorentzian sector
is conformal to the direct topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a
(1+1)-dimensional de Sitter spacetime with a deformed 2-sphere of fixed
size. To each point in the sphere corresponds a @xmath spacetime, except
for one point - the south pole - which corresponds a @xmath spacetime
with a string [ 89 ] . When we set @xmath the @xmath is a round 2-sphere
free of the conical singularity and so, without the string. In this case
it has been shown [ 97 , 170 ] that the Nariai solution decays through
the quantum tunnelling process into a slightly non-extreme dS black hole
pair (for a complete review on this subject see, e.g., Bousso [ 129 ]
and chapter chapter 7 on this thesis). We then naturally expect that an
analogous quantum instability is present in the Nariai C-metric.
Therefore, the Nariai C instanton describes the creation of a Nariai C
universe that then decays into a slightly non-extreme ( @xmath ) pair of
black holes accelerated by the cosmological background and by the
string.

We recall again that the neutral Nariai C instanton with @xmath is the
only regular Euclidean solution that can be constructed from the dS
C-metric when the charge vanishes. The same feature is present in the
@xmath case where only the neutral Nariai instanton with @xmath is
available [ 97 , 169 , 170 , 172 ] .

###### 9.3.2.d The ultracold C instanton

In the case of the ultracold C instanton, we require that the size of
the three horizons ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) is equal, and let us
label this degenerated horizon by @xmath : @xmath . In this case, the
function @xmath can be written as (onwards the subscript “ @xmath ”
means ultracold)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined by ( 9.91 ) and the roots @xmath and @xmath are
given by ( 9.92 ) and ( 9.93 ), respectively. Given the values of @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath can take only the value

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mass and the charge of the solution, defined by ( 9.98 ), are then
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and these values are the maximum values of the mass and charge of both
the cold and charged Nariai instantons.

Being a limiting case of both the cold C instanton and of the charged
Nariai C instanton, the ultracold C instanton presents similar features.
The appropriate analysis of this solution (see [ 89 ] for a detailed
discussion) requires that we first set @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath .
Then, we introduce a new time coordinate @xmath , @xmath , and a new
radial coordinate @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath . Finally, in the limit
@xmath , from ( 9.74 ) and ( 9.109 ), we obtain the gravitational field
of the ultracold C instanton

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that the spacetime factor @xmath is just Euclidean space in
Rindler coordinates, and therefore, under the usual coordinate
transformation, it can be putted in the form @xmath . @xmath corresponds
to the Rindler horizon and @xmath corresponds an internal infinity
boundary. In the new coordinates @xmath and @xmath , the Maxwell field
for the magnetic case is still given by ( 6.5 ), while in the electric
case we have now

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The period of @xmath of the ultracold C instanton is simply @xmath .

The function @xmath is given by ( 6.74 ), with @xmath and @xmath fixed
by ( 9.111 ) for a given @xmath and @xmath . Under these conditions the
south and north pole (which are the only real roots) are also given by (
9.100 ) and ( 9.101 ). The period of @xmath , @xmath , that avoids the
conical singularity at the north pole is given by ( 9.76 ) with @xmath
defined in ( 9.100 ).

The topology of the ultracold C instanton is @xmath , since @xmath is at
an infinite proper distance ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ).
The surface @xmath is then an internal infinity boundary that will have
to be taken into account in the calculation of the action of the
ultracold C instanton (see section 9.3.3.d ). The ultracold C instanton
transforms into the ultracold instanton when we take the limit @xmath [
89 ] . The Lorentzian sector is conformal to the direct topological
product of @xmath , i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime
with a deformed 2-sphere of fixed size. To each point in the sphere
corresponds a @xmath spacetime, except for one point - the south pole -
which corresponds a @xmath spacetime with a string [ 89 ] . We can,
appropriately, label this solution as Nariai Bertotti-Robinson C
universe (see [ 89 ] ). When we set @xmath the @xmath is a round
2-sphere free of the conical singularity and so, without the string. In
an analogous way to the Nariai C universe, the Nariai Bertotti-Robinson
C universe is unstable and decays into a slightly non-extreme ( @xmath )
pair of black holes accelerated by the cosmological background and by
the string. The ultracold C instanton mediates this decay.

The allowed range of @xmath and @xmath for each one of the four C
instantons is sketched in Fig. 9.5 .

##### 9.3.3 Calculation of the black hole pair creation rates

In the last section we have found the regular dS C instantons that can
be interpreted as describing a circular motion in the Euclidean sector
of the solution with a period @xmath . These instantons are the
Euclidean continuation of a Lorentzian solution which describes a pair
of black holes that start at rest at the creation moment, and then run
hyperbolically in opposite directions by the strings that accelerate
them. Now, in order to compute the pair creation rate of the
corresponding black holes, we have to slice the instanton, the Euclidean
trajectory, in half along @xmath and @xmath , where the velocities
vanish. The resulting geometry is precisely that of the moment of
closest approach of the black holes in the Lorentzian sector of the dS
C-metric, and in this way the Euclidean and Lorentzian solutions
smoothly match together. In particular, the extrinsic curvature vanishes
for both surfaces and therefore, they can be glued to each other.

In this section, we will compute the black hole pair creation rates
given in ( 9.71 ) for each one of the four cases considered in section
9.3.2 . Moreover, we will also compute the pair creation rate of black
holes whose nucleation process is described by sub-maximal instantons.
For the reason explained in section 9.3.1 , the magnetic action will be
evaluated using ( 9.72 ), while the electric action will be computed
using ( 9.73 ). In general, in ( 9.72 ) and ( 9.73 ) we identify @xmath
with the surfaces of zero extrinsic curvature discussed just above. It
then follows that the boundary term @xmath vanishes. However, as we
already mentioned in sections 9.3.2.b and 9.3.2.d , in the cold and
ultracold case we have in addition an internal infinity boundary, @xmath
, for which the boundary action term does not necessarily vanish.

The domain of validity of our results is the particle limit, @xmath ,
for which the radius of the black hole, @xmath , is much smaller than
the typical distance between the black holes at the creation moment,
@xmath .

In order to compute the black hole pair creation rate given by ( 9.70 )
or ( 9.71 ), we need to find @xmath and @xmath . The evaluation of the
action of the string instanton that mediates the nucleation of a string
in the dS spacetime is done using ( 9.78 ) and ( 9.79 ), yielding

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.114)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the integration over @xmath has been done in the interval @xmath
with @xmath , the integration range of @xmath was @xmath , the
integration interval of @xmath was @xmath , and @xmath .

The action of the @xmath gravitational instanton that mediates the
nucleation of the dS spacetime is [ 170 , 172 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The nucleation rate of a string in a dS background is then given by (
9.69 ). For the particle limit, @xmath , the mass density of the string,
@xmath , is given by @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, the nucleation probability of a string in the dS background
decreases when its mass density increases.

###### 9.3.3.a The lukewarm C pair creation rate

We first consider the magnetic case, whose Euclidean action is given by
( 9.72 ), and then we consider the electric case, using ( 9.73 ), and we
verify that these two quantities give the same numerical value. The
boundary @xmath that appears in ( 9.72 ) consists of an initial spatial
surface at @xmath plus a final spatial surface at @xmath . We label
these two 3-surfaces by @xmath . Each one of these two spatial
3-surfaces is delimitated by a 2-surface at the acceleration horizon and
by a 2-surface at the outer black hole horizon. The two surfaces @xmath
are connected by a timelike 3-surface that intersects @xmath at the
frontier @xmath and by a timelike 3-surface that intersects @xmath at
the frontier @xmath . We label these two timelike 3-surfaces by @xmath .
Thus @xmath , and the region @xmath within it is compact. With the
analysis of section 9.3.2.a , we can compute all the terms of action (
9.72 ). We start with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 9.83 ),
@xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.88 ), and @xmath and @xmath are
respectively given by ( 9.86 ) and ( 9.89 ). The Maxwell term in the
action yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used @xmath [see ( 6.5 )], and @xmath . Adding all these
terms yields for the magnetic action ( 9.72 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, given that the string is already present in the initial system, the
pair creation rate of nonextreme lukewarm black holes when the cosmic
string breaks is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where ( 9.114 ) yields @xmath , and @xmath is the one-loop contribution
not computed here. @xmath is a monotonically increasing function of both
@xmath and @xmath (for a fixed @xmath ). When we take the limit @xmath
on ( 9.119 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

recovering the action for the @xmath lukewarm instanton [ 169 ] , that
describes the pair creation of two non-extreme dS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black holes accelerated only by the cosmological
constant.

In the electric case, the Euclidean action is given by ( 9.73 ) with
@xmath [see ( 9.75 )]. Thus,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to compute the extra Maxwell boundary term in ( 9.73 ) we have
to find a vector potential, @xmath , that is regular everywhere
including at the horizons. An appropriate choice in the lukewarm case is
@xmath , which obviously satisfies ( 9.75 ). The integral over @xmath
consists of an integration between @xmath and @xmath along the @xmath
surface and back along @xmath , and of an integration between @xmath and
@xmath along the @xmath surface and back along the @xmath surface. The
normal to @xmath is @xmath , and the normal to @xmath is @xmath . Thus
@xmath on @xmath , and the non-vanishing contribution comes only from
the integration along the @xmath surface. The Maxwell boundary term in (
9.73 ), @xmath , is then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding ( 9.117 ), ( 9.122 ) and ( 9.123 ) yields for the electric action
( 9.73 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is given by ( 9.119 ).

In Fig. 9.6 we show a plot of @xmath as a function of @xmath and @xmath
for a fixed @xmath , where @xmath is the action of de Sitter space.
Given the pair creation rate, @xmath , we conclude that, for a fixed
@xmath and @xmath , as the mass and charge of the lukewarm black holes
increase, the probability they have to be pair created decreases
monotonically. Moreover, for a fixed mass and charge, this probability
increases monotonically as the acceleration provided by the string
increases. Alternatively, we can discuss the behavior of @xmath . In
this case, for a fixed mass and charge, the probability decreases
monotonically as the acceleration of the black holes increases.

###### 9.3.3.b The cold C pair creation rate

We first consider the magnetic case, whose Euclidean action is given by
( 9.72 ). The boundary that appears in ( 9.72 ) is given by @xmath ,
where @xmath is a spatial surface at @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is a
timelike 3-surface at @xmath , and the timelike 3-surface @xmath is an
internal infinity boundary at @xmath . With the analysis of section
9.3.2.b , we can compute all the terms of action ( 9.72 ). We start with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we used @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are respectively given by (
9.92 ) and ( 9.94 ), @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.100 ), and
@xmath and @xmath are, respectively, given by ( 9.99 ) and ( 9.76 ). The
Maxwell term in the action yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we used @xmath [see ( 6.5 )], and @xmath . Adding all these terms
yields for the magnetic action ( 9.72 ) of the cold case

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is given by ( 9.94 ), @xmath and @xmath are defined by (
9.100 ), and @xmath is given by ( 9.76 ). Given that the string is
already present in the initial system, the pair creation rate of extreme
cold black holes when the string breaks is @xmath , where @xmath is
given by ( 9.114 ), and @xmath is the one-loop contribution not computed
here. In Fig. 9.7 we show a plot of @xmath as a function of @xmath and
@xmath for a fixed @xmath . Given the pair creation rate, @xmath , we
conclude that for a fixed @xmath and @xmath as the mass and charge of
the cold black holes increases, the probability they have to be pair
created decreases monotonically. Moreover, for a fixed mass and charge,
this probability increases monotonically as the acceleration of the
black holes increases. Alternatively, we can discuss the behavior of
@xmath . In this case, for a fixed mass and charge, the probability
decreases monotonically as the acceleration of the black holes
increases. When we take the limit @xmath we recover the action for the
@xmath cold instanton [ 169 ] , which lies in the range @xmath , and
which describes the pair creation of extreme dS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black holes accelerated only by the cosmological
constant.

In the electric case, the Euclidean action is given by ( 9.73 ) with
@xmath [see ( 9.75 )]. Thus,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to compute the extra Maxwell boundary term in ( 9.73 ) we have
to find a vector potential, @xmath , that is regular everywhere
including at the horizons. An appropriate choice in the cold case is
@xmath , which obviously satisfies ( 9.75 ). Analogously to the lukewarm
case, the non-vanishing contribution to the Maxwell boundary term in (
9.73 ) comes only from the integration along the @xmath surface, and is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding ( 9.128 ) and ( 9.129 ) yields ( 9.126 ). Thus, the electric
action ( 9.73 ) of the cold instanton is equal to the magnetic action,
@xmath , and therefore electric and magnetic cold black holes have the
same probability of being pair created.

###### 9.3.3.c The Nariai C pair creation rate

The Nariai C instanton is the only one that can have zero charge. We
will first consider the charged Nariai C instanton and then the neutral
Nariai C instanton.

We start with the magnetic case, whose Euclidean action is given by (
9.72 ). The boundary that appears in ( 9.72 ) is given by @xmath , where
@xmath is a spatial surface at @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath is a
timelike 3-surface at @xmath and @xmath . With the analysis of section
9.3.2.c , we can compute all the terms of action ( 9.72 ). We start with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.100 ),
and @xmath is given by ( 9.76 ). The Maxwell term in the action yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used @xmath [see ( 6.5 )], and @xmath . Adding these three
terms yields the magnetic action ( 9.72 ) of the Nariai case

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.100 ), and @xmath is
given by ( 9.76 ), with @xmath and @xmath subjected to ( 9.104 ). Given
that the string is already present in the initial system, the pair
creation rate of extreme Nariai black holes when the string breaks is
@xmath , where @xmath is given by ( 9.114 ), and @xmath is the one-loop
contribution not computed here. In Fig. 9.8 we show a plot of @xmath as
a function of @xmath and @xmath for a fixed @xmath . Given the pair
creation rate, @xmath , we conclude that for a fixed @xmath and @xmath
as the mass and charge of the Nariai black holes increases, the
probability they have to be pair created decreases monotonically.
Moreover, for a fixed mass and charge, this probability increases
monotonically as the acceleration of the black holes increases.
Alternatively, we can discuss the behavior of @xmath . In this case, for
a fixed mass and charge, the probability decreases monotonically as the
acceleration of the black holes increases. When we take the limit @xmath
we recover the action for the @xmath Nariai instanton [ 169 , 181 ] ,
which lies in the range @xmath , and that describes the nucleation of a
Nariai universe that is unstable [ 97 , 170 , 129 ] and decays through
the pair creation of extreme dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström black holes
accelerated only by the cosmological constant.

In the electric case, the Euclidean action is given by ( 9.73 ) with
@xmath [see ( 9.108 )]. Thus,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to compute the extra Maxwell boundary term in ( 9.73 ), the
appropriate vector potential, @xmath , that is regular everywhere
including at the horizons is @xmath , which obviously satisfies ( 9.108
). The integral over @xmath consists of an integration between @xmath
and @xmath along the @xmath surface and back along @xmath , and of an
integration between @xmath and @xmath along the @xmath surface, and back
along the @xmath surface. The unit normal to @xmath is @xmath , and
@xmath on @xmath . Thus, the non-vanishing contribution to the Maxwell
boundary term in ( 9.73 ), @xmath , comes only from the integration
along the @xmath surface and is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding ( 9.133 ) and ( 9.134 ) yields ( 9.131 ). Therefore, the electric
action ( 9.73 ) of the charged Nariai instanton is equal to the magnetic
action, @xmath , and therefore electric and magnetic charged Nariai
black holes have the same probability of being pair created.

Now, we discuss the neutral Nariai C instanton. This instanton is
particulary important since it is the only regular Euclidean solution
available when we want to evaluate the pair creation of neutral black
holes. The same feature is present in the @xmath case where only the
neutral Nariai instanton is available [ 97 , 169 , 170 , 172 ] . The
action of the neutral Nariai C instanton is simply given by ( 9.130 )
and, for a fixed @xmath and @xmath , it is always smaller than the
action of the charged Nariai C instanton (see line @xmath in Fig. 9.8 ):
@xmath . Thus the pair creation of charged Nariai black holes is
suppressed relative to the pair creation of neutral Nariai black holes,
and both are suppressed relative to the dS space.

###### 9.3.3.d The ultracold C pair creation rate

We first consider the magnetic case, whose Euclidean action is given by
( 9.72 ). The boundary that appears in ( 9.72 ) is given by @xmath ,
where @xmath is a spatial surface at @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is a
timelike 3-surface at the Rindler horizon @xmath , and the timelike
3-surface @xmath is an internal infinity boundary at @xmath . With the
analysis of section 9.3.2.d , we can compute all the terms of action (
9.72 ). We start with @xmath which yields (using @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.100 ) and ( 9.111 ), and
@xmath is given by ( 9.76 ). The Maxwell term in the action yields

  -- -- -- ---------
           (9.136)
  -- -- -- ---------

where we used @xmath [see ( 6.5 )] with @xmath . Due to the fact that
@xmath it might seem that the contribution from ( 9.135 ) and ( 9.136 )
diverges. Fortunately this is not the case since these two terms cancel
each other. Trying to verify this analytically is cumbersome, but for
our purposes we can simply fix any numerical value for @xmath and @xmath
, and using ( 9.111 ) and ( 9.100 ) we indeed verify that ( 9.135 ) and
( 9.136 ) cancel each other.

Now, contrary to the other instantons, the ultracold C instanton has a
non-vanishing extrinsic curvature boundary term, @xmath , due to the
internal infinity boundary ( @xmath at @xmath ) contribution. The
extrinsic curvature to @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath is the unit
outward normal to @xmath , @xmath is the projection tensor onto @xmath ,
and @xmath represents the covariant derivative with respect to @xmath .
Thus the trace of the extrinsic curvature to @xmath is @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The magnetic action ( 9.72 ) of the ultracold C instanton is then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.138)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.100 ) and ( 9.111 ). When we
take the limit @xmath we get @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and therefore we recover the action for the @xmath ultracold instanton [
169 ] , that describes the pair creation of ultracold black holes
accelerated only by the cosmological constant.

In Fig. 9.6 we show a plot of @xmath as a function of @xmath and @xmath
for a fixed @xmath . When we fix @xmath and @xmath we also fix the mass
and charge of the ultracold black holes. For a fixed @xmath , when
@xmath increases the probability of pair creation of ultracold black
holes, @xmath , increases monotonically and they have a lower mass and
charge. Alternatively, we can discuss the behavior of @xmath . In this
case, the probability decreases monotonically as the acceleration of the
black holes increases.

In the electric case, the Euclidean action is given by ( 9.73 ) with
@xmath [see ( 9.113 )]. Thus,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the ultracold case the vector potential @xmath , that is regular
everywhere including at the horizon, needed to compute the extra Maxwell
boundary term in ( 9.73 ) is @xmath , which obviously satisfies ( 9.113
). The integral over @xmath consists of an integration between @xmath
and @xmath along the @xmath surface and back along @xmath , and of an
integration between @xmath and @xmath along the @xmath surface, and back
along the internal infinity surface @xmath . The non-vanishing
contribution to the Maxwell boundary term in ( 9.73 ) comes only from
the integration along the internal infinity boundary @xmath , and is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding ( 9.140 ) and ( 9.141 ) yields ( 9.136 ). Thus, the electric
action ( 9.73 ) of the ultracold C instanton is equal to the magnetic
action, @xmath , and therefore electric and magnetic ultracold black
holes have the same probability of being pair created.

###### 9.3.3.e Pair creation rate of nonextreme sub-maximal black holes

The lukewarm, cold, Nariai and ultracold C-metric instantons are saddle
point solutions free of conical singularities both in the @xmath and
@xmath horizons. The corresponding black holes may then nucleate in the
dS background when a cosmic string breaks, and we have computed their
pair creation rates in the last four subsections. However, these
particular black holes are not the only ones that can be pair created.
Indeed, it has been shown in [ 155 , 156 ] that Euclidean solutions with
conical singularities may also be used as saddle points for the pair
creation process. In this way, pair creation of nonextreme sub-maximal
black holes is allowed (by this nomenclature we mean all the nonextreme
black holes other than the lukewarm ones that are in the region interior
to the close line @xmath in Fig. 9.5 ), and their pair creation rate may
be computed. In order to calculate this rate, the action is given by (
9.72 ) and ( 9.73 ) (in the magnetic and electric cases respectively)
and, in addition, it has now an extra contribution from the conical
singularity (c.s.) that is present in one of the horizons ( @xmath ,
say) given by [ 291 , 97 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the area of the 2-surface spanned by the conical
singularity, and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the deficit angle associated to the conical singularity at the
horizon @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath being the periods of @xmath that
avoid a conical singularity in the horizons @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The contribution from ( 9.72 ) and ( 9.73 ) follows
straightforwardly in a similar way as the one shown in subsection
9.3.3.a with the period of @xmath , @xmath , chosen in order to avoid
the conical singularity at the acceleration horizon, @xmath . The full
Euclidean action for general nonextreme sub-maximal black holes is then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is given by ( 9.76 ), and the pair creation rate of
nonextreme sub-maximal black holes is @xmath , where @xmath is the
action of de Sitter space, and @xmath is the one-loop contribution not
computed here. In order to compute ( LABEL:I-Sub-Maximal ), we need the
relation between the parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
the horizons @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In general, for a nonextreme
solution with horizons @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.146)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be expressed as a
function of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.147)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The allowed values of parameters @xmath and @xmath are those contained
in the interior region defined by the close line @xmath in Fig. 9.5 .

##### 9.3.4 Entropy, area and pair creation rate

In previous works on black hole pair creation in general background
fields it has been well established that the pair creation rate is
proportional to the exponential of the gravitational entropy @xmath of
the system, @xmath , with the entropy being given by one quarter of the
the total area @xmath of all the horizons present in the instanton,
@xmath . In what follows we will verify that these relations also hold
for the instantons of the dS C-metric.

###### 9.3.4.a The lukewarm C case. Entropy and area

In the lukewarm case, the instanton has two horizons in its Euclidean
section, namely the acceleration horizon at @xmath and the black hole
horizon at @xmath . So, the total area of the lukewarm C instanton is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 9.83 ), @xmath and @xmath are
defined by ( 9.88 ), and @xmath is given by ( 9.89 ). It is
straightforward to verify that @xmath , where @xmath is given by ( 9.119
), and thus @xmath , where @xmath .

###### 9.3.4.b The cold C case. Entropy and area

In the cold case, the instanton has a single horizon, the acceleration
horizon at @xmath , in its Euclidean section, since @xmath is an
internal infinity. So, the total area of the cold C instanton is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is given by ( 9.94 ), @xmath and @xmath are defined by (
9.100 ), and @xmath is given by ( 9.76 ). Thus, @xmath , where @xmath is
given by ( 9.127 ), and thus @xmath , where @xmath .

###### 9.3.4.c The Nariai C case. Entropy and area

In the Nariai case, the instanton has two horizons in its Euclidean
section, namely the acceleration horizon @xmath and the black hole
horizon @xmath , both at @xmath , and thus they have the same area. So,
the total area of the Nariai C instanton is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.100 ), and @xmath is
given by ( 9.76 ), with @xmath and @xmath subjected to ( 9.104 ). Thus,
@xmath , where @xmath is given by ( 9.132 ), and thus @xmath , where
@xmath .

###### 9.3.4.d The ultracold C case. Entropy and area

In the ultracold case, the instanton has a single horizon, the Rindler
horizon at @xmath , in its Euclidean section, since @xmath is an
internal infinity. So, the total area of the ultracold C instanton is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath [see ( 9.110 )], @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 9.100 ),
and @xmath is given by ( 9.76 ), with @xmath and @xmath subjected to (
9.111 ). It straightforward to verify that @xmath , where @xmath is
given by ( 9.138 ), and thus @xmath , where @xmath .

As we have already said, the ultracold C instanton is a limiting case of
both the charged Nariai C instanton and the cold C instanton (see, e.g.,
Fig. 9.5 ). Then, as expected, the action of the cold C instanton gives,
in this limit, the action of the ultracold C instanton (see Fig. 9.7 ).
However, the ultracold frontier of the Nariai C action is given by two
times the ultracold C action (see Fig. 9.8 ). From the results of this
section we clearly understand the reason for this behavior. Indeed, in
the ultracold case and in the cold case, the respective instantons have
a single horizon (the other possible horizon turns out to be an internal
infinity). This horizon gives the only contribution to the total area,
@xmath , and therefore to the pair creation rate. In the Nariai case,
the instanton has two horizons with the same area, and thus the
ultracold limit of the Nariai action is doubled with respect to the true
ultracold action.

###### 9.3.4.e The nonextreme sub-maximal case. Entropy and area

In the lukewarm case, the instanton has two horizons in its Euclidean
section, namely the acceleration horizon at @xmath and the black hole
horizon at @xmath . So, the total area of the saddlepoint solution is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and once again one has @xmath , where @xmath is given by (
LABEL:I-Sub-Maximal ), and thus @xmath , where @xmath .

##### 9.3.5 Heuristic derivation of the nucleation rates

The physical interpretation of our exact results of section 9.3 can be
clarified with a heuristic derivation of the nucleation rates. An
estimate for the nucleation probability is given by the Boltzmann
factor, @xmath , where @xmath is the energy of the system that nucleates
and @xmath is the work done by the external force @xmath , that provides
the energy for the nucleation, through the typical distance @xmath
separating the created pair.

Forget for a moment the string, and ask what is the probability that a
black hole pair is created in a dS background. This process has been
discussed in [ 169 ] where it was found that the pair creation rate is
@xmath . In this case, @xmath , where @xmath is the rest energy of the
black hole, and @xmath is the work provided by the cosmological
background. To derive @xmath one can argue as follows. In the dS case,
the Newtonian potential is @xmath and its derivative yields the force
per unit mass or acceleration, @xmath , where @xmath is the
characteristic dS radius, @xmath . The force can then be written as
@xmath , where the characteristic mass of the system is @xmath . Thus,
the characteristic work is @xmath , where the characteristic distance
that separates the pair at the creation moment is @xmath . So, from the
Boltzmann factor we indeed expect that the creation rate of a black hole
pair in a dS background is given by @xmath [ 169 ] .

A question that has been answered in the present section 9.3 was: given
that a string is already present in our initial system, what is the
probability that it breaks and a pair of black holes is produced and
accelerated apart by @xmath and by the string tension? The presence of
the string leads in practice to a problem in which we have an effective
cosmological constant that satisfies @xmath , that is, the acceleration
@xmath provided by the string makes a positive contribution to the
process. Heuristically, we may then apply the same arguments that have
been used in the last paragraph, with the replacement @xmath . At the
end, the Boltzmann factor tells us that the creation rate for the
process is @xmath . So, for a given black hole mass, @xmath , and for a
given cosmological constant, @xmath , the black hole pair creation
process is enhanced when a string is present, as the explicit
calculations done in section 9.3 show. For @xmath this heuristic
derivation yields @xmath which is the pair creation rate found in [ 133
] .

Another question that we have dealt with in the present section 9.3 was:
what is the probability for the nucleation of a string in a dS
background? Heuristically, the energy of the string that nucleates is
@xmath , i.e., its mass per unit length times the dS radius, while the
work provided by the cosmological background is still given by @xmath .
The Boltzmann factor yields for nucleation rate the value @xmath , in
agreement with ( 9.116 ).

##### 9.3.6 Summary and discussion

We have studied in detail the quantum process in which a cosmic string
breaks in a de Sitter (dS) background and a pair of black holes is
created at the ends of the string. The energy to materialize and
accelerate the pair comes from the positive cosmological constant and
from the string tension. This process is a combination of the processes
considered in [ 167 ] - [ 172 ] , where the creation of a black hole
pair in a dS background has been analyzed, and in [ 133 ] - [ 136 ] ,
where the breaking of a cosmic string accompanied by the creation of a
black hole pair in a flat background has been studied.

We have constructed the saddle point solutions that mediate the pair
creation process through the analytic continuation of the dS C-metric [
86 , 120 , 88 ] , and we have explicitly computed the nucleation rate of
the process (see also a heuristic derivation of the rate in the
Appendix). Globally our results state that the dS space is stable
against the nucleation of a string, or against the nucleation of a
string followed by its breaking and consequent creation of a black hole
pair. In particular, we have answered three questions. First, we have
concluded that the nucleation rate of a cosmic string in a dS background
@xmath decreases when the mass density of the string increases. Second,
given that the string is already present in our initial system, the
probability @xmath that it breaks and a pair of black holes is produced
and accelerated apart by @xmath and by the string tension increases when
the mass density of the string increases. In other words, a string with
a higher mass density makes the process more probable, for a fixed black
hole mass. Third, if we start with a pure dS background, the probability
@xmath that a string nucleates on it and then breaks forming a pair of
black holes decreases when the mass density of the string increases.
These processes have a clear analogy with a thermodynamical system, with
the mass density of the string being the analogue of the temperature
@xmath . Indeed, from the Boltzmann factor, @xmath (where @xmath is the
Boltzmann constant), one knows that a higher background temperature
turns the nucleation of a particle with energy @xmath more probable.
However, in order to have a higher temperature we have first to furnish
more energy to the background, and thus the global process (increasing
the temperature to the final value @xmath plus the nucleation of the
particle) becomes energetically less favorable as @xmath increases.

We have also verified that the relation between the rate, entropy and
area, which is satisfied for all the black hole pair creation processes
analyzed so far, also holds in the process studied in this paper.
Indeed, the pair creation rate is proportional to @xmath , where @xmath
is the gravitational entropy of the system, and is given by one quarter
of the total area of all the horizons present in the saddle point
solution that mediates the pair creation.

#### 9.4 Pair creation in AdS, flat and dS backgrounds: a comparing
discussion

We have reviewed in detail the studies on the quantum process in which a
cosmic string breaks in an anti-de Sitter [ 132 ] , in a flat [ 133 ,
134 , 135 , 136 ] and in a de Sitter background [ 131 ] , and a pair of
black holes is created at the ends of the string (see Fig. 1.9 ). The
energy to materialize and accelerate the black holes comes from the
strings’ tension, and we have explicitly computed the pair creation
rates. In the dS case the cosmological background acceleration makes a
positive contribution to the process, while in the AdS case the
cosmological background acceleration contributes negatively. In
particular, in the AdS case, pair creation of black holes is possible
only when the acceleration provided by the string tension is higher than
@xmath : if we have a virtual pair of black holes and we want to turn
them real, we have to furnish a sufficient force that overcomes the AdS
background attraction.

We remark that in principle our explicit values for the pair creation
rates [ 132 ] in an AdS and dS [ 131 ] background also apply to the
process of pair creation in an external electromagnetic field, with the
acceleration being provided in this case by the Lorentz force instead of
being furnished by the string tension. Indeed, there is no Ernst
solution in a cosmological constant background, and thus we cannot
discuss analytically the process. However, physically we could in
principle consider an external electromagnetic field that supplies the
same energy and acceleration as our strings and, from the results of the
@xmath case (where the pair creation rates in the string and
electromagnetic cases agree), we expect that the results found in [ 131
, 132 ] do not depend on whether the energy is being provided by an
external electromagnetic field or by strings.

For the benefit of comparison, in Fig. 9.9 we schematically represent
the general behavior of the black hole pair creation rate @xmath as a
function of the acceleration @xmath provided by the strings, when a
cosmic string breaks in the three cosmological constant backgrounds. In
a flat background [see Fig. 9.9 .(a)], the pair creation rate is zero
when @xmath [ 133 ] . In this case, the flat C-metric reduces to a
single black hole, and since we are studying the probability of pair
creation, the corresponding rate is naturally zero. This does not mean
that a single black hole cannot be materialized from the quantum vacuum,
it only means that this latter process is not described by the C-metric.
The creation probability of a single black hole in a hot bath has been
considered in [ 138 ] . In a dS background [see Fig. 9.9 .(b)], the pair
creation rate is not zero when @xmath [ 131 ] . This means that even in
the absence of the string, the positive cosmological constant is enough
to provide the energy to materialize the black hole pair [ 169 ] . If in
addition one has an extra energy provided by the string, the process
becomes more favorable [ 131 ] . In the AdS case [see Fig. 9.9 .(c)],
the negative cosmological constant makes a negative contribution to the
process, and black hole pair creation is possible only when the
acceleration provided by the strings overcomes the AdS background
attraction. The branch @xmath represents the creation probability of a
single black hole when the acceleration provided by the broken string is
not enough to overcome the AdS attraction, and was not studied in this
thesis.

We can also fix @xmath and @xmath , and describe the evolution of the
pair creation rates when the mass and charge of the black holes
increase. In the three cases, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we conclude
that as the mass and charge of the black holes increase, the probability
they have to be pair created decreases monotonically. This is the
expected result since the materialization of a higher mass implies the
need of a higher energy.

In order to study the pair creation processes, we had to construct the
instantons that mediate the process. This has done through the analytic
continuation of some special cases of the AdS, flat and dS C-metrics.
The regularity condition imposed to these instantons restricts the mass
@xmath and the charge @xmath of the black holes that are produced, and
physically it means that the only black holes that can be pair produced
are those that are in thermodynamic equilibrium. Concretely, in the
three cases, AdS, flat and dS, we have found two charged regular
instantons. One mediates the pair creation of nonextreme black holes
with @xmath , and the other mediates the pair creation of extreme black
holes ( @xmath ). The instantons constructed from the AdS and flat
C-metric are noncompact (contrary to what occurs with the @xmath
instantons), in the sense that they have an acceleration horizon with an
infinite area. Thus when dealing with them, we had to eliminate this
infinity by normalizing this area relative to the acceleration horizon
area of an appropriate background reference spacetime. In the dS case,
the acceleration horizon has a finite area, and the above nonextreme
instanton is also called lukewarm and the extreme instanton is also
called cold. Moreover, in the dS case there are two other instantons
available: the Nariai instanton, and the ultracold instanton, which are
not present in the AdS and flat cases since they are out of the allowed
range of the angular direction @xmath . The Nariai C instanton describes
the creation of a Nariai C universe (see section 7.2.1 ) that is
unstable and, once created, it decays through the quantum tunnelling
process into a slightly non-extreme ( @xmath ) pair of black holes
accelerated by the cosmological background and by the string. Finally,
the ultracold C instanton describes the creation of a Nariai
Bertotti-Robinson C universe (see section 7.2.3 ) that is unstable and,
once created, it decays into a slightly non-extreme ( @xmath ) pair of
black holes accelerated by the cosmological background and by the
string.

In all the cases studied in this chapter, the pair creation rate is
proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the gravitational entropy of
the system, and is given by one quarter of the total area of all the
horizons present in the instanton that mediates the pair creation.

To conclude let us recall that the C-metric allows two distinct physical
interpretations. In one of them one removes the conical singularity at
the north pole and leaves one at the south pole. In this way the
C-metric describes a pair of black holes accelerated away by two strings
with positive mass density from each one of the black holes towards
infinity. Alternatively, we can avoid the conical singularity at the
south pole and in this case the black holes are pushed away by a strut
(with negative mass density) in between them, along their north poles.
In this chapter, as in we have adopted the first choice. Technically,
the second choice introduces minor changes. Essentially it changes the
period of the angular coordinate @xmath : it would be given by @xmath
instead of ( 9.76 ). We have chosen the first choice essentially for two
reasons. First, the string has a positive mass density and, in this
sense, it is a more physical solution than the strut. Second, in order
to get the above string/pair configuration we only have to cut the
string in a point. The strings tension does the rest of the work.
However, if we desire the strut/pair system described above we would
have to cut the strut in two different points. Then we would have to
discard somehow the parts that join each one of the black holes towards
infinity along their south poles.

## Part III Black holes and pair creation in higher dimensions

### Chapter 10 Black holes in higher dimensional spacetimes

] ] \minitoc

In this chapter we will describe the main features of the static higher
dimensional black hole solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell theory in a
background with a generalized cosmological constant @xmath . Some of
these black holes were found by Tangherlini [ 202 ] , and are the higher
dimensional cousins of the Schwarzschild and of the Reissner-Nordström
black holes. We work in the context of the Einstein-Maxwell action with
a cosmological constant @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of the spacetime, @xmath is the
determinant of the metric, @xmath is the Ricci scalar, @xmath is the
Maxwell field strength of the gauge field @xmath , and we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient of the @xmath term was chosen in order to insure that,
for any dimension @xmath , the pure dS or AdS spacetime is described by
@xmath , as occurs with @xmath . We set the @xmath -dimensional Newton’s
constant equal to one, and @xmath . The variation of ( 10.1 ), @xmath ,
yields the equations for the gravitational field and for the Maxwell
field, respectively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
     @xmath      (10.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci tensor and @xmath is the electromagnetic
energy-momentum tensor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contraction of ( 10.3 ) with @xmath yields for the Ricci tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the trace of @xmath . We remark that in a general @xmath
-dimensional background the electromagnetic energy-momentum tensor is
not traceless. Indeed, the contraction of ( 10.5 ) with @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes only for @xmath .

#### 10.1 Higher dimensional black holes in a flat background

In a flat background, @xmath , the most general static solution with
spherical symmetry is given by [ 202 ] (see also [ 203 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the line element on an unit @xmath -sphere,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the function @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mass parameter @xmath and the charge parameter @xmath are related to
the ADM mass, @xmath , and ADM electric charge, @xmath , of the solution
by [ 203 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the area of an unit @xmath -sphere,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath is the Gamma function, whose definition and properties are
listed in [ 292 ] . For our purposes we need to know that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (10.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The radial electromagnetic field produced by the electric charge @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When @xmath the solution ( 10.8 ) ( 10.14 ) represents a black hole
solution with a curvature singularity at the origin, and with an event
horizon, @xmath , and a Cauchy horizon, @xmath which satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

such that @xmath , and @xmath . When @xmath , one has an extreme black
hole with @xmath , and when @xmath , one has a naked singularity. When
@xmath we have a neutral black hole with an event horizon at @xmath .

Now, any @xmath -dimensional geometry can be embedded into a higher
dimensional Minkowski spacetime [ 293 ] , with one or more timelike
coordinates. This process is usually called as global embedding
Minkowskian spacetime procedure (GEMS). This procedure allows, for
example, to verify that the Hawking temperature and the Unruh
temperature can be matched (see, e.g., [ 294 , 210 ] ). The neutral
Tangherlini black hole ( @xmath ) admits the following embedding in a
@xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime [ 210 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the surface gravity of the event horizon @xmath given by
@xmath . Starting with the @xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime,
@xmath , the transformations ( 10.16 ) map it into the neutral
Tangherlini black hole ( 10.8 ). When @xmath , ( 10.16 ) yields the
global embedding of the Schwarzschild black hole found in [ 294 ] .

Analogously the charged Tangherlini black hole ( @xmath ) admits the
following embedding in a @xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime with
two timelike coordinates ( @xmath ) [ 210 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         (10.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------

with the coordinates @xmath to @xmath being the same as those defined in
( 10.16 ), and we have defined @xmath . When @xmath , ( 10.17 ) yields
the global embedding of the Reissner-Nordström black hole found in [ 294
] .

#### 10.2 Higher dimensional exact solutions in a dS background

##### 10.2.1 Higher dimensional black holes in an asymptotically dS
background

In an asymptotically de Sitter background, @xmath , the static higher
dimensional black hole solutions with spherical topology were also found
by Tangherlini [ 202 ] . The gravitational field and the electromagnetic
field are still given by ( 10.8 ) and by ( 10.14 ), respectively, but
now the function @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mass parameter @xmath and the charge parameter @xmath are related to
the ADM hairs, @xmath and @xmath , by ( 10.11 ). The causal structure of
the dS-Tangherlini black holes is similar to the one of their
4-dimensional counterparts (see chapter 5 ). In particular, these
solutions have a curvature singularity at the origin, and the black
holes can have at most three horizons with one of them being the
cosmological horizon.

In section 10.2.2 and in chapter 11 , we will need to have the range of
parameters for which one has an extreme dS black hole. We start with the
five-dimensional case, @xmath [ 211 ] . The non-extreme dS black hole
has three horizons, namely the Cauchy horizon, @xmath , the event
horizon, @xmath , and the cosmological horizon @xmath , with @xmath . We
are interested in the extreme dS black holes, for which two of the above
horizons coincide. Let us label this degenerated horizon by @xmath . In
this case (and for @xmath ), the function @xmath given by ( 10.18 ) can
be written as [ 211 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus the other horizon of the extreme black hole is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mass parameter @xmath and the charge parameter @xmath of the black
holes are written as functions of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The condition @xmath implies that @xmath . At this point we note that
@xmath and @xmath first increase with @xmath (this stage corresponds to
@xmath ), until @xmath reaches the critical value @xmath (this stage
corresponds to @xmath ), and then @xmath and @xmath start decreasing
until @xmath reaches its maximum allowed value (this stage corresponds
to @xmath ). These three stages are associated to three distinct extreme
dS black holes: the cold, the ultracold and the Nariai ^(a) ^(a) a
Please note that in this section we deal with the Nariai black hole
while in the next section we will generate the Nariai solution which is
not a black hole solution. black holes, respectively (here we follow the
nomenclature used in the analogous 4-dimensional black holes [ 168 ] ).
More precisely, for @xmath one has the cold black hole with @xmath and
@xmath . The ranges of the mass and charge parameters for the cold black
hole are @xmath and @xmath . The case @xmath gives the ultracold black
hole in which the three horizons coincide, @xmath . Its mass and charge
parameters are @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath one has the Nariai black
hole with @xmath and @xmath . The ranges of the mass and charge
parameters for the Nariai black hole are @xmath and @xmath .

Now, the above construction can be extended for @xmath -dimensional
extreme dS black holes. In the extreme case the function @xmath given by
( 10.18 ) can be written as [ 211 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the degenerated horizon of the black hole, and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are constants that can be found through the matching
between ( 10.18 ) and ( 10.23 ). This procedure yields the mass
parameter @xmath and the charge parameter @xmath of the black holes as
functions of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The condition @xmath implies that @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the @xmath -dimensional cold black hole ( @xmath ), @xmath and
@xmath increase with @xmath , and one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the @xmath -dimensional ultracold black hole ( @xmath ), one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.28)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, for the @xmath -dimensional Nariai black hole ( @xmath ),
@xmath and @xmath decrease with @xmath , and one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.29)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The ranges of @xmath and @xmath that represent which one of the above
black holes are sketched in Fig. 10.1 .

##### 10.2.2 Extremal limits of the higher dimensional dS black holes

In chapter 7 , we saw that Ginsparg and Perry [ 97 ] have connected the
extreme Nariai black hole with the Nariai solution [ 125 ] in a
4-dimensional spacetime. This is, they have shown that the already known
Nariai solution (which is not a black hole solution) could be generated
from an extremal limit of a near-Nariai black hole. They realized this
connection while they were studying the quantum stability of the Nariai
and the Schwarzschild-dS solutions [ 97 , 129 ] . A similar procedure
allows to generate the Bertotti-Robinson solution and the Nariai @xmath
Bertotti-Robinson solution from the near-cold black hole and
near-ultracold black hole, respectively. In this section, we will apply
the near extremal procedure of [ 97 ] to the extreme black holes
discussed in the last subsection, in order to find the higher
dimensional Nariai, dS @xmath Bertotti-Robinson, Bertotti-Robinson and
Nariai @xmath Bertotti-Robinson solutions [ 211 ] .

###### 10.2.2.a Higher dimensional Nariai solution

In order to generate the higher dimensional Nariai solution from the
near-Nariai black hole we first go back to ( 10.22 ) and rewrite it in
the form @xmath , where @xmath is the degenerated horizon of the black
hole, and @xmath is a polynomial function of @xmath . Then, we set
@xmath and @xmath , in order that @xmath measures the deviation from
degeneracy, and the limit @xmath is obtained when @xmath . Now, we
introduce a new time coordinate @xmath , @xmath , and a new radial
coordinate @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath correspond,
respectively, to the horizons @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath , with
@xmath is defined in ( 10.23 ). Then, in the limit @xmath , from ( 10.8
) and ( 10.22 ), we obtain the gravitational field of the Nariai
solution [ 211 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.30)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are
related to @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.31)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Maxwell field ( 10.14 ) of the higher dimensional Nariai solution is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So, if we give the parameters @xmath , and @xmath we can construct the
higher dimensional Nariai solution. This solution is the direct
topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional dS
spacetime with a ( @xmath )-sphere of fixed radius @xmath , and is an
exact solution of Einstein-Maxwell equations with @xmath in @xmath
-dimensions.

The neutral Nariai solution ( @xmath ) satisfies @xmath and @xmath . The
@xmath limit of the Nariai solution is @xmath -dimensional Minkowski
spacetime as occurs with the @xmath solution (see subsection 7.1.4 ).

###### 10.2.2.b Higher dimensional dS Bertotti-Robinson solution

In order to generate the higher dimensional dS Bertotti-Robinson
solution from the near-cold black hole we first go back to ( 10.22 ) and
rewrite it in the form @xmath , where @xmath is the degenerated horizon
of the black hole, and @xmath is a polynomial function of @xmath . Then,
we set @xmath and @xmath , in order that @xmath measures the deviation
from degeneracy, and the limit @xmath is obtained when @xmath . Now, we
introduce a new time coordinate @xmath , @xmath , and a new radial
coordinate @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath , with @xmath is defined in (
10.23 ). Then, in the limit @xmath , from ( 10.8 ) and ( 10.22 ), we
obtain the gravitational field of the dS Bertotti-Robinson solution [
211 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.33)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are related to @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.34)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Maxwell field ( 10.14 ) of the higher dimensional dS
Bertotti-Robinson solution is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.35)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So, if we give the parameters @xmath , and @xmath we can construct the
higher dimensional dS Bertotti-Robinson solution. This solution is the
direct topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional AdS
spacetime with a ( @xmath )-sphere of fixed radius @xmath , and is an
exact solution of Einstein-Maxwell equations with @xmath in @xmath
-dimensions. There is no neutral ( @xmath ) Bertotti-Robinson solution.

###### 10.2.2.c Higher dimensional flat Bertotti-Robinson solution

From the @xmath limit of the dS Bertotti-Robinson, one can generate the
@xmath Bertotti-Robinson solution. It is described by ( 10.33 ) and (
10.35 ) with @xmath and @xmath being related to @xmath by [ 211 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.36)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Topologically this solution is also @xmath , and is an exact solution of
Einstein-Maxwell equations with @xmath in @xmath -dimensions.

###### 10.2.2.d Higher dimensional Nariai@xmathBertotti-Robinson
solution

In order to generate the higher dimensional Nariai @xmath
Bertotti-Robinson solution from the near-ultracold black hole we first
go back to ( 10.22 ) and rewrite it in the form @xmath , where @xmath is
a degenerated horizon of the black hole, @xmath is the other horizon,
and @xmath is a polynomial function of @xmath . Then, we set @xmath and
@xmath , with @xmath defined in ( 10.27 ), in order that @xmath measures
the deviation from degeneracy, and the limit @xmath is obtained when
@xmath . Now, we introduce a new time coordinate @xmath , @xmath , and a
new radial coordinate @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath . Then, in the
limit @xmath , from ( 10.8 ) we obtain the gravitational field of the
Nariai @xmath Bertotti-Robinson solution [ 211 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.37)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath defined in ( 10.27
). The Maxwell field ( 10.14 ) of the higher dimensional Nariai @xmath
Bertotti-Robinson solution is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.38)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is given by ( 10.11 ) and ( 10.28 ). So, if we give @xmath
we can construct the higher dimensional Nariai @xmath Bertotti-Robinson
solution. Notice that the spacetime factor @xmath is just @xmath
(2-dimensional Minkowski spacetime) in Rindler coordinates. Therefore,
under the usual coordinate transformation @xmath and @xmath , this
factor transforms into @xmath . The higher dimensional Nariai @xmath
Bertotti-Robinson solution is the direct topological product of @xmath ,
and is an exact solution of Einstein-Maxwell equations with @xmath in
@xmath -dimensions.

#### 10.3 Higher dimensional exact solutions in an AdS background

##### 10.3.1 Higher dimensional black holes in an asymptotically AdS
background

In a higher dimensional asymptotically anti-de Sitter background, @xmath
, the Einstein-Maxwell equations allow a three-family of static black
hole solutions, parameterized by the constant @xmath which can take the
values @xmath , and whose gravitational field is described by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.39)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.40)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus, the family with @xmath yields AdS black holes with spherical
topology found in [ 202 ] . The family with @xmath yields AdS black
holes with planar, cylindrical or toroidal (with genus @xmath ) topology
that are the higher dimensional counterparts (introduced in [ 295 ] in
the neutral case, and in [ 296 ] in the charged case) of the
4-dimensional black holes found and analyzed in [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] . Finally,
the family with @xmath yields AdS black holes with hyperbolic, or
toroidal topology with genus @xmath that are the higher dimensional
counterparts (introduced in [ 295 ] in the neutral case) of the
4-dimensional black holes analyzed in [ 11 ] . The solutions with
non-spherical topology (i.e., with @xmath and @xmath ) do not have
counterparts in a @xmath or in a @xmath background.

The mass parameter @xmath and the charge parameter @xmath are related to
the ADM hairs, @xmath and @xmath , by ( 10.11 ). The causal structure of
these higher dimensional AdS black holes is similar to the one of their
4-dimensional counterparts (see chapter 5 ). In particular, these black
holes can have at most two horizons. Following a similar procedure as
the one sketched in section 10.2.1 , we find the mass parameter @xmath
and the charge parameter @xmath of the extreme black holes as functions
of the degenerated horizon at @xmath [ 211 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.42)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### 10.3.1.a Higher dimensional AdS black holes with spherical
topology

When @xmath , one has @xmath and @xmath and @xmath in ( 10.42 ) are
always positive. The ranges of @xmath and @xmath that represent extreme
and nonextreme black holes are sketched in Fig. 10.2 .

For @xmath , the function @xmath in the extreme case can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.43)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### 10.3.1.b Higher dimensional AdS black holes with toroidal or
cylindrical topology

When @xmath , one has @xmath and @xmath and @xmath in ( 10.42 ) are also
always positive. The ranges of @xmath and @xmath that represent extreme
and nonextreme black holes are sketched in Fig. 10.2 .

For @xmath , the function @xmath in the extreme case can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.44)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### 10.3.1.c Higher dimensional AdS black holes with hyperbolic
topology

When @xmath , the condition that @xmath demands that @xmath . For @xmath
, the extreme black hole has no electric charge ( @xmath ) and its mass
is negative, @xmath . For @xmath , the extreme black hole has no mass (
@xmath ) and its charge is given by @xmath . The ranges of @xmath and
@xmath that represent extreme and nonextreme black holes are sketched in
Fig. 10.3 .

For @xmath , the function @xmath in the extreme case can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.45)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The condition @xmath requires @xmath which implies that @xmath is the
only real root of the solution.

##### 10.3.2 Extremal limits of the higher dimensional AdS black holes

In this subsection, we will consider the extremal limits of the
near-extreme higher dimensional AdS black holes. This procedure leads to
the generation of the higher dimensional anti-Nariai solution and higher
dimensional AdS Bertotti-Robinson solution. To achieve our aim, we first
go back to the extreme case of ( 10.40 ) and rewrite it in the form
@xmath , where @xmath is the degenerated horizon of the black hole, and
@xmath is a polynomial function of @xmath . Then, we introduce a new
time coordinate @xmath , @xmath , and a new radial coordinate @xmath ,
@xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath measures the deviation from
degeneracy. Finally, taking the limit @xmath in ( 10.39 ) yields the
gravitational field of the new higher dimensional solutions [ 211 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.46)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath in the spherical, cylindrical and hyperbolic cases,
respectively, and @xmath and @xmath are constants related to @xmath and
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.47)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the new coordinate system, the Maxwell field ( 10.14 ) of the
solutions is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.48)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equations ( 10.46 )-( 10.48 ) describe three exact solutions of the
Einstein-Maxwell theory with @xmath in @xmath -dimensions. The @xmath
case describes the AdS Bertotti-Robinson solution with spherical
topology. This solution is the direct topological product of @xmath ,
i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional AdS spacetime with a ( @xmath )-sphere of
fixed radius @xmath . The @xmath case describes the AdS
Bertotti-Robinson solution with toroidal or cylindrical topology. This
solution is the direct topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a
(1+1)-dimensional AdS spacetime with a ( @xmath ) Euclidean space.
Finally, the @xmath case describes the the higher dimensional
anti-Nariai solution. This solution is the direct topological product of
@xmath , i.e., of a (1+1)-dimensional AdS spacetime with a ( @xmath
)-hyperboloid with a fixed size, @xmath . The @xmath case is the only
one that admits a solution with @xmath . This neutral anti-Nariai
solution satisfies @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath limit of the
anti-Nariai solution is @xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime as
occurs with the @xmath solution (see subsection 7.1.4 ).

### Chapter 11 Pair creation of black holes in higher dimensional
spacetimes

] ] \minitoc

In this chapter, we discuss in detail the creation of a higher
dimensional Tangherlini black hole pair in a dS background [ 210 , 212 ]
. The instantons that describe the process are constructed from the dS
Tangherlini solution, which describes a pair of higher dimensional dS
black holes accelerated apart by the cosmological constant expansion. We
compute the pair creation rates of the process. This study is the only
one discussing the black hole pair creation process in a higher
dimensional spacetime.

#### 11.1 The higher dimensional dS instantons

In order to evaluate the black hole pair creation rate we need to find
the instantons of the theory, i.e., we must look into the Euclidean
section of the higher dimensional dS solution and choose only those
Euclidean solutions which are regular in a way that will be explained
soon. To obtain the Euclidean section of the dS solution from the
Lorentzian dS solution, ( 10.8 ), ( 10.14 ) and ( 10.18 ), we simply
introduce an imaginary time coordinate @xmath .

To have a positive definite Euclidean metric we must require that @xmath
belongs to @xmath . In general, when @xmath , one then has conical
singularities at the horizons @xmath and @xmath . In order to obtain a
regular solution we have to eliminate the conical singularities at both
horizons. This is achieved by imposing that the period of @xmath is the
same for the two horizons, and is equivalent to requiring that the
Hawking temperature of the two horizons be equal. To eliminate the
conical singularity at @xmath the period of @xmath must be @xmath (where
@xmath is the surface gravity of the cosmological horizon),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

This choice for the period of @xmath also eliminates simultaneously the
conical singularity at the outer black hole horizon, @xmath , if and
only if the parameters of the solution are such that the surface
gravities of the black hole and acceleration horizons are equal ( @xmath
), i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are two ways to satisfy this condition. One is a regular Euclidean
solution with @xmath , and will be called lukewarm instanton. This
solution requires the presence of an electromagnetic charge. The other
way is to have @xmath , and will be called Nariai instanton. This last
solution exists with or without charge. When we want to distinguish
them, they will be labelled by charged Nariai and neutral Nariai
instantons, respectively.

We now turn our attention to the case @xmath and @xmath , which
obviously requires the presence of charge. When this happens the allowed
range of @xmath in the Euclidean sector is simply @xmath . This occurs
because when @xmath the proper distance along spatial directions between
@xmath and @xmath goes to infinity. The point @xmath disappears from the
@xmath section which is no longer compact but becomes topologically
@xmath . Thus, in this case we have a conical singularity only at @xmath
, and so we obtain a regular Euclidean solution by simply requiring that
the period of @xmath be equal to ( 11.1 ). We will label this solution
by cold instanton. Finally, we have a special solution that satisfies
@xmath and that is regular when condition ( 11.1 ) is satisfied. This
instanton will be called ultracold instanton and can be viewed as a
limiting case of both the charged Nariai instanton and cold instanton.

Below, we will describe each one of these four instantons, following the
order: (A) cold instanton, (B) Nariai instanton, (C) ultracold
instanton, and (D) lukewarm instanton. These instantons are the higher
dimensional counterparts of the 4-dimensional instantons that have been
constructed [ 167 , 168 , 169 , 173 ] from the Euclidean section of the
dS @xmath Reissner-Nordström solution, and thus we preserve the
4-dimensional nomenclature. The cold instanton, the Nariai instanton,
and the ultracold instanton are obtained by euclideanizing solutions
found chapter in 10 . These four families of instantons will allow us to
calculate the pair creation rate of accelerated dS @xmath
Reissner-Nordström black holes in section 11.2 .

As is clear from the above discussion, when the charge vanishes the only
regular Euclidean solution that can be constructed is the neutral Nariai
instanton. The same feature is present in the 4-dimensional case where
only the neutral Nariai instanton is available [ 97 , 169 , 170 , 172 ]
.

##### 11.1.1 The higher dimensional cold instanton

The gravitational field of the higher dimensional cold instanton is
given by ( 10.8 ) and ( 10.18 ), while its Maxwell field is given by (
10.14 ), with the replacement @xmath . Moreover, the degenerated horizon
@xmath , the mass parameter @xmath , and the charge parameter @xmath
satisfy relations ( 10.24 ) and ( 10.26 ). The topology of the higher
dimensional cold instanton is @xmath , since @xmath is at an infinite
proper distance ( @xmath , @xmath ). The surface @xmath is then an
internal infinity boundary that will have to be taken into account in
the calculation of the action of the cold instanton (see section 11.2.1
). The Lorentzian sector of this cold case describes two extreme (
@xmath ) dS black holes being accelerated by the cosmological
background, and the higher dimensional cold instanton describes pair
creation of these extreme black holes. To compute the pair creation rate
of cold black holes we need to know the location of the cosmological
horizon, @xmath . This location can be explicitly determined for @xmath
and @xmath . Specifically, for @xmath one has @xmath , where, from (
10.26 ), one has @xmath . For @xmath one has @xmath , where, from (
10.26 ), one has @xmath . For @xmath finding explicitly @xmath requires
solving a polynomial of degree higher than four.

##### 11.1.2 The higher dimensional Nariai instanton

The gravitational field of the higher dimensional Nariai instanton is
given by ( 10.30 ), while the Maxwell field is given by ( 10.32 ), with
the replacement @xmath . Moreover, the parameter @xmath and @xmath
satisfy relations ( 10.31 ) and ( 10.29 ). The topology of the Nariai
instanton is @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ). The Lorentzian sector of this
solution is the direct topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a
(1+1)-dimensional de Sitter spacetime with a (D-2)-sphere of fixed size.
To each point in the sphere corresponds a @xmath spacetime. In the
@xmath case it has been shown [ 97 , 170 ] that the Nariai solution
decays through the quantum tunnelling process into a slightly
non-extreme dS black hole pair (for a complete review on this subject
see [ 129 ] ). We then naturally expect that an analogous quantum
instability is present in the higher dimensional Nariai solution.
Therefore, the Nariai instanton describes the creation of a higher
dimensional Nariai universe that then decays into a slightly non-extreme
( @xmath ) pair of black holes accelerated by the cosmological constant
background.

##### 11.1.3 The higher dimensional ultracold instanton

The gravitational field of the higher dimensional ultracold instanton is
given by ( 10.37 ) while the Maxwell field is given by ( 10.38 ), with
the replacement @xmath . Moreover the parameters @xmath and @xmath are
defined in ( 10.27 ) and ( 10.28 ), respectively. The topology of the
ultracold instanton is @xmath . The Lorentzian sector of this solution
is the direct topological product of @xmath , i.e., of a
(1+1)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime with a (D-2)-sphere of fixed size.
The ultracold instanton describes the creation of a higher dimensional
Nariai @xmath Bertotti-Robinson universe that then decays into a
slightly non-extreme ( @xmath ) pair of black holes accelerated by the
cosmological constant background.

##### 11.1.4 The higher dimensional lukewarm instanton

The gravitational field of the higher dimensional lukewarm instanton is
given by ( 10.8 ) with the requirement that @xmath satisfies condition (
11.2 ) and @xmath . To find the properties of the lukewarm instanton we
note that the function @xmath , given by ( 10.8 ), can also be written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (11.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) are constants that can be found from the
matching between ( 10.8 ) and ( 11.3 ). This matching, together with the
extra condition ( 11.2 ), lead to unique relations between the
parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the position of the horizons,
@xmath and @xmath . Since this procedure involves polynomials with a
high degree, we have not been able to find the general relations between
( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) and ( @xmath , @xmath ) for any @xmath .
So, we have to carry this procedure for each @xmath . As examples, we
specifically discuss now the @xmath and the @xmath lukewarm instantons.
For @xmath , the above procedure yields the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (11.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , the relations are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (11.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

These two examples indicate an important difference between the lukewarm
instanton in @xmath dimensions and in @xmath : for @xmath the lukewarm
instanton has a ADM mass, @xmath , equal to its ADM charge, @xmath ,
while for @xmath one has @xmath . Note also that relations ( 11.4 ) and
( 11.5 ) and their higher dimensional counterparts define implicitly
@xmath and @xmath as a function of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The
location of @xmath and @xmath can be explicitly determined for @xmath
and @xmath . For @xmath finding explicitly @xmath requires solving a
polynomial of degree higher than four.

The topology of the lukewarm instanton is @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ).
The Lorentzian sector of the lukewarm solution describes two higher
dimensional dS black holes being accelerated apart by the cosmological
constant, so this instanton describes pair creation of nonextreme black
holes.

#### 11.2 Calculation of the black hole pair creation rates

The pair creation rate of higher dimensional black holes in a dS
background is given, according to the no-boundary proposal of [ 283 ] ,
by (see subsection 9.3.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the one-loop contribution from the quantum quadratic
fluctuations in the fields that will not be considered here. @xmath is
the classical Euclidean action of the gravitational instanton that
mediates the pair creation of black holes, given by [ 101 , 181 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (11.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the boundary of a compact manifold @xmath , @xmath is
the determinant of the Euclidean metric, @xmath is the determinant of
the induced metric on the boundary @xmath , @xmath is proportional to
the cosmological constant as defined in ( 10.2 ), @xmath is the Ricci
scalar defined in ( 10.6 ), @xmath is the trace of the extrinsic
curvature @xmath of the boundary, @xmath is the Maxwell field strength
of the gauge field @xmath , and @xmath is the unit outward normal to
@xmath

We note again, since this fact is important for the computation of the
pair creation rates, that in a general @xmath -dimensional background
the electromagnetic energy-momentum tensor is not traceless. Indeed, it
is given by ( 10.7 ), which vanishes only for @xmath .

@xmath is the Euclidean action of the @xmath gravitational instanton
that mediates the nucleation of a dS space from nothing, given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (11.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### 11.2.1 The higher dimensional cold pair creation rate

The Maxwell field of the higher dimensional cold is @xmath . With this
information we are able to compute all the terms of the Euclidean action
( 11.7 ). We start with

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (11.9)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 10.12 ). The Maxwell term in the action
yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . In order to compute the extra Maxwell boundary term in (
11.7 ) we have to find a vector potential, @xmath , that is regular
everywhere including at the horizons. An appropriate choice in the cold
case is @xmath . The integral over @xmath consists of an integration
between @xmath and @xmath along the @xmath surface and back along @xmath
, and of an integration between @xmath and @xmath along the @xmath
surface and back along the @xmath surface. The normal to @xmath is
@xmath , and the normal to @xmath is @xmath . Thus the non-vanishing
contribution comes only from the integration along the @xmath surface.
The Maxwell boundary term in ( 11.7 ) is then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding all these terms yields the action ( 11.7 ) of the higher
dimensional cold instanton (onwards the subscript “ @xmath ” means cold)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, for @xmath , reduces to the result of [ 169 ] . The allowed
interval of @xmath is defined in ( 10.26 ). As @xmath varies from @xmath
, defined in ( 10.27 ), to @xmath , the cold action ( 11.12 ) varies
according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the lower limit of this relation is the ultracold action, as we
shall see in ( 11.25 ), and @xmath is defined in ( 11.8 ).

The pair creation rate of extreme cold black holes is given by ( 11.6 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the one-loop contribution not computed here.

##### 11.2.2 The higher dimensional Nariai pair creation rate

The first term of the Euclidean action ( 11.7 ) gives in the Nariai case

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (11.15)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

The Maxwell term in the action yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath . In order to compute the extra Maxwell boundary term in (
11.7 ) we have to find a vector potential, @xmath , that is regular
everywhere including at the horizons. An appropriate choice in the
lukewarm case is @xmath . The integral over @xmath consists of an
integration between @xmath and @xmath along the @xmath surface and back
along @xmath , and of an integration between @xmath and @xmath along the
@xmath surface, and back along the @xmath surface. The non-vanishing
contribution to the Maxwell boundary term in ( 11.7 ), @xmath , comes
only from the integration along the @xmath surface and is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding all these terms yields the action ( 11.7 ) of the higher
dimensional Nariai instanton (onwards the subscript “ @xmath ” means
Nariai)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, for @xmath , reduces to the result of [ 181 , 169 ] . One has
@xmath , where @xmath lies in the range defined in ( 10.29 ). Thus, the
Nariai action ( 11.18 ) lies in the range

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the quantities @xmath and @xmath are defined, respectively, in (
10.25 ) and ( 10.27 ). The equality holds in the neutral Nariai case (
@xmath ), while the upper limit of ( 11.19 ) is the double of the
ultracold action, which will be defined in ( 11.25 ).

The pair creation rate of extreme Nariai black holes is given by ( 11.6
),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is given by ( 11.8 ), and @xmath is the one-loop
contribution not computed here. The process studied in this subsection
describes the nucleation of a higher dimensional Nariai universe that is
unstable [ 97 , 170 , 129 ] and decays through the pair creation of
extreme Nariai black holes.

##### 11.2.3 The higher dimensional ultracold pair creation rate

The boundary @xmath that appears in ( 11.7 ) consists of an initial
spatial surface at @xmath plus a final spatial surface at @xmath . We
label these two 3-surfaces by @xmath . Each one of these two spatial
@xmath -surfaces is delimitated by a ( @xmath )-surface at the Rindler
horizon @xmath and by a ( @xmath )-surface at the internal infinity
@xmath . The two surfaces @xmath are connected by a timelike ( @xmath
)-surface, @xmath , that intersects @xmath at the frontier @xmath and by
a timelike ( @xmath )-surface, @xmath , that intersects @xmath at the
internal infinity boundary @xmath . Thus @xmath , and the region @xmath
within it is compact. The first term of the Euclidean action ( 11.7 )
yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (11.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Maxwell term in the action yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, contrary to the other instantons, the ultracold instanton has a
non-vanishing extrinsic curvature boundary term, @xmath , due to the
internal infinity boundary ( @xmath at @xmath ) contribution. The
extrinsic curvature to @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath is the unit
outward normal to @xmath , @xmath is the projection tensor onto @xmath ,
and @xmath represents the covariant derivative with respect to @xmath .
Thus the trace of the extrinsic curvature to @xmath is @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the ultracold case the vector potential @xmath , that is regular
everywhere including at the horizon, needed to compute the extra Maxwell
boundary term in ( 11.7 ) is @xmath . The integral over @xmath consists
of an integration between @xmath and @xmath along the @xmath surface and
back along @xmath , and of an integration between @xmath and @xmath
along the @xmath surface, and back along the internal infinity surface
@xmath . The non-vanishing contribution to the Maxwell boundary term in
( 11.7 ) comes only from the integration along the internal infinity
boundary @xmath , and is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Due to the fact that @xmath it might seem that the contribution from (
11.21 ), ( 11.22 ) and ( 11.24 ) diverges. This is not however the case
since these three terms cancel each other. The only contribution to the
action ( 11.7 ) of the higher dimensional ultracold instanton (onwards
the subscript “ @xmath ” means ultracold) comes from ( 11.23 ) yielding

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, for @xmath , reduces to the result of [ 169 ] . The ultracold
action coincides with the minimum value of the cold action range ( 11.13
), and is equal to one half the maximum value of the Nariai action range
( 11.19 ).

The pair creation rate of extreme ultracold black holes is given by (
11.6 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is given by ( 11.8 ), and @xmath is the one-loop
contribution not computed here. The process studied in this subsection
describes the nucleation of a higher dimensional Nariai @xmath
Bertotti-Robinson universe that is unstable, and decays through the pair
creation of extreme ultracold black holes.

##### 11.2.4 The higher dimensional lukewarm pair creation rate

The evaluation of the Euclidean action of the higher dimensional
lukewarm instanton follows as in the cold case as long as we replace
@xmath by @xmath . Therefore, the action ( 11.7 ) of the higher
dimensional lukewarm instanton (onwards the subscript “ @xmath ” means
lukewarm) is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the pair creation rate of nonextreme lukewarm black holes is given
by ( 11.6 ).

##### 11.2.5 Pair creation rate of higher dimensional nonextreme
sub-maximal black holes

The cold, Nariai, ultracold and lukewarm instantons are saddle point
solutions free of conical singularities both in the @xmath and @xmath
horizons. The corresponding black holes may then nucleate in the dS
background, and we have computed their pair creation rates in the last
four subsections. However, these particular black holes are not the only
ones that can be pair created. Indeed, it has been shown in [ 155 , 156
] that Euclidean solutions with conical singularities may also be used
as saddle points for the pair creation process. In this way, pair
creation of nonextreme sub-maximal black holes is allowed (by this
nomenclature we mean all the nonextreme black holes other than the
lukewarm ones that are in the region interior to the close line @xmath
in Fig. 10.1 ), and their pair creation rate may be computed. In order
to calculate this rate, the action is given by ( 11.7 ) and, in
addition, it has now an extra contribution from the conical singularity
(c.s.) that is present in one of the horizons ( @xmath , say) given by [
291 , 97 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.28)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the area of the ( @xmath )-sphere spanned by the conical
singularity, and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.29)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the deficit angle associated to the conical singularity at the
horizon @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath being the periods of @xmath that
avoid a conical singularity in the horizons @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The contribution from ( 11.7 ) follows straightforwardly
in a similar way as the one shown in subsection 11.2.4 with the period
of @xmath , @xmath , chosen in order to avoid the conical singularity at
the cosmological horizon, @xmath .

#### 11.3 Discussion of the results

We have studied in detail the quantum process in which a pair of black
holes is created in a higher dimensional de Sitter (dS) background, a
process that in @xmath was previously discussed in [ 169 ] . The energy
to materialize and accelerate the pair comes from the positive
cosmological constant. The dS space is the only background in which we
can discuss analytically the pair creation process of higher dimensional
black holes, since the C-metric and the Ernst solutions, that describe
respectively a pair accelerated by a string and by an electromagnetic
field, are not know yet in a higher dimensional spacetime.

In previous works on black hole pair creation in general background
fields it has been well established that the pair creation rate is
proportional to the exponential of the gravitational entropy @xmath of
the system, @xmath , with the entropy being given by one quarter of the
the total area @xmath of all the horizons present in the instanton,
@xmath . It is straightforward to verify that these relations also hold
for the higher dimensional dS instantons. Indeed, in the cold case, the
instanton has a single horizon, the cosmological horizon at @xmath , in
its Euclidean section, since @xmath is an internal infinity. So, the
total area of the cold instanton is @xmath . Thus, @xmath , where @xmath
is given by ( 11.12 ). In the Nariai case, the instanton has two
horizons in its Euclidean section, namely the cosmological horizon
@xmath and the black hole horizon @xmath , both at @xmath , and thus
they have the same area. So, the total area of the Nariai instanton is
@xmath . Again, one has @xmath , where @xmath is given by ( 11.18 ). In
the ultracold case, the instanton has a single horizon, the Rindler
horizon at @xmath , in its Euclidean section, since @xmath is an
internal infinity. The total area of the ultracold instanton is then
@xmath . Thus, @xmath , where @xmath is given by ( 11.25 ).

The ultracold instanton is a limiting case of both the charged Nariai
instanton and the cold instanton (see Fig. 10.1 ). Then, as expected,
the action of the cold instanton gives, in this limit, the action of the
ultracold instanton (see 11.13 ). However, the ultracold frontier of the
Nariai action is given by two times the ultracold action (see 11.19 ).
The reason for this behavior is clear. Indeed, in the ultracold case and
in the cold case, the respective instantons have a single horizon (the
other possible horizon turns out to be an internal infinity). This
horizon gives the only contribution to the total area, @xmath , and
therefore to the pair creation rate. In the Nariai case, the instanton
has two horizons with the same area, and thus the ultracold limit of the
Nariai action is doubled with respect to the true ultracold action.

A property of the higher dimensional lukewarm instanton is worth of
mention. In @xmath it is known that the lukewarm instanton has an ADM
mass equal to its ADM charge. This relation is valid in several
background fields, e.g., in a dS background, in an electromagnetic
background and in a cosmic string background. For @xmath we have shown
that the dS lukewarm instanton no longer has an ADM mass equal to its
ADM charge.

In order to clarify the physical interpretation of the results, in this
Appendix we heuristically derive the nucleation rates for the processes
discussed in the main body of the paper. An estimate for the nucleation
probability is given by the Boltzmann factor, @xmath , where @xmath is
the energy of the system that nucleates and @xmath is the work done by
the external force @xmath , that provides the energy for the nucleation,
through the typical distance @xmath separating the created pair. We can
then show that the creation probability for a black hole pair in a dS
background is given by @xmath , in agreement with the exact results.
Indeed, one has @xmath , where @xmath is the rest energy of the black
hole, and @xmath is the work provided by the cosmological background. To
derive @xmath one can argue as follows. In the dS case, the Newtonian
potential is @xmath and its derivative yields the force per unit mass or
acceleration, @xmath , where @xmath is the characteristic dS radius,
@xmath . The force can then be written as @xmath , where the
characteristic mass of the system is @xmath . Thus, the characteristic
work is @xmath , where the characteristic distance that separates the
pair at the creation moment is @xmath . So, from the Boltzmann factor we
indeed expect that the creation rate of a black hole pair in a dS
background is given by @xmath . This expression is in agreement with our
results since from ( 10.24 ), one has @xmath , and thus @xmath .

### Chapter 12 Gravitational radiation in higher dimensional spacetimes
and energy released during black hole creation

] ] \minitoc

One expects to finally detect gravitational waves in the forthcoming
years. If this happens, and if the observed waveforms match the
predicted templates, General Relativity will have pass a crucial test.
Moreover, if one manages to cleanly separate gravitational waveforms, we
will open a new and exciting window to the Universe, a window from which
one can look directly into the heart of matter, as gravitational waves
are weakly scattered by matter. A big effort has been spent in the last
years trying to build gravitational wave detectors, and a new era will
begin with gravitational wave astronomy [ 213 , 214 ] . What makes
gravitational wave astronomy attractive, the weakness with which
gravitational waves are scattered by matter, is also the major source of
technical difficulties when trying to develop an apparatus which
interacts with them. Nevertheless, some of these highly non-trivial
technical difficulties have been surmounted, and we have detectors
already operating [ 215 , 216 , 217 ] . Another effort is being
dedicated by theoreticians trying to obtain accurate templates for the
various physical processes that may give rise to the waves impinging on
the detector. We now have a well established theory of wave generation
and propagation, which started with Einstein and his quadrupole formula.
The quadrupole formula expresses the energy lost to gravitational waves
by a system moving at low velocities, in terms of its energy content.
The quadrupole formalism is the most famous example of slow motion
techniques to compute wave generation. All these techniques break
Einstein’s equations non-linearity by imposing a power series in some
small quantity and keeping only the lowest or the lowest few order
terms. The quadrupole formalism starts from a flat background and
expands the relevant quantities in @xmath , where @xmath is the size of
source and @xmath the wavelength of waves. Perturbation formalisms on
the other hand, start from some non-radiative background, whose metric
is known exactly, for example the Schwarzschild metric, and expand in
deviations from that background metric. For a catalog of the various
methods and their description we refer the reader to the review works by
Thorne [ 218 ] and Damour [ 219 ] . The necessity to develop all such
methods was driven of course by the lack of exact radiative solutions to
Einstein’s equations (although there are some worthy exceptions, like
the C-metric [ 84 ] ), and by the fact that even nowadays solving the
full set of Einstein’s equations numerically is a monumental task, and
has been done only for the more tractable physical situations. All the
existing methods seem to agree with each other when it comes down to the
computation of waveforms and energies radiated during physical
situations, and also agree with the few available results from a fully
numerical evolution of Einstein’s equations.

In this chapter we extend some of these results to higher dimensional
spacetimes. There are several reasons why one should now try to do it.
It seems impossible to formulate in four dimensions a consistent theory
which unifies gravity with the other forces in nature. Thus, most
efforts in this direction have considered a higher dimensional arena for
our universe, one example being string theories which have recently made
some remarkable achievements. Moreover, recent investigations [ 193 ]
propose the existence of extra dimensions in our Universe in order to
solve the hierarchy problem, i.e., the huge difference between the
electroweak and the Planck scale, @xmath . The fields of standard model
would inhabit a 4-dimensional sub-manifold, the brane, whereas the
gravitational degrees of freedom would propagate throughout all
dimensions. One of the most spectacular consequences of this scenario
would be the production of black holes at the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN [ 194 , 198 , 197 , 297 ] (for recent relevant work related to this
topic we refer the reader to [ 226 , 225 , 224 , 220 , 222 ] ). Now, one
of the experimental signatures of black hole production will be a
missing energy, perhaps a large fraction of the center of mass energy [
220 ] . This will happen because when the partons collide to form a
black hole, some of the initial energy will be converted to
gravitational waves, and due to the small amplitudes involved, there is
no gravitational wave detector capable of detecting them, so they will
appear as missing. Thus, the collider could in fact indirectly serve as
a gravitational wave detector. This calls for the calculation of the
energy given away as gravitational waves when two high energy particles
collide to form a black hole, which lives in all the dimensions. The
work done so far on this subject [ 201 , 200 ] in higher dimensions, is
mostly geometric, and generalizes a construction by Penrose to find
trapped surfaces on the union of two shock waves, describing boosted
Schwarzschild black holes. On the other hand, there are clues [ 220 ,
222 ] indicating that a formalism described by Weinberg [ 184 ] to
compute the gravitational energy radiated in the collision of two point
particles, gives results correct to a order of magnitude when applied to
the collision of two black holes. This formalism assumes a hard
collision, i.e., a collision lasting zero seconds. It would be important
to apply this formalism in higher dimensions, trying to see if there is
agreement between both results. This will be one of the topics discussed
in this chapter. The other topic we study in this chapter is the
quadrupole formula in higher dimensions. Due to the difficulties in
handling the wave tails in odd dimensions we concentrate our study in
even dimensions.

In this chapter we follow [ 185 ] and it is organized as follows. In
section 12.1 we linearize Einstein’s equations in a flat @xmath
-dimensional background and arrive at an inhomogeneous wave equation for
the metric perturbations. The source free equations are analyzed in
terms of plane waves, and then the general solution to the homogeneous
equation is deduced in terms of the @xmath -dimensional retarded Green’s
function. In section 12.2 we compute the @xmath -dimensional quadrupole
formula (assuming slowly moving sources), expressing the metric and the
radiated energy in terms of the time-time component of the
energy-momentum tensor. We then apply the quadrupole formula to two
cases: a particle in circular motion in a generic background, and a
particle falling into a @xmath -dimensional Schwarzschild black hole. In
section 12.3 we consider the hard collision between two particles, i.e.,
the collision takes zero seconds, and introduce a cutoff frequency
necessary to have meaningful results. We then apply to the case where
one of the colliding particles is a black hole. We propose that this
cutoff should be related to the gravitational quasinormal frequency of
the black hole, and compute some values of the scalar quasinormal
frequencies for higher dimensional Schwarzschild black holes, expecting
that the gravitational quasinormal frequencies will behave in the same
manner. Finally, we apply this formalism to compute the generation of
gravitational radiation during black hole pair creation in four and
higher dimensions, a result that has never been worked out, even for
@xmath . In our presentation we shall mostly follow Weinberg’s [ 184 ]
exposition.

#### 12.1 Linearized @xmath-dimensional Einstein’s equations

Due to the non-linearity of Einstein’s equations, the treatment of the
gravitational radiation problem is not an easy one since the
energy-momentum tensor of the gravitational wave contributes to its own
gravitational field. To overcome this difficulty it is a standard
procedure to work only with the weak radiative solution, in the sense
that the energy-momentum content of the gravitational wave is small
enough in order to allow us to neglect its contribution to its own
propagation. This approach is justified in practice since we expect the
detected gravitational radiation to be of low intensity.

##### 12.1.1 The inhomogeneous wave equation

We begin this subsection by introducing the general background formalism
(whose details can be found, e.g., in [ 184 ] ) that will be needed in
later sections. Then we obtain the linearized inhomogeneous wave
equation.

Greek indices vary as @xmath and latin indices as @xmath and our units
are such that @xmath . We work on a @xmath -dimensional spacetime
described by a metric @xmath that approaches asymptotically the @xmath
-dimensional Minkowski metric @xmath , and thus we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is small, i.e., @xmath , so that it represents small
corrections to the flat background. The exact Einstein field equations,
@xmath (with @xmath being the usual Newton constant), can then be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the part of the Ricci tensor linear in @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath is the effective energy-momentum tensor, containing
contributions from @xmath , the energy-momentum tensor of the matter
source, and @xmath which represents the gravitational contribution. The
pseudo-tensor @xmath contains the difference between the exact Ricci
terms and the Ricci terms linear in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Bianchi identities imply that @xmath is locally conserved,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

Introducing the cartesian coordinates @xmath with @xmath , and
considering a @xmath volume @xmath with a boundary spacelike surface
@xmath with dimension @xmath whose unit exterior normal is @xmath , eq.
( 12.5 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that one may interpret

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the total energy-momentum (pseudo)vector of the system, including
matter and gravitation, and @xmath as the corresponding flux. Since the
matter contribution is contained in @xmath , the flux of gravitational
radiation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this context of linearized general relativity, we neglect terms of
order higher than the first in @xmath and all the indices are raised and
lowered using @xmath . We also neglect the contribution of the
gravitational energy-momentum tensor @xmath (i.e., @xmath ) since from (
12.4 ) we see that @xmath is of higher order in @xmath . Then, the
conservation equations ( 12.5 ) yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this setting and choosing the convenient coordinate system that obeys
the harmonic (also called Lorentz) gauge conditions,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(where @xmath ), the first order Einstein field equations ( 12.2 ) yield

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional Laplacian, and @xmath will be
called the modified energy-momentum tensor of the matter source. Eqs. (
12.11 ) and ( 12.12 ) subject to ( 12.10 ) allow us to find the
gravitational radiation produced by a matter source @xmath .

##### 12.1.2 The plane wave solutions

In vacuum, the linearized equations for the gravitational field are
@xmath or, equivalently, the homogeneous equations @xmath , subjected to
the harmonic gauge conditions ( 12.10 ). The solutions of these
equations, the plane wave solutions, are important since the general
solutions of the inhomogeneous equations ( 12.10 ) and ( 12.11 )
approach the plane wave solutions at large distances from the source.
Setting @xmath with @xmath and @xmath being respectively the frequency
and wave vector, the plane wave solutions can be written as a linear
superposition of solutions of the kind

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is called the polarization tensor and @xmath means the
complex conjugate. These solutions satisfy eq. ( 12.11 ) with @xmath if
@xmath , and obey the harmonic gauge conditions ( 12.10 ) if @xmath .

An important issue that must be addressed is the number of different
polarizations that a gravitational wave in @xmath dimensions can have.
The polarization tensor @xmath , being symmetric, has in general @xmath
independent components. However, these components are subjected to the
@xmath harmonic gauge conditions that reduce by @xmath the number of
independent components. In addition, under the infinitesimal change of
coordinates @xmath , the polarization tensor transforms into @xmath .
Now, @xmath and @xmath describe the same physical system for arbitrary
values of the @xmath parameters @xmath . Therefore, the number of
independent components of @xmath , i.e., the number of polarization
states of a gravitational wave in @xmath dimensions is @xmath . From
this computation we can also see that gravitational waves are present
only when @xmath . Therefore, from now on we assume @xmath whenever we
refer to @xmath . In what concerns the helicity of the gravitational
waves, for arbitrary @xmath the gravitons are always spin @xmath
particles.

To end this subsection on gravitational plane wave solutions, we present
the average gravitational energy-momentum tensor of a plane wave, a
quantity that will be needed later. Notice that in vacuum, since the
matter contribution is zero ( @xmath ), we cannot neglect the
contribution of the gravitational energy-momentum tensor @xmath . From
eq. ( 12.4 ), and neglecting terms of order higher than @xmath , the
gravitational energy-momentum tensor of a plane wave is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and through a straightforward calculation (see e.g. [ 184 ] for details)
we get the average gravitational energy-momentum tensor of a plane wave,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 12.1.3 The @xmath-dimensional retarded Green’s function

The general solution to the inhomogeneous differential equation ( 12.11
) may be found in the usual way in terms of a Green’s function as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Green’s function @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Dirac delta function. In the momentum representation
this reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . To evaluate this, it is convenient to perform the @xmath
-integral by using spherical coordinates in the ( @xmath )-dimensional
@xmath -space. The required transformation is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The result for the retarded Green’s function in these spherical
coordinates is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the Heaviside function defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The function @xmath is a Bessel function [ 298 , 292 ] . The structure
of the retarded Green’s function will depend on the parity of @xmath ,
as we shall see. This dependence on the parity, which implies major
differences between even and odd spacetime dimensions, is connected to
the structure of the Bessel function. For even @xmath , the index of the
Bessel function is semi-integer and then the Bessel function is
expressible in terms of elementary functions, while for odd @xmath this
does not happen. A concise explanation of the difference between
retarded Green’s function in even and odd @xmath , and the physical
consequences that entails is presented in [ 299 ] (see also [ 300 , 301
, 302 ] ). A complete derivation of the Green’s function in higher
dimensional spaces may be found in Hassani [ 303 ] . The result is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is sometimes convenient to work with the Fourier transform (in the
time coordinate) of the Green’s function. One finds [ 303 ] an
analytical result independent of the parity of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a modified Bessel function [ 292 , 298 ] . Of course,
the different structure of the Green’s function for different @xmath is
again embodied in these Bessel functions. Equations ( 12.22 ) and (
12.24 ), are one of the most important results we shall use in this
chapter. For @xmath ( 12.22 ) obviously reproduce well known results [
303 ] . Now, one sees from eq. ( 12.22 ) that although there are delta
function derivatives on the even- @xmath Green’s function, the
localization of the Green’s function on the light cone is preserved.
However, eq. ( 12.23 ) tells us that the retarded Green’s function for
odd dimensions is non-zero inside the light cone. The consequence, as
has been emphasized by different authors [ 299 , 302 , 304 ] , is that
for odd @xmath the Huygens principle does not hold: the fact that the
retarded Green’s function support extends to the interior of the light
cone implies the appearance of radiative tails in ( 12.16 ). In other
words, we still have a propagation phenomenum for the wave equation in
odd dimensional spacetimes, in so far as a localized initial state
requires a certain time to reach a point in space. Huygens principle no
longer holds, because the effect of the initial state is not sharply
limited in time: once the signal has reached a point in space, it
persists there indefinitely as a reverberation.

This fact coupled to the analytic structure of the Green’s function in
odd dimensions make it hard to get a grip on radiation generation in odd
dimensional spacetimes. Therefore, from now on we shall focus on even
dimensions, for which the retarded Green’s function is given by eq. (
12.22 ).

##### 12.1.4 The even @xmath-dimensional retarded solution in the wave
zone

The retarded solution for the metric perturbation @xmath , obtained by
using the retarded Green’s function ( 12.22 ) and discarding the
homogeneous solution in ( 12.16 ) will be given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath as in eq. ( 12.22 ). For @xmath for example one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is the well known result. For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath means derivative of the Dirac delta function with
respect to its argument. For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.28)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that in general even- @xmath dimensions the Green’s function
consists of inverse integer powers in r, spanning all values between
@xmath and @xmath , including these ones. Now, the retarded solution is
given by eq. ( 12.25 ) as a product of the Green’s function times the
modified energy-momentum tensor @xmath . The net result of having
derivatives on the delta functions is to transfer these derivatives to
the energy-momentum tensor as time derivatives (this can be seen by
integrating ( 12.25 ) by parts in the @xmath -integral).

A close inspection then shows that the retarded field possesses a kind
of peeling property in that it consists of terms with different fall off
at infinity. Explicitly, this means that the retarded field will consist
of a sum of terms possessing all integer inverse powers in @xmath
between @xmath and @xmath . The term that dies off more quickly at
infinity is the @xmath , typically a static term, since it comes from
the Laplacian. As a matter of fact this term was already observed in the
higher dimensional black hole by Tangherlini [ 202 ] (see also Myers and
Perry [ 203 ] ). We will see that the term falling more slowly, the one
that goes like @xmath , gives rise to gravitational radiation. It is
well defined, in the sense that the power crossing sufficiently large
hyperspheres with different radius is the same, because the volume
element goes as @xmath and the energy as @xmath .

In radiation problems, one is interested in finding out the field at
large distances from the source, @xmath , where @xmath is the wavelength
of the waves, and also much larger than the source’s dimensions @xmath .
This is defined as the wave zone. In the wave zone, one may neglect all
terms in the Green’s function that decay faster than @xmath . So, in the
wave zone, we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.29)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath stands for the @xmath th derivative with respect to time.
For @xmath eq. ( 12.29 ) yields the standard result [ 184 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.30)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To find the Fourier transform of the metric, one uses the representation
( 12.24 ) for the Green’s function. Now, in the wave zone, the Green’s
function may be simplified using the asymptotic expansion for the Bessel
function [ 292 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.31)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This could also have been arrived at directly from ( 12.29 ), using the
rule time derivative @xmath for Fourier transforms. Equations ( 12.29 )
and ( 12.32 ) are one of the most important results derived in this
chapter, and will be the basis for all the subsequent section. Similar
equations, but not as general as the ones presented here, were given by
Chen, Li and Lin [ 305 ] in the context of gravitational radiation by a
rolling tachyon.

To get the energy spectrum, we use ( 12.12 ) yielding

  -- -- -- ---------
           (12.33)
  -- -- -- ---------

#### 12.2 The even @xmath-dimensional quadrupole formula

##### 12.2.1 Derivation of the even @xmath-dimensional quadrupole
formula

When the velocities of the sources that generate the gravitational waves
are small, it is sufficient to know the @xmath component of the
gravitational energy-momentum tensor in order to have a good estimate of
the energy they radiate. In this subsection, we will deduce the @xmath
-dimensional quadrupole formula and in the next subsection we will apply
it to (1) a particle in circular orbit and (2) a particle in free fall
into a @xmath -dimensional Schwarzschild black hole.

We start by recalling that the Fourier transform of the energy-momentum
tensor is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.34)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath means the complex conjugate of the preceding term. Then,
the conservation equations ( 12.9 ) for @xmath applied to eq. ( 12.34 )
yield @xmath . Using this last result we obtain @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath . We can then write the energy spectrum, eq. ( 12.33 ), as
a function only of the spacelike components of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.35)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.36)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At this point, we make a new approximation (in addition to the wave zone
approximation) and assume that @xmath , where @xmath is the source’s
radius. In other words, we assume that the internal velocities of the
sources are small and thus the source’s radius is much smaller than the
characteristic wavelength @xmath of the emitted gravitational waves.
Within this approximation, one can set @xmath in eq. ( 12.34 ) (since
@xmath ). Moreover, after a straightforward calculation, one can also
set in eq. ( 12.35 ) the approximation @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.37)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (12.38)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional solid angle defined in ( 10.12
), we obtain the @xmath -dimensional quadrupole formula

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.39)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Gamma function @xmath is defined in ( 10.13 ). As the
dimension @xmath grows it is seen that the rate of gravitational energy
radiated increases as @xmath . Sometimes it will be more useful to have
the time rate of emitted energy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.40)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath , eq. ( 12.40 ) yields the well known result [ 184 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.41)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 12.2.2 Applications of the quadrupole formula: test particles in a
background geometry

The quadrupole formula has been used successfully in almost all kind of
problems involving gravitational wave generation. By successful we mean
that it agrees with other more accurate methods. Its simplicity and the
fact that it gives results correct to within a few percent, makes it an
invaluable tool in estimating gravitational radiation emission. We shall
in the following present two important examples of the application of
the quadrupole formula.

###### 12.2.2.a A particle in circular orbit

The radiation generated by particles in circular motion was perhaps the
first situation to be considered in the analysis of gravitational wave
generation. For orbits with low frequency, the quadrupole formula yields
excellent results. As expected it is difficult to find in nature a
system with perfect circular orbits, they will in general be elliptic.
In this case the agreement is also remarkable, and one finds that the
quadrupole formalism can account with precision for the increase in
period of the pulsar PSR 1913 @xmath 16, due to gravitational wave
emission [ 306 ] . In four dimensions the full treatment of elliptic
orbital motion is discussed by Peters [ 307 ] . In dimensions higher
than four, it has been shown [ 202 ] that there are no stable geodesic
circular orbits, and so geodesic circular motion is not as interesting
for higher @xmath . For this reason, and also because we only want to
put in evidence the differences that arise in gravitational wave
emission as one varies the spacetime dimension @xmath , we will just
analyze the simple circular, not necessarily geodesic motion, to see
whether the results are non-trivially changed as one increases @xmath .
Consider then two bodies of equal mass @xmath in circular orbits a
distance @xmath apart. Suppose they revolve around the center of mass,
which is at @xmath from both masses, and that they orbit with frequency
@xmath in the @xmath plane. A simple calculation [ 307 , 308 ] yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.42)
     @xmath      (12.43)
     @xmath      (12.44)
  -- -------- -- ---------

independently of the dimension in which they are imbedded and with all
other components being zero. We therefore get from eq. ( 12.40 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.45)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath one gets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.46)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which agrees with known results [ 307 , 308 ] . Eq. ( 12.45 ) is telling
us that as one climbs up in dimension number @xmath , the frequency
effects gets more pronounced.

###### 12.2.2.b A particle falling radially into a higher dimensional
Schwarzschild black hole

As yet another example of the use of the quadrupole formula eq. ( 12.40
) we now calculate the energy given away as gravitational waves when a
point particle, with mass @xmath falls into a @xmath -dimensional
Schwarzschild black hole, a metric first given in [ 202 ] .
Historically, the case of a particle falling into a @xmath Schwarzschild
black hole was one of the first to be studied [ 309 , 310 ] in
connection with gravitational wave generation, and later served as a
model calculation when one wanted to evolve Einstein’s equations fully
numerically [ 311 , 312 ] . This process was first studied [ 310 ] by
solving numerically Zerilli’s [ 309 ] wave equation for a particle at
rest at infinity and then falling into a Schwarzschild black hole. Davis
et al [ 310 ] found numerically that the amount of energy radiated to
infinity as gravitational waves was @xmath , where @xmath is the mass of
the particle falling in and @xmath is the mass of the black hole. It is
found that the @xmath quadrupole formula yields [ 313 ] @xmath , so it
is of the order of magnitude as that given by fully relativistic
numerical results. Despite the fact that the quadrupole formula fails
somewhere near the black hole (the motion is not slow, and the
background is certainly not flat), it looks like one can get an idea of
how much radiation will be released with the help of this formula. Based
on this good agreement, we shall now consider this process but for
higher dimensional spacetimes. The metric for the @xmath -dimensional
Schwarzschild black hole in ( @xmath ) coordinates is (see section 10.1
)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.47)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consider a particle falling along a radial geodesic, and at rest at
infinity. Then, the geodesic equations give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.48)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we make the flat space approximation @xmath . We then have, in
these coordinates, @xmath , and all other components vanish. From (
12.40 ) we get the energy radiated per second, which yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.49)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can perform the derivatives and integrate to get the total energy
radiated. There is a slight problem though, where do we stop the
integration? The expression for the energy diverges at @xmath but this
is no problem, as we know that as the particle approaches the horizon,
the radiation will be infinitely red-shifted. Moreover, the standard
picture [ 313 ] is that of a particle falling in, and in the last stages
being frozen near the horizon. With this in mind we integrate from
@xmath to some point near the horizon, say @xmath , where @xmath is the
horizon radius and @xmath is some number larger than unit, and we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.50)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.51)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To understand the effect of both the dimension number @xmath and the
parameter @xmath on the total energy radiated according to the
quadrupole formula, we list in Table 1 some values @xmath for different
dimensions, and @xmath between @xmath and @xmath .

The parameter @xmath is in fact a measure of our ignorance of what goes
on near the black hole horizon, so if the energy radiated doesn’t vary
much with @xmath it means that our lack of knowledge doesn’t affect the
results very much. For @xmath that happens indeed. Putting @xmath gives
only an energy @xmath times larger than with @xmath , and still very
close to the fully relativistic numerical result of @xmath . However as
we increase @xmath , the effect of @xmath increases dramatically. For
@xmath for example, we can see that a change in @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath gives a corresponding change in @xmath of @xmath to @xmath . This
is @xmath orders of magnitude lower! Since there is as yet no
Regge-Wheeler-Zerilli [ 309 , 314 ] wavefunction for higher dimensional
Schwarzschild black holes, there are no fully relativistic numerical
results to compare our results with. Thus @xmath is just the perfect
dimension to predict, through the quadrupole formula, the gravitational
energy coming from collisions between particles and black holes, or
between small and massive black holes. It is not a problem related to
the quadrupole formalism, but rather one related to @xmath . A small
change in parameters translates itself, for high @xmath , in a large
variation in the final result. Thus, as the dimension @xmath grows, the
knowledge of the cutoff radius @xmath becomes essential to compute
accurately the energy released.

#### 12.3 Instantaneous collisions in even @xmath-dimensions. Energy
released during black hole pair creation

In general, whenever two bodies collide or scatter there will be
gravitational energy released due to the changes in momentum involved in
the process. If the collision is hard meaning that the incoming and
outgoing trajectories have constant velocities, there is a method first
envisaged by Weinberg [ 184 , 315 ] , later explored in [ 316 ] by Smarr
to compute exactly the metric perturbation and energy released. The
method is valid for arbitrary velocities (one will still be working in
the linear approximation, so energies have to be low). Basically, it
assumes a collision lasting for zero seconds. It was found that in this
case the resulting spectra were flat, precisely what one would expect
based on one’s experience with electromagnetism [ 187 ] , and so to give
a meaning to the total energy, a cutoff frequency is needed. This cutoff
frequency depends upon some physical cutoff in the particular problem.
We shall now generalize this construction for arbitrary dimensions.

##### 12.3.1 Derivation of the Radiation Formula in terms of a cutoff
for a head-on collision. Energy released during formation of black hole
at LHC

Consider therefore a system of freely moving particles with @xmath
-momenta @xmath , energies @xmath and ( @xmath )-velocities @xmath ,
which due to the collision change abruptly at @xmath , to corresponding
primed quantities. For such a system, the energy-momentum tensor is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.52)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from which, using eqs. ( 12.32 ) and ( 12.33 ) one can get the
quantities @xmath and also the radiation emitted. Let us consider the
particular case in which one has a head-on collision of two particles,
particle @xmath with mass @xmath and Lorentz factor @xmath , and
particle @xmath with mass @xmath with Lorentz factor @xmath , colliding
to form a particle at rest. Without loss of generality, one may orient
the axis so that the motion is in the @xmath plane, and the @xmath axis
is the radiation direction [see ( 12.19 )]. We then have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.53)
     @xmath      (12.54)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Momentum conservation leads to the additional relation @xmath .
Replacing ( 12.53 ) and ( 12.54 ) in the energy-momentum tensor ( 12.52
) and using ( 12.33 ) we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.55)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that the for arbitrary (even) @xmath the spectrum is not flat.
Flatness happens only for @xmath . For any @xmath the total energy,
integrated over all frequencies would diverge so one needs a cutoff
frequency which shall depend on the particular problem under
consideration. Integrating ( 12.55 ) from @xmath to the cutoff frequency
@xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.56)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Two limiting cases are of interest here, namely (i) the collision
between identical particles and (ii) the collision between a light
particle and a very massive one. In case (i) replacing @xmath , @xmath ,
eq. ( 12.56 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.57)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In case (ii) considering @xmath , @xmath , eq. ( 12.56 ) yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.58)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that the technique just described is expected to break down if
the velocities involved are very low, since then the collision would not
be instantaneous. In fact a condition for this method to work would can
be stated

Indeed, one can see from eq. ( 12.56 ) that if @xmath , @xmath , even
though we know (see Subsection ( 12.3.1 )) that @xmath . In any case, if
the velocities are small one can use the quadrupole formula instead.

##### 12.3.2 Applications: The cutoff frequency when one of the
particles is a black hole and radiation from black hole pair creation

###### 12.3.2.a The cutoff frequency when one of the head-on colliding
particles is a black hole

We shall now restrict ourselves to the case (ii) of last subsection, in
which at least one of the particles participating in the collision is a
massive black hole, with mass @xmath (where we have put @xmath and
@xmath ). Formulas ( 12.56 )- ( 12.58 ) are useless unless one is able
to determine the cutoff frequency @xmath present in the particular
problem under consideration. In the situation where one has a small
particle colliding at high velocities with a black hole, it has been
suggested by Smarr [ 316 ] that the cutoff frequency should be @xmath ,
presumably because the characteristic collision time is dictated by the
large black hole whose radius is @xmath . Using this cutoff he finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.59)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The exact result, using a relativistic perturbation approach which
reduces to the numerical integration of a second order differential
equation (the Zerilli wavefunction), has been given by Cardoso and Lemos
[ 222 ] , as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.60)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is equivalent to saying that @xmath , and so it looks like the
cutoff is indeed the inverse of the horizon radius. However, in the
numerical work by Cardoso and Lemos, it was found that it was not the
presence of an horizon that contributed to this cutoff, but the presence
of a potential barrier @xmath outside the horizon. By decomposing the
field in tensorial spherical harmonics with index @xmath standing for
the angular quantum number, we found that for each @xmath , the spectrum
is indeed flat (as predicted by eq. ( 12.56 ) for @xmath ), until a
cutoff frequency @xmath which was numerically equal to the lowest
gravitational quasinormal frequency @xmath . For @xmath the spectrum
decays exponentially. This behavior is illustrated in Fig. 1.

The quasinormal frequencies [ 317 ] are those frequencies that
correspond to only outgoing waves at infinity and only ingoing waves
near the horizon. As such the gravitational quasinormal frequencies will
in general have a real and an imaginary part, the latter denoting
gravitational wave emission and therefore a decay in the perturbation.
There have been a wealth of works dwelling on quasinormal modes on
asymptotically flat spacetimes [ 317 ] , due to its close connection
with gravitational wave emission, and also on non-asymptotically flat
spacetimes, like asymptotically anti-de Sitter [ 318 ] or asymptotically
de Sitter [ 319 ] spacetimes, mainly due to the AdS/CFT and dS/CFT [ 320
] correspondence conjecture. We argue here that it is indeed the
quasinormal frequency that dictates the cutoff, and not the horizon
radius. For @xmath it so happens that the weighted average of @xmath is
@xmath , which, as we said, is quite similar to @xmath . The reason for
the cutoff being dictated by the quasinormal frequency can be understood
using some WKB intuition. The presence of a potential barrier outside
the horizon means that waves with some frequencies get reflected back on
the barrier while others can cross. Frequencies such that @xmath is
lower than the maximum barrier height @xmath will be reflected back to
infinity where they will be detected. However, frequencies @xmath larger
than the maximum barrier height cross the barrier and enter the black
hole, thereby being absorbed and not contributing to the energy detected
at infinity. So only frequencies @xmath lower than this maximum barrier
height are detected at infinity. It has been shown [ 321 ] that the
gravitational quasinormal frequencies are to first order equal to the
square root of the maximum barrier height. In view of this picture, and
considering the physical meaning of the cutoff frequency, it seems quite
natural to say that the cutoff frequency is equal to the quasinormal
frequency. If the frequencies are higher than the barrier height, they
don’t get reflected back to infinity. This discussion is very important
to understand how the total energy varies with the number @xmath of
dimensions. In fact, if we set @xmath , we find that the total energy
radiated decreases rapidly with the dimension number, because @xmath
increases rapidly with the dimension. This conflicts with recent results
[ 201 , 200 ] , which using shock waves that describe boosted
Schwarzschild black holes, and searching for apparent horizons, indicate
an increase with @xmath . So, we need the gravitational quasinormal
frequencies for higher dimensional Schwarzschild black holes. To arrive
at an wave equation for gravitational perturbations of higher
dimensional Schwarzschild black holes, and therefore to compute its
gravitational quasinormal frequencies, one needs to decompose Einstein’s
equations in D-dimensional tensorial harmonics, which would lead to some
quite complex expressions. It is not necessary to go that far though,
because one can get an idea of how the gravitational quasinormal
frequencies vary by searching for the quasinormal frequencies of scalar
perturbations, and scalar quasinormal frequencies are a lot easier to
find. One hopes that the scalar frequencies will behave with @xmath in
the same manner as do the gravitational ones. Scalar perturbations in
@xmath -dimensional Schwarzschild spacetimes obey the wave equation
(consult [ 322 ] for details)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.61)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The potential @xmath appearing in equation ( 12.61 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.62)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the eigenvalue of the Laplacian on the hypersphere
@xmath , the tortoise coordinate @xmath is defined as @xmath , and
@xmath . We have found the quasinormal frequencies of spherically
symmetric ( @xmath ) scalar perturbations, by using a WKB approach
developed by Schutz, Will and collaborators [ 321 ] . The results are
presented in Table 2, where we also show the maximum barrier height of
the potential in eq. ( 12.62 ), as well as the horizon radius.

The first thing worth noticing is that the real part of the scalar
quasinormal frequency is to first order reasonably close to the square
root of the maximum barrier height @xmath , supporting the previous
discussion. Furthermore, the scalar quasinormal frequency grows more
rapidly than the inverse of the horizon radius @xmath as one increases
@xmath . In fact, the scalar quasinormal frequency grows with @xmath
while the horizon radius @xmath gets smaller. Note that from pure
dimensional arguments, for fixed @xmath , @xmath . The statement here is
that the constant of proportionality depends on the dimension @xmath ,
more explicitly it grows with @xmath , and can be found from Table 2.
Assuming that the gravitational quasinormal frequencies will have the
same behavior (and some very recent studies [ 323 ] relating black hole
entropy and damped quasinormal frequencies seem to point that way), the
total energy radiated will during high-energy collisions does indeed
increase with @xmath , as some studies [ 201 , 200 ] seem to indicate.

###### 12.3.2.b The gravitational energy radiated during black hole pair
creation

As a new application of this instantaneous collision formalism, we will
now consider the gravitational energy released during the quantum
creation of pairs of black holes, a process which as far as we know has
not been analyzed in the context of gravitational wave emission, even
for @xmath . It is well known that vacuum quantum fluctuations produce
virtual electron-positron pairs. These pairs can become real [ 130 ] if
they are pulled apart by an external electric field, in which case the
energy for the pair materialization and acceleration comes from the
external electric field energy. Likewise, a black hole pair can be
created in the presence of an external field whenever the energy pumped
into the system is enough in order to make the pair of virtual black
holes real (see chapter 9 ). If one tries to predict the spectrum of
radiation coming from pair creation, one expects of course a spectrum
characteristic of accelerated masses but one also expects that this
follows some kind of signal indicating pair creation. In other words,
the process of pair creation itself, which involves the sudden creation
of particles, must imply emission of radiation. It is this phase we
shall focus on, forgetting the subsequent emission of radiation caused
by the acceleration.

Pair creation is a pure quantum-mechanical process in nature, with no
classical explanation. But given that the process does occur, one may
ask about the spectrum and intensity of the radiation accompanying it.
The sudden creation of pairs can be viewed for our purposes as an
instantaneous creation of particles (i.e., the time reverse process of
instantaneous collisions), the violent acceleration of particles
initially at rest to some final velocity in a very short time, and the
technique described at the beginning of this section applies. This is
quite similar to another pure quantum-mechanical process, the beta
decay. The electromagnetic radiation emitted during beta decay has been
computed classically by Chang and Falkoff [ 186 ] and is also presented
in Jackson [ 187 ] . The classical calculation is similar in all aspects
to the one described in this section (the instantaneous collision
formalism) assuming the sudden acceleration to energies @xmath of a
charge initially at rest, and requires also a cutoff in the frequency,
which has been assumed to be given by the uncertainty principle @xmath .
Assuming this cutoff one finds that the agreement between the classical
calculation and the quantum calculation [ 186 ] is extremely good
(specially in the low frequency regime), and more important, was
verified experimentally. Summarizing, formula ( 12.57 ) also describes
the gravitational energy radiated when two black holes, each with mass
@xmath and energy @xmath form through quantum pair creation. The typical
pair creation time can be estimated by the uncertainty principle @xmath
, and thus we find the cutoff frequency as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.63)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we would like to draw the reader’s attention to the fact that the
units of Planck’s constant @xmath change with dimension number @xmath :
according to our convention of setting @xmath the units of @xmath are
@xmath . With this cutoff, we find the spectrum of the gravitational
radiation emitted during pair creation to be given by ( 12.55 ) with
@xmath and @xmath (we are considering the pair creation of two identical
black holes):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.64)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the total frequency integrated energy per solid angle is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.65)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For example, in four dimensions and for pairs with @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.66)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and will have for the total energy radiated during production itself,
using the cutoff frequency ( 12.63 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.67)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This could lead, under appropriate numbers of @xmath and @xmath to huge
quantities. Although one cannot be sure as to the cutoff frequency, and
therefore the total energy ( 12.67 ), it is extremely likely that, as
was verified experimentally in beta decay, the zero frequency limit (
12.66 ) is exact.

#### 12.4 Summary and discussion

We have developed the formalism to compute gravitational wave generation
in higher @xmath dimensional spacetimes, with @xmath even. Several
examples have been worked out, and one cannot help the feeling that our
apparently four dimensional world is the best one to make predictions
about the intensity of gravitational waves in concrete situations, in
the sense that a small variation of parameters leads in high @xmath to a
huge variation of the energy radiated. A lot more work is still needed
if one wants to make precise predictions about gravitational wave
generation in @xmath dimensional spacetimes. For example, it would be
important to find a way to treat gravitational perturbations of higher
dimensional Schwarzschild black holes. One of the examples worked out,
the gravitational radiation emitted during black hole pair creation, had
not been previously considered in the literature, and it seems to be a
good candidate, even in @xmath , to radiate intensely through
gravitational waves.

] ]