### 13 Non-Mixmaster dynamics

In this section, we discuss the past asymptotic dynamics of SH
subclasses with non-generic @xmath action. The conditions for OT @xmath
action, HO KVF and diagonal @xmath action are given by ( 256 )–( 258 )
respectively. Figures 4 – 5 summarized the hierarchy for these SH
subclasses. Tables 5 – 7 list the variables and the additional
restrictions.

For each entry in Tables 5 – 7 , we combine the unstable arcs of the
curvature, frame and tilt transition sets in Figure 11 and look for the
remaining stable arcs on the Kasner circles @xmath and @xmath . In each
case, sequences of transition sets will terminate at some stable arc.
For each class the past attractor is an arc or union of arcs on the
Kasner circles. The result is that each orbit, except for a set of
measure zero, is past asymptotic to a Kasner equilibrium point.

For SH cosmologies with OT @xmath action ( 256 ), the @xmath trigger is
zero, making the Kasner arc @xmath on @xmath in Figure 11 stable. The
corresponding arc on @xmath is unstable due to the tilt. Thus the
conjectured past attractor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -- -------

The past attractor for the non-tilted case (i.e. @xmath ) is also given
by ( 286 ), except for Bianchi II, whose past attractor is a bigger set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (287)
  -- -------- -- -------

For SH cosmologies with one HO KVF ( 257 ), there is only one trigger,
@xmath . With one tilt degree of freedom, from Figure 11 , we see that
the conjectured past attractor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (288)
  -- -------- -- -------

For non-tilted models, the past attractor is the point @xmath on @xmath
. Finally, we note that the past attractor for the case with two tilt
degrees of freedom is also given by ( 288 ). ³¹ ³¹ 31 It turns out that
the set for stable arcs on @xmath , given by

@xmath

is empty, and the arcs for which @xmath is stable on @xmath is identical
to @xmath (compare ( 266 ) with ( 248 )). Finally, the stable arcs on
@xmath , given by

@xmath

simplifies to

@xmath

For SH cosmologies with diagonal @xmath action ( 258 ), there are no
triggers. From Figure 10 , we see that for tilted models ( @xmath ) the
conjectured past attractor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (289)
  -- -------- -- -------

With zero tilt, the past attractor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -- -------

except for Bianchi V, whose past attractor is a smaller set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (291)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 14 Future asymptotics

In this section we discuss the future asymptotic dynamics of @xmath
-compatible SH cosmologies.

##### The role of @xmath

The presence of a cosmological constant @xmath simplifies the future
asymptotic dynamics of SH cosmologies dramatically, as shown by Wald
1983 [ 80 ] . He proved, for all SH cosmologies excluding Bianchi type
IX, subject to certain restrictions on the matter content, that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (292)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Hubble scalar and @xmath is the shear tensor. In
other words, the cosmological models are asymptotic to the de Sitter
solution.

Starobinskiǐ 1983 [ 67 ] discussed the asymptotic dynamics of
cosmologies without symmetry assumptions and provided a conjecture for
behaviour of the tilt variables, an issue that Wald had not addressed.
He called the positive cosmological constant “the best isotropizer”.

Our goal is to describe the effect of including a positive cosmological
constant @xmath from the perspective of the Hubble-normalized state
space. First, including @xmath increases the dimension of the
Hubble-normalized state space by one, by adjoining the Hubble-normalized
variable @xmath . Second, the Gauss constraint ( 196 ) implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -- -------

The condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (294)
  -- -------- -- -------

with ( 196 ) and ( 193 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (295)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the evolution equation ( 204 ) for @xmath is identically satisfied.
Equations ( 294 )–( 295 ) thus define an invariant set. The evolution
equation ( 189 ) evaluated on the invariant set ( 294 )–( 295 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (296)
  -- -------- -- -------

which implies that equilibrium points must satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (297)
  -- -------- -- -------

Evolution equations ( 201 )–( 203 ) and ( 209 ) evaluated on this
invariant set give

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (298)
     @xmath   @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which imply that the equilibrium points are

  -- -- -- -------
           (300)
  -- -- -- -------

We shall refer to the set ( 294 )–( 295 ), ( 297 ) and ( 300 ) as the de
Sitter invariant set .

The evolution equation ( 204 ) for @xmath , ( 193 ) and ( 293 ) imply
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (301)
  -- -------- -- -------

which implies that @xmath is monotone increasing, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (302)
  -- -------- -- -------

The presence of @xmath thus has no effect on the past asymptotic
dynamics, but destabilizes all equilibrium points on the set @xmath into
the future. That @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (303)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a result, the Weyl curvature variables also tend to zero:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (304)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since there are no equilibrium points with @xmath , as @xmath the
solutions must approach the de Sitter invariant set. The tilt variables
have the following limits:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (305)
  -- -------- -- -------

See Lim et al . 2004 [ 48 ] , Appendix B for a proof.

##### The case @xmath

The future dynamics in the case @xmath is much more complicated than in
the case @xmath , and depends significantly on the Bianchi type and on
the equation of state parameter @xmath . The future dynamics for the
non-tilted case has been completely analyzed, ³² ³² 32 See WE,
Wainwright, Hancock & Uggla 1999 [ 78 ] , Nilsson, Hancock & Wainwright
2000 [ 56 ] , Horwood et al . 2003 [ 38 ] and Hewitt et al . 2003 [ 36 ]
. but much remains to be done as regards the tilted case. Based on the
known cases – the Bianchi II and VI @xmath subclasses (see [ 35 ] and [
32 ] respectively), non-tilted equilibrium points in the interior (
@xmath ) of the state space, which act as the future attractor for
non-tilted models, are destabilized by the tilt as @xmath increases. The
resulting bifurcations lead to the creation of tilted equilibrium points
that act as the future attractor.

Table 8 gives an overview of the work on tilted @xmath -compatible SH
cosmologies (all with @xmath ) using Hubble-normalized variables. ³³ ³³
33 See WE for references to work on tilted SH cosmologies using other
approaches. Hervik and Coley 2004 [ 33 ] are currently analyzing the
future dynamics of tilted Bianchi VI @xmath cosmologies, and a
preliminary result suggests that a complicated, periodic orbit attractor
exists for a certain range of @xmath .

The class of SH cosmologies of Bianchi type VII is of particular
interest because it contains the flat and open FL cosmologies as
isotropic special cases (flat FL as a special case of VII @xmath and
open FL as a special case of VII @xmath ).

{comment}

Figure 13 shows the hierarchy within the Bianchi VII cosmologies.

The Bianchi VII @xmath state space is unbounded: @xmath is not bounded
by the Gauss constraint ( 196 ). This is not an artifact of a bad choice
of spatial frame, since the Weyl curvature scalars become unbounded as
@xmath ( @xmath appears in ( 211 )–( 212 ) and ( 216 )–( 217 )). In
other words, the Hubble-normalized Weyl curvature scalars are unbounded
on the Bianchi VII @xmath state space. The detailed analysis of the
non-tilted Bianchi VII @xmath cosmologies shows that if @xmath , they
isotropize as regards the shear (i.e. @xmath as @xmath ) even though
@xmath , but that the Weyl curvature diverges if @xmath [ 78 ] [ 56 ] .
Preliminary investigation of the tilted models [ 47 ] indicates that no
tilted equilibrium points exist for Bianchi VII @xmath cosmologies. We
expect that if @xmath , they isotropize as regards the shear. This
matter requires further investigation.

{comment}

##### Rotation-invariant variables

The spatial gauge choice ( 222 ) is not perfect – the invariant set
@xmath that it exploits becomes lost when the @xmath action specializes
to OT (it no longer picks out a preferred direction because @xmath ). As
a result, the rotation freedom returns to yield one redundant dimension
for the state space. The culprits are the Bianchi VII cosmologies with
OT @xmath action, which seem to lack a smooth invariant set that can be
exploited when choosing an analytic spatial gauge.

Choosing a spatial gauge is awkward. There is no completely satisfactory
choice, though ( 222 ) appears to be the best. An alternative way to
remove the redundant dimension is by using only the rotation-invariant
scalars formed from the various 2D tensors @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (306)
  -- -------- -- -------

See Hewitt & Wainwright 1993 [ art:HewittWainwright1993 ] and WE,
Section 7.1.1 for application to non-tilted SH cosmologies with OT
@xmath action (and @xmath ). An unsuccessful attempt at SH cosmologies
with generic @xmath action was made by Nilsson 1999 [ com:Nilsson1999 ]
.

For completeness, we give the equations for tilted SH cosmologies with
OT @xmath action and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (307)
     @xmath   @xmath      (308)
     @xmath   @xmath      (309)
     @xmath   @xmath      (310)
     @xmath   @xmath      (311)
     @xmath   @xmath      (312)
     @xmath   @xmath      (313)
     @xmath   @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (315)
     @xmath   @xmath      (316)
     @xmath   @xmath      (317)
     @xmath   @xmath      (318)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

There is one constraint (from the @xmath constraint):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (319)
  -- -------- -- -------

For Bianchi VI and VII, we have the following identity:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -- -------

The variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (321)
  -- -------- -- -------

The rotation-invariant system provides an alternative framework for
analyzing the future asymptotics.

### Chapter \thechapter The state space for @xmath cosmologies

In this chapter, we use the 1+1+2 orthonormal frame formalism as
developed in Section 6 to formulate the evolution equations for @xmath
cosmologies. We also introduce the notion of asymptotic silence and the
silent boundary , which provides the link between @xmath dynamics and SH
dynamics.

#### 15 The evolution equations

The starting point for deriving the evolution equations for @xmath
cosmologies is the 1+1+2 form of the orthonormal frame equations. As
discussed in Section 7 we normalize the variables for @xmath cosmologies
using the area expansion rate @xmath , as motivated by van Elst et al .
2002 [ 74 ] . @xmath -normalization is advantageous only when used in
conjunction with the so-called separable area gauge , introduced by van
Elst et al . 2002 [ 74 ] in the context of OT @xmath cosmologies.

The separable area gauge condition is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (322)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using the @xmath constraint ( 92 ) we find that @xmath , introduced
in ( 122 ), is independent of @xmath , which implies that we may
reparametrize @xmath to set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (323)
  -- -------- -- -------

A special case of the separable area gauge is the timelike area gauge ,
for which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (324)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gauge is equivalent to the one that has been widely used in the
study of vacuum OT @xmath cosmologies using the metric approach (see,
for example, Rendall & Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] ). Although the timelike area
gauge is simpler than the separable area gauge in a number of respects
(see Sections 24 , 25 and 26 ), we shall resist setting @xmath , since
the separable area gauge enables one to include all @xmath -compatible
SH cosmologies as special cases, as will be explained in Section 16 .

As in Section 11 , for convenience we introduce the following notation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (326)
  -- -------- -- -------

The 1+1+1+1 @xmath -normalized evolution equations and constraints then
follow from the system ( 62 )–( 78 ), and are given below. In the
process, we replace @xmath by @xmath using the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (327)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see ( 118 )), and normalize the variables using ( 115 )–( 116 ). The
variables @xmath and @xmath are introduced and are given by ( 129 ) and
( 130 ) respectively. We remind the reader that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (328)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### @xmath system (@xmath-normalized)

Evolution equations for the gravitational field:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (329)
     @xmath   @xmath      (330)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (331)
     @xmath   @xmath      (332)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (333)
     @xmath   @xmath      (334)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (335)
     @xmath   @xmath      (336)
     @xmath   @xmath      (337)
     @xmath   @xmath      (338)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (339)
     @xmath   @xmath      (340)
     @xmath   @xmath      (341)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Constraint equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (342)
     @xmath   @xmath      (343)
     @xmath   @xmath      (344)
     @xmath   @xmath      (345)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Evolution equations for the matter:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (346)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (347)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (348)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (349)
     @xmath   @xmath      (350)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (351)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (352)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that we have used the @xmath constraint ( 67 ) to solve for @xmath
, giving ( 340 ). The @xmath constraint ( 345 ) is an immediate
consequence of the definitions ( 123 ) and @xmath . Equation ( 329 ) is
the @xmath -normalized form of equation ( 93 ). The evolution equations
for @xmath are derived in the same manner as explained in Section 11 for
SH cosmologies. They were first derived by Weaver 2002 [ 81 ] for
generic @xmath cosmologies.

Three useful auxiliary equations are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (353)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (354)
     @xmath   @xmath      (355)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 353 ) is derived from ( 15 ) and ( 15 ), while ( 355 ) is
derived from the commutator @xmath in ( 133 ) acting on @xmath .
Equation ( 353 ) becomes algebraic and convenient to use in the timelike
area gauge ( 324 ). Equation ( 355 ) is not used for numerical
simulations, but is useful for analysis.

It follows from ( 81 )–( 86 ) and ( 132 ) that the Weyl curvature
variables are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (356)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (357)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (358)
     @xmath   @xmath      (359)
     @xmath   @xmath      (360)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (361)
     @xmath   @xmath      (362)
     @xmath   @xmath      (363)
     @xmath   @xmath      (364)
     @xmath   @xmath      (365)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the @xmath and @xmath constraints have been used to simplify
@xmath and @xmath respectively.

At this stage the @xmath -normalized state vector is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (366)
  -- -------- -- -------

The variable @xmath is to be determined by choosing a spatial gauge, and
the final form of the state vector depends on this choice, as we now
describe.

###### The spatial gauge

We use a @xmath -dependent rotation (see Appendix II ) to rotate the
spatial frame vectors @xmath so that @xmath . The evolution equation (
337 ) and the constraint ( 343 ) then give

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (367)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the shear spatial gauge ( 222 ) introduced for @xmath
-compatible SH cosmologies. Alternatively, we can use the Killing
spatial gauge ( 221 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (368)
  -- -------- -- -------

Both gauges specialize to ( 223 ) for generic @xmath cosmologies with
fewer than three tilt degrees of freedom. The motivation for using the
shear spatial gauge rather than the Killing spatial gauge is the
compatibility of the former with all @xmath -compatible SH cosmologies.

Using the shear spatial gauge ( 367 ), the final @xmath -normalized
state vector for @xmath cosmologies is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (369)
  -- -------- -- -------

together with the parameter @xmath .

Separating @xmath from the rest of the variables as follows,

  ------- -------- -------- -- -------
          @xmath   @xmath      (370)
  where                        
          @xmath   @xmath      (371)
  ------- -------- -------- -- -------

we can write the system of evolution equations and constraints ( 329 )–(
350 ) in a concise symbolic form.

Evolution equations and constraints:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (372)
     @xmath      (373)
     @xmath      (374)
  -- -------- -- -------

In addition we write the expression ( 340 ) for the spatial gradient
@xmath of the normalization factor @xmath symbolically as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (375)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Features of @xmath-normalization and separable area gauge

The principal advantage of using @xmath -normalized variables and the
associated separable area gauge is that it leads to evolution equations
that are first order in the spatial derivatives as well as the time
derivatives, i.e. a first order quasi-linear system of PDEs, which is
desirable for numerical simulations. In contrast, if we were to use
Hubble-normalized variables and the associated separable volume gauge
(see Uggla et al . 2003 [ 72 ] ), then the evolution equations would
contain second spatial derivative terms. The reason for this difference
is that ( 340 ) gives an algebraic expression for @xmath , whereas when
using Hubble-normalized variables and the associated separable volume
gauge, the expression for @xmath contains first order spatial
derivatives, which lead to second spatial derivatives since the equation
for @xmath contains the spatial derivative @xmath . A minor variation of
the formulation ( 370 )–( 375 ) is possible due to the fact that ( 15 )
is linear in @xmath , allowing one to replace @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (376)
  -- -------- -- -------

(substitute ( 340 ) in ( 15 ) and solve for @xmath ). ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 We
restrict to models with @xmath , i.e. models with a timelike gradient
vector of the @xmath area density. See van Elst et al . 2002 [ 74 ] ,
equation (62). Coupled with the fact that @xmath does not appear in the
evolution equations, this again leads to a first order quasi-linear
system of PDEs. We shall make use of this possibility when doing
numerical simulations.

#### 16 Invariant subsets of the @xmath-normalized state space

In this section, we explain the important invariant sets and equilibrium
points within the @xmath state space, and the link with the SH state
space.

###### The @xmath hierarchy

We now revisit the hierarchy of the action of the @xmath group and the
tilt degrees of freedom, as shown in Figure 2 , and give the defining
conditions in terms of the state variables ( 371 ).

For OT @xmath cosmologies, ( 138 ) and ( 367 ) imply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (377)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath cosmologies with one HO KVF, ( 135 ) and ( 367 ) imply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (378)
  -- -------- -- -------

For diagonal @xmath cosmologies, ( 377 ) and ( 378 ) imply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (379)
  -- -------- -- -------

The hierarchy of invariant sets is summarized in Table 9 , which lists
the variables and the additional restrictions. We have omitted @xmath in
Table 9 for simplicity and ease of comparison with Tables 4 – 7 for
@xmath -compatible SH cosmologies.

###### SH dynamics again

To specialize to @xmath -compatible SH models (see Figures 3 – 5 ), one
sets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (380)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the separable area gauge ( 322 ) coincides with the @xmath -adapted
gauge of SH cosmologies. The system ( 373 )–( 375 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (381)
     @xmath      (382)
  -- -------- -- -------

and ( 372 ) decouples. The system ( 381 )–( 382 ), given in detail by (
329 )–( 350 ) subject to ( 380 ), describes the dynamics of @xmath
-compatible SH cosmologies, but in @xmath -normalized variables, and is
fully equivalent to the Hubble-normalized system, given by ( 184 )–( 204
).

###### The silent boundary

The evolution equations ( 329 ) and ( 355 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (383)
  -- -------- -- -------

imply that the conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (384)
  -- -------- -- -------

define an invariant subset of the evolution equations, which we shall
call the silent boundary . ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 van Elst et al . 2002 [ 74 ] define
the silent boundary to be @xmath , with no restrictions on @xmath .
Using this definition, Andersson et al . 2004 [ 3 ] relate the vacuum
@xmath dynamics to the dynamics of spatially self-similar cosmologies
(see sets (2) and (3) on page S39 of [ 3 ] ). The difference here does
not affect the past asymptotic dynamics, as spatially self-similar
cosmologies and SH cosmologies have the same past asymptotic dynamics.

It follows by setting @xmath and @xmath in ( 373 )–( 375 ), that the SH
evolution equations ( 381 )–( 382 ) describe the dynamics in the silent
boundary, but now with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (385)
  -- -------- -- -------

In Section 17 we shall present evidence that the dynamics in the silent
boundary approximates the dynamics of @xmath cosmologies in the
asymptotic regimes ( @xmath or, @xmath and @xmath ) in the sense that
@xmath and @xmath tend to zero asymptotically. An important aspect of
this approximation is that equilibrium points for the SH evolution
equations are also equilibrium points for the @xmath evolution equations
on the silent boundary.

###### The Kasner equilibrium points

On the silent boundary in the @xmath -normalized @xmath state space, the
Kasner solutions are described by a parabola of equilibrium points (see
Figure 14 ), given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (386)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (387)
  -- -------- -- -------

The latter equation follows from ( 15 ). From ( 353 ), the deceleration
parameter @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (388)
  -- -------- -- -------

The parabola ( 387 ) is equivalent to the circle

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (389)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the Hubble-normalized state space, as follows from ( 394 ) below. The
Taub Kasner point @xmath (where @xmath ) is not represented on the
parabola, because the @xmath -normalized variables are undefined there.
The corresponding transitions and Mixmaster dynamics can be described in
the @xmath -normalized state space, but their representation in the
Hubble-normalized state space is simpler geometrically.

###### The de Sitter equilibrium points

On the silent boundary in the @xmath -normalized @xmath state space, the
de Sitter equilibrium points are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (390)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (391)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are the same as ( 294 )–( 295 ), ( 297 ) and ( 300 ), except
@xmath are functions of @xmath rather than constants. From ( 15 ), the
deceleration parameter is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (392)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath -normalized and the Hubble-normalized variables coincide here
because @xmath (see equation ( 393 ) below).

###### Visualization of SH and @xmath cosmologies

In the SH state space, an SH cosmology at a fixed time is represented by
a point, and its evolution in time by an orbit. A @xmath cosmology at a
fixed time can be represented by an arc of points in the SH state space,
parametrized by the spatial variable @xmath . The evolution of a @xmath
cosmology along one timeline is represented by an orbit in the SH state
space, and the full evolution of a @xmath cosmology is represented by a
moving arc of points. We shall use this representation in Chapters I and
II to illustrate @xmath solutions in the SH state space.

As discussed in Section 15 , @xmath -normalized variables have the major
advantage of leading to evolution equations that are first order in the
spatial derivatives, and will thus be used for analysis and numerical
simulations. On the other hand, Hubble-normalized variables are directly
related to the standard observational parameters, and give a simpler
representation of the Kasner solutions. We shall thus use them for
displaying the state space and most of the plotted figures in Chapter II
.

To avoid possible confusion between the notation of the
Hubble-normalized variables in Section 11 and of the @xmath -normalized
variables here, we shall use a superscript @xmath for Hubble-normalized
variables for the rest of Part I and Part II of this thesis. Note that
from ( 118 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (393)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this relation, @xmath -normalized variables can be converted into
Hubble-normalized variables as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (394)
  -- -------- -- -------

In addition, the gradients of @xmath and @xmath , defined by ( 101 )–(
102 ) and ( 123 ), are related according to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (395)
     @xmath   @xmath      (396)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is important to note, however, that converting @xmath -normalized
variables to Hubble-normalized variables does not change the temporal or
spatial gauge (we are still using the separable area gauge and the shear
spatial gauge).

When the separable area gauge ( 322 )–( 323 ) and the @xmath -adapted
gauge coincide, ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 This happens for SH cosmologies, and in the
silent boundary of @xmath cosmologies (see below). the time variable
@xmath for the separable area gauge is related to the time variable
@xmath for the @xmath -adapted gauge according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (397)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 17 Asymptotic silence

There is considerable analytical and numerical evidence that the silent
boundary plays a significant role in determining the asymptotic dynamics
of @xmath cosmologies in the following sense: @xmath and @xmath tend to
zero along almost all timelines as @xmath , and if there is a positive
cosmological constant, as @xmath . The significance of this behaviour is
that the asymptotic dynamics of @xmath cosmologies will then be
approximated locally, i.e. along individual timelines, by the dynamics
in the silent boundary, i.e by SH dynamics.

###### Past asymptotic silence

We now define past asymptotic silence as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (398)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the basis of numerical simulations and physical considerations about
the existence of particle horizons (see below), we conjecture that
generic @xmath cosmologies are asymptotically silent into the past:

###### Conjecture \thechapter.1 (Past asymptotic silence).

A typical @xmath cosmology is asymptotically silent into the past along
almost all timelines.

Some analytical evidence for asymptotic silence is provided by the
evolution equations. In the special case of vacuum OT @xmath cosmologies
with @xmath , the evolution equation ( 329 ) for @xmath simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (399)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (400)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive function of @xmath . We note that for a
timeline whose orbit is past asymptotic to the Taub Kasner point @xmath
, @xmath tends to a finite limit @xmath (see Section 18 ). So @xmath
tends to zero along orbits that are not past asymptotic to @xmath . The
evolution equation ( 355 ) for @xmath also simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (401)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the invariant set @xmath , this equation reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (402)
  -- -------- -- -------

and hence along orbits on the invariant set @xmath , @xmath as @xmath .

###### Future asymptotic silence

Similarly, we define future asymptotic silence as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (403)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the basis of numerical simulations, we expect that typical @xmath
cosmologies with @xmath are future asymptotic to the de Sitter solution.
Evaluating ( 329 ) and ( 355 ) on the de Sitter invariant set ( 390 )–(
391 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (404)
  -- -------- -- -------

which imply that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (405)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus we expect that @xmath cosmologies that are asymptotic to the de
Sitter invariant set are asymptotically silent into the future.

###### Physical interpretation of asymptotic silence

The coordinate speed of light in the @xmath -direction is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (406)
  -- -------- -- -------

and it depends on the choice of temporal gauge and the parametrization
of the @xmath - and @xmath -coordinates. In using the separable area
gauge ( 322 )–( 323 ), we have set @xmath . We also note that the slope
of the light cone in the @xmath -direction is the inverse of the
coordinate speed of light:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (407)
  -- -------- -- -------

The physical speed of light has been set to unity by using geometrized
units.

If there exists a particle horizon in the @xmath -direction, then its
coordinate distance (from the observer at @xmath ) at @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (408)
  -- -------- -- -------

The physical distance of the horizon at @xmath from the observer is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (409)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by ( 408 ).

With @xmath , if a particle horizon exists, then @xmath is finite and
(assuming a bounded derivative) @xmath must tend to zero as @xmath . If
we also have @xmath tending to zero, then we have past asymptotic
silence. Thus, past asymptotic silence is interpreted as the existence
of a particle horizon.

Similarly, if there exists an event horizon in the @xmath -direction,
then its coordinate and physical distances are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (410)
     @xmath   @xmath      (411)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With @xmath , if an event horizon exists, then @xmath is finite and
(assuming a bounded derivative) @xmath must tend to zero as @xmath . If
we also have @xmath tending to zero, then we have future asymptotic
silence. Thus, future asymptotic silence is interpreted as the existence
of an event horizon.

###### The significance of the spatial average of @xmath

At a fixed time @xmath , consider a spatial inhomogeneity with a
coordinate wavelength of @xmath . Its physical wavelength is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (412)
  -- -------- -- -------

Suppose that a particle horizon exists. We can make a rough
approximation of the ratio of this physical wavelength to the distance
to the particle horizon. By assuming that @xmath does not vary
dramatically with @xmath , it follows from ( 409 ) and ( 412 ) that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (413)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under a change of @xmath -coordinate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (414)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath transforms as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (415)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the spatial average of @xmath (on @xmath for example), given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (416)
  -- -------- -- -------

is preserved under ( 414 ) provided that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (417)
  -- -------- -- -------

This average has physical significance, as we now explain.

We choose @xmath such that

  -- -- -- -------
           (418)
  -- -- -- -------

Assuming that @xmath has an exponential growth rate from @xmath up to
time @xmath (e.g. in the past asymptotic regime), ( 408 ) reduces to
@xmath , and ( 413 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (419)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spatial average of @xmath is thus a measure of the ratio of the
scale of spatial inhomogeneities and the distance to the particle
horizon. The bigger @xmath is, the shorter the wavelength is relative to
the horizon distance.

This understanding will be helpful in interpreting the numerical
simulations in Chapter II , in which we prescribe periodic boundary
conditions by identifying @xmath with @xmath . ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 In doing so, we
do not regard the universe as being spatially finite, but rather as an
infinite universe with repetitive patterns. In this way, we consider the
particle horizon still exists even when @xmath . In this situation the
maximum coordinate wavelength is @xmath .

### Chapter \thechapter Explicit @xmath cosmologies

In this chapter we give two explicit @xmath solutions that can develop
large spatial gradients on approach to the initial singularity. In the
first solution, the asymptotic form of the (Hubble-normalized) state
vector can have jump discontinuities or “steps”, while in the second
solution the asymptotic form can have “spike” discontinuities. The
explicit solutions allow us to analyze the development of large spatial
gradients in detail.

#### 18 An explicit solution with “steps”

In this section, we discuss an explicit LRS @xmath dust solution, which
can develop step-like structures as it approaches the initial
singularity.

###### The framework

We consider the class of LRS @xmath cosmologies which are defined by the
condition ( 142 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (420)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we drop the index on @xmath . We use the timelike area gauge ( 324
):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (421)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that the spatial gauge is given by ( 222 ), which now simplifies
to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (422)
  -- -------- -- -------

With these restrictions the evolution equations ( 329 )–( 350 ) simplify
dramatically. Firstly the Gauss constraint ( 15 ) defines @xmath
according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (423)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the remaining constraints are satisfied identically. Secondly, the
expressions ( 15 ) and ( 340 ) for @xmath and @xmath become

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (424)
     @xmath   @xmath      (425)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The state vector ( 369 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (426)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 420 )–( 425 ) the evolution equations ( 329 ), ( 346 ), ( 347 )
and ( 350 ) for these variables reduce to the following:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (427)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (428)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (429)
     @xmath   @xmath      (430)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

###### An explicit solution

Consider the ansatz @xmath , and with @xmath . Equation ( 425 ) implies
@xmath , and then ( 429 ) implies @xmath (otherwise @xmath ). Equation (
424 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (431)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath also implies @xmath and @xmath , in accordance with
equations ( 123 ) and ( 345 ). Equations ( 427 )–( 434 ) reduce to the
following evolution equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (432)
     @xmath   @xmath      (433)
     @xmath   @xmath      (434)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

These equations can be solved explicitly, yielding

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (435)
     @xmath   @xmath      (436)
     @xmath   @xmath      (437)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant with dimension @xmath , and @xmath is an
essential arbitrary function, which is required to satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (438)
  -- -------- -- -------

This condition ensures that @xmath for @xmath sufficiently large. If
@xmath , then @xmath assumes all real values while if @xmath , then
@xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (439)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (440)
  -- -------- -- -------

An arbitrary multiplicative function of @xmath in ( 437 ) has been
absorbed by means of @xmath -reparametrization. The shear is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (441)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath , the solution is an LRS Bianchi I dust solution with @xmath .
In addition, if @xmath , the solution is a flat FL solution with @xmath
.

###### Structure of the singularity

For simplicity we shall analyze the structure of the singularity using
the explicit solution ( 435 )–( 437 ). To show that an initial
singularity exists, we show that the matter density @xmath . Using the
definition of @xmath and @xmath and equations ( 435 )–( 436 ), it
follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (442)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to determine the asymptotic state of the singularity, it is
helpful to calculate the Hubble-normalized shear. Equations ( 441 ) and
( 394 ) lead to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (443)
  -- -------- -- -------

It follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (444)
  -- -------- -- -------

Crucially, if @xmath has both signs, the limit of @xmath at the
singularity has a jump discontinuity, i.e. a “step” . Thus the solution
can develop step-like structures as it approaches the initial
singularity.

One can gain insight into the creation of “steps” by thinking of the LRS
@xmath dust solution as an ‘‘inhomogenized” LRS Bianchi I dust solution.
The Hubble-normalized state space for the LRS Bianchi I solutions is
shown ⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 The state space follows from a routine analysis of
equations ( 433 )–( 434 ), and then making use of ( 423 ). in Figure 15
. In terms of evolution into the past, the flat FL equilibrium point is
a saddle point, and the de Sitter equilibrium point is a source. The
line going from the de Sitter equilibrium point to the flat FL
equilibrium point is the stable manifold of the flat FL equilibrium
point. At a given time, an LRS @xmath dust solution is represented by a
segment of points in the LRS Bianchi I state space. If @xmath for all
@xmath , then @xmath and hence the segment lies to the right of the
stable manifold of the FL equilibrium point, and follows the arrows to
the LRS Kasner equilibrium point as @xmath . Likewise, if @xmath for all
@xmath , then the segment lies to the left of the stable manifold of the
FL equilibrium point, and follows the arrows to the Taub Kasner
equilibrium point as @xmath . Crucially, if @xmath has both signs, then
the segment straddles the stable manifold of the FL equilibrium point.
As @xmath tends to @xmath or @xmath , the segment is stretched out more
and more. The part of the segment straddling the stable manifold of the
flat FL equilibrium point is being stretched the most, giving a
step-like structure in the spatial profile of @xmath .

This solution is a special case of the Szekeres solution (see Krasinski
1997 [ 44 , page 25] , the case @xmath ). It is first given explicitly
by Barrow & Stein-Schabes 1984 [ 7 , case @xmath ] . They however did
not discuss the past asymptotic dynamics. A special case of this
solution, with @xmath , is first given explicitly by Bonnor & Tomimura
1976 [ 12 , Model PI with @xmath , @xmath ] . They discussed the past
asymptotic dynamics, but overlooked the possibility that models can be
past asymptotic to the Taub Kasner point.

#### 19 An explicit solution with “spikes”

In this section, we obtain a new explicit vacuum OT @xmath solution that
develops “spikes” as @xmath . Spikes are narrow spatial structures with
steep slopes appearing on an otherwise mild profile of a variable of a
cosmological solution (see Berger & Moncrief 1993 [ 11 ] ). To generate
this spiky solution, we apply a transformation introduced by Rendall &
Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] to the Wainwright-Marshman solution (see Wainwright &
Marshman 1979 [ 79 ] , Case I with @xmath ).

###### The framework

We consider the class of vacuum OT @xmath cosmologies which are defined
by the conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (445)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see ( 377 ) for the OT condition). We use the timelike area gauge ( 324
):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (446)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that the spatial gauge is ( 222 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (447)
  -- -------- -- -------

With these restrictions the evolution equations ( 329 )–( 350 ) simplify
dramatically. Firstly the Gauss constraint ( 15 ) defines @xmath
according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (448)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the remaining constraints are satisfied identically. Secondly, the
expressions ( 15 ) and ( 340 ) for @xmath and @xmath become

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (449)
     @xmath   @xmath      (450)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The state vector ( 369 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (451)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 445 )–( 450 ) the evolution equations ( 329 ), ( 15 )–( 336 )
for these variables reduce to the following equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (452)
     @xmath   @xmath      (453)
     @xmath   @xmath      (454)
     @xmath   @xmath      (455)
     @xmath   @xmath      (456)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 452 ) can be solved explicitly to give

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (457)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we reparametrize @xmath to set @xmath for simplicity. Since @xmath
as @xmath , the solutions are asymptotically silent (see Section 16 ).
The metric in this temporal and spatial gauge can be written in this
form (see, e.g. van Elst et al . 2002 [ 74 , Appendix A.3] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (458)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the variables @xmath are defined in terms of @xmath and @xmath
(see van Elst et al . 2002 [ 74 , equations (180) and (181)] , which are
derived from the constraint ( 96 )):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (459)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### The transformation method

Rendall & Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] introduce a two-step solution-generating
method.

The first step of the method is to perform the following transformation
on the metric functions @xmath and @xmath : ⁴² ⁴² 42 We have changed the
sign of ( 461 ) from equation (4) of [ 62 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (460)
     @xmath   @xmath      (461)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The second step is to perform the so-called Gowdy-to-Ernst
transformation. Rendall & Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] ) define this
transformation in terms of its effect on @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (462)
     @xmath   @xmath      (463)
     @xmath   @xmath      (464)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which generates a new solution, ⁴³ ⁴³ 43 This is the same transformation
as equation (7) of Rendall & Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] , but looks slightly
different because the time variable @xmath in [ 62 ] is related to our
time variable @xmath via @xmath . although in general @xmath cannot be
obtained explicitly.

We now describe the transformations in the framework of the orthonormal
frame formalism. First, we show that the transformation ( 460 )–( 461 )
is a rotation of the frame vectors @xmath , and describe it in terms of
@xmath -normalized variables.

Consider a rotation of the frame vectors @xmath (see Appendix II ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (465)
  -- -------- -- -------

To preserve the spatial gauge condition ( 447 ), it follows from ( 634
)–( 639 ) that the angle @xmath must satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (466)
     @xmath   @xmath      (467)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It turns out that these equations are satisfied if the rotation angle
@xmath is related to @xmath and @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (468)
  -- -------- -- -------

as follows from differentiating ( 468 ) and using ( 459 ). The
transformation ( 638 )–( 639 ), with @xmath given by ( 468 ), is in fact
equivalent to performing the transformation ( 460 )–( 461 ). This
statement can be verified by differentiating ( 460 )–( 461 ) and
expressing them in terms of @xmath using ( 459 ), then comparing with (
638 )–( 639 ) to obtain ( 468 ).

The Gowdy-to-Ernst transformation ( 462 )–( 464 ) is much simpler in
terms of @xmath , as follows from ( 459 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (469)
     @xmath   @xmath      (470)
     @xmath   @xmath      (471)
     @xmath   @xmath      (472)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is easily verified that this transformation preserves the form of the
evolution equations ( 453 )–( 456 ).

Composing the transformations ( 638 )–( 639 ) with ( 468 ) and ( 469 )–(
472 ) leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (473)
     @xmath   @xmath      (474)
     @xmath   @xmath      (475)
     @xmath   @xmath      (476)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by ( 468 ).

In summary, given a solution @xmath of ( 453 )–( 456 ), the metric
functions @xmath and @xmath are determined by ( 459 ). Then ( 473 )–(
476 ), with @xmath determined by @xmath and @xmath according to ( 468 ),
determines a new solution.

###### The Wainwright-Marshman solution

Consider the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (477)
  -- -------- -- -------

It follows from ( 455 )–( 456 ) that @xmath . Then ( 453 )–( 454 ) imply
@xmath . Solving ( 455 ) then gives @xmath , where @xmath is freely
specifiable, and @xmath is the argument of the function @xmath . To
recapitulate, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (478)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can now obtain @xmath and @xmath via ( 459 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (479)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the Wainwright-Marshman (WM) solution (see Wainwright & Marshman
1979 [ 79 ] , Case I with @xmath ). ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴ 44 The Gowdy-to-Ernst
transformation leaves the WM solution essentially invariant – it changes
only the sign of @xmath .

###### The transformed Wainwright-Marshman solution

We apply the transformation ( 473 )–( 476 ) to the WM solution and
obtain a new explicit solution of the evolution equations ( 452 )–( 456
):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (480)
     @xmath   @xmath      (481)
     @xmath   @xmath      (482)
     @xmath   @xmath      (483)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (484)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Structure of the singularity

What solution(s) does the transformed WM solution tend to as @xmath ?
From ( 484 ), we see that for a fixed @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (485)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath only pointwise because

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (486)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then from ( 480 )–( 484 ), we obtain (assuming that @xmath is smooth):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (487)
  -- -------- -- -------

In terms of Hubble-normalized variables, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (488)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the transformed WM solution tends pointwise to two distinct Kasner
solutions if @xmath has both signs. These two Kasner solutions are shown
in the SH state space in Figure 16 , and are in fact connected by two
@xmath transition orbits. Recall that it follows from ( 179 ) that the
two @xmath transition orbits lie on the sphere

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (489)
  -- -------- -- -------

going from @xmath to @xmath as @xmath . We can think of the transformed
WM solution as represented by a segment of points in the SH state space
in Figure 16 . If @xmath has both signs, then this segment gets
stretched along the two @xmath transition orbits as @xmath , thus
creating spiky structures in the variables.

To see this clearly, consider the example @xmath . Figure 17 shows the
snapshots of @xmath and @xmath at @xmath . The variable @xmath tends to
@xmath for @xmath , and @xmath otherwise. The variable @xmath tends to
zero pointwise, but not uniformly. The height of the spikes in @xmath is
@xmath . We note that spikes also form in @xmath and @xmath , but these
variables still tend to zero uniformly.

In Section 26 we shall use both the WM solution and the transformed WM
solution to test the accuracy of three numerical schemes. The
transformed WM solution also provides a simple way to analyze the nature
of spikes. We shall return to this in Section 22 .

#### 20 Spiky and step-like structures

Spikes and step-like structures are governed by the same mechanism. They
have one thing in common – they form because the solution shadows two
disjoint branches of the unstable manifold (of an unstable equilibrium
point). The meaning of a “trigger”, introduced in Section 10 , can be
extended to include the variable whose axis is parallel to the
directions of the branches above. In the language of triggers, consider
a trigger of an unstable equilibrium point. It assumes a certain value
(we call it an “inactive value”) at the unstable equilibrium point. Now
consider a @xmath solution in which the trigger of an unstable
equilibrium point straddles its inactive value, e.g. the LRS dust
solution in which @xmath straddles its inactive value of zero, and the
transformed WM solution in which @xmath straddles its inactive value of
zero. Then the trigger activates on both sides of the inactive value,
but by continuity there exists some point @xmath in the middle where it
cannot activate. Over time, a steep slope forms at @xmath . How the
profile of the trigger extends further is determined by the unstable
manifolds of the saddle point, whose orbits may lead directly to the
sinks or indirectly through a sequence of saddle points. If these orbits
are such that the trigger develops a monotone profile, then we see a
step-like structure. Otherwise the profile resembles a non-monotone,
spiky structure. Figure 18 illustrates the initial smooth profile and
the asymptotic formation of a steep slope at @xmath , and either a
step-like structure or a generic spiky structure.

We end this chapter with the following conjecture on what causes the
formation of spiky or step-like structures.

###### Conjecture \thechapter.1.

Consider a class of @xmath cosmologies and their invariant subset of SH
cosmologies. In an asymptotically silent regime, the @xmath cosmologies
locally approach the attractor of their SH subset. Step-like or spiky
structures will form if a @xmath solution, represented by a segment of
points in the SH state space, straddles the stable manifold of a saddle
point.

{comment}

Conjecture 2

Restrict to past asymptotics, where the sinks, if any, must be Kasner.
Suppose that the step-like or spiky structures are permanent, then the
asymptotic state of this solution must be represented by a collection of
sink(s) and the mentioned saddle point. If these sinks form a connected
set of points in the state space, then the structures are spiky rather
than step-like. Likewise, if the sinks in this asymptotic state do not
form a connected set of points in the state space, then the structures
are step-like rather than spiky.

[wcl: Bianchi II is a counter example – it is a hybrid of a step and a
spike. Spikes and steps are really the same thing. They have one thing
in common: the trigger has both signs, and that creates one single steep
slope. How the profile extends further has nothing to do with the fact
that the trigger has both signs, but rather on how the segment get
stretched in the state space towards the sinks, which in turn depends on
the sequences of equilibrium points leading to the sinks on both sides
of the unstable manifold.

### Chapter \thechapter Dynamics in the past asymptotic regime

In this chapter, we make predictions about the dynamics in the past
asymptotic regime of @xmath cosmologies, based on a heuristic analysis
of the equations. Recall that we wrote the system ( 329 )–( 350 )
symbolically as ( 372 )–( 375 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (490)
     @xmath      (491)
     @xmath      (492)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the state vector in ( 369 ). In analyzing the dynamics,
we shall consider three types of behaviour:

-   the background dynamics,

-   the effects of saddle points, and

-   the effects of spatial derivative terms.

The background dynamics is governed by the SH system ( 381 )–( 382 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (493)
     @xmath      (494)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we regard as governing the dynamics in the silent boundary ( 384
):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (495)
  -- -------- -- -------

We shall show that the saddle points of the SH system can combine with
inhomogeneity to initiate some interesting effects in this system.
Furthermore, under the right conditions, the term @xmath becomes active
and the system ( 491 ) exhibits some fascinating behaviour. We explain
each type of dynamical behaviour in the sections below, and present
numerical simulations that illustrate the behaviour in Chapter II .

#### 21 Background dynamics: role of algebraic terms

In Section 17 , we conjectured that a typical @xmath cosmology is
asymptotically silent into the past, suggesting that SH dynamics plays a
major role in the past asymptotic dynamics of @xmath cosmologies. The
separable area gauge for @xmath cosmologies also coincides with the
@xmath adapted gauge for SH cosmologies as @xmath , since asymptotic
silence entails @xmath .

##### Mixmaster dynamics

With asymptotic silence, it is plausible that @xmath cosmologies, like
SH cosmologies, also satisfy the BKL conjecture I and the Kasner
Attractivity Conjecture, which will now refer to tilted Kasner circles
@xmath as well as the standard Kasner circle @xmath .

BKL conjecture I

Along almost all local orbits of a typical @xmath cosmology,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (496)
  -- -------- -- -------

Kasner Attractivity Conjecture

Almost all local orbits of a typical @xmath cosmology enter a
neighbourhood of one of the Kasner circles.

We emphasize that at this time there has been no progress in proving
these conjectures for @xmath cosmologies. They are, however, strongly
supported by our numerical simulations. We believe that they are
fundamentally important as regards the dynamics in the past asymptotic
regime.

Once the @xmath orbits enter a neighbourhood of one of the Kasner
circles, Mixmaster dynamics takes over along each individual orbit, in
accordance with SH dynamics. Proposition \thechapter .1 concerning the
occurrence of Mixmaster dynamics in @xmath -compatible SH cosmologies
now leads directly to the following proposition.

###### Proposition \thechapter.1.

Consider @xmath cosmologies that satisfy the Kasner Attractivity
Conjecture.

-    If the @xmath is generic, Mixmaster dynamics occurs along typical
    timelines. ⁴⁵ ⁴⁵ 45 We note that in contrast to the case of SH
    cosmologies, @xmath is not an invariant set in @xmath cosmologies,
    due to the presence of the terms @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath and
    @xmath equations.

-    If the @xmath is non-generic, Mixmaster dynamics does not occur.

For generic @xmath cosmologies, the background dynamics is that of SH
cosmologies of Bianchi type VI and VII.

To recapitulate, the limits ( 283 )–( 285 ) for @xmath -compatible SH
cosmologies should also hold locally (i.e. along typical timelines) for
@xmath cosmologies:

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      (497)
        @xmath      (498)
        @xmath      (499)
  -- -- -------- -- -------

Again we emphasize that no progress has been made in proving Proposition
\thechapter .1 and the limits ( 497 )–( 499 ). The limits ( 496 ), ( 497
) and ( 498 ), which assert that almost all local @xmath orbits shadow
the unstable manifolds of the Kasner equilibrium points, provide the
foundation of Mixmaster dynamics in @xmath cosmologies.

##### Non-Mixmaster dynamics

For more special @xmath actions, there are too few triggers to sustain
Mixmaster dynamics as some of the arcs on the Kasner circle become sinks
(into the past) in the smaller state space.

For OT @xmath cosmologies, the background dynamics is that of OT SH
cosmologies of type VI and VII. Thus we expect the local past attractor
to be given by ( 286 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (500)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the phrase “local past attractor” we mean that almost all local
orbits of a typical OT @xmath cosmology are past asymptotic to the arc (
500 ). As an example, the transformed WM solution tends to two distinct
Kasner solutions, as given by ( 488 ). The local orbit of a spike point
tends to the Kasner solution @xmath , which does not lie on @xmath , but
other local orbits tend to the Kasner solution @xmath , which lies on
@xmath .

For @xmath cosmologies with one HO KVF, the background dynamics is that
of SH cosmologies of type VI with one HO KVF. We expect the local past
attractor to be given by ( 288 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (501)
  -- -------- -- -------

For diagonal @xmath cosmologies, the background dynamics is that of
diagonal SH cosmologies of type VI. Thus we expect the local past
attractor to be given by ( 289 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (502)
  -- -------- -- -------

Isenberg & Moncrief 1990 [ 41 ] proved that @xmath contains the past
attractor for vacuum diagonal @xmath cosmologies. Anguige 2000 [ 5 ]
gave the asymptotic expansions for a generic class of perfect fluid
diagonal @xmath cosmologies that are past asymptotic to @xmath .

#### 22 Effects of spatial inhomogeneity I: role of saddles

Recall that the state of a @xmath solution at a fixed time is
represented by an arc of points in the SH state space. We have seen in
Chapter I that if this arc straddles the stable manifold of a saddle
point then the solution will develop steep spatial gradients. In the
language of triggers, if a trigger variable has both signs, then when
the trigger activates, steep spatial gradients will develop in the
neighbourhood of the point where the trigger variable is zero.

In this section we discuss the steep spatial gradients in more detail,
with a view to confirming the validity of BKL conjecture II. We shall
see that a mild initial inhomogeneity plus a zero in a trigger variable
can lead to a strong asymptotic inhomogeneity, via local SH dynamics.

##### Step-like structures

The tilt variable @xmath assumes a value close to 0 or @xmath when it is
inactive, and undergoes transitions between 0 and @xmath when it
activates. If @xmath has both signs on an arc of the Kasner circle
@xmath when it activates, it develops step-like structures, as
illustrated schematically in Figure 19 . This is not unlike the
step-like structures in the LRS dust solution in Section 18 , since the
tilt transition will change @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath to @xmath ,
where @xmath .

##### Spiky structures

The curvature trigger @xmath and the frame triggers @xmath and @xmath
assume a value close to zero when they are inactive, and become of order
unity when they activate. If such a trigger has both signs on a Kasner
arc when it activates, it develops spikes, as illustrated schematically
in Figure 20 . The spikes shown in Figure 17 for the transformed WM
solution are a simple prototype.

In the case of the transformed WM solution ( 480 )–( 484 ), the spikes
are permanent – their amplitude does not tend to zero as @xmath . The
spikes in the transformed WM solution form in a neighbourhood of
isolated points where @xmath , called “spike points”, defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (503)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath appears in the argument of @xmath , a spike point depends
on @xmath and moves toward a limiting spike point @xmath as @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (504)
  -- -------- -- -------

Despite the fact that @xmath exponentially fast, the steep slopes of the
spikes ensure that @xmath in ( 491 ) is comparable to @xmath in size, as
shown by the asymptotic expansion of the transformed WM solution below.

The decay rates as @xmath along the timeline @xmath are as follows
(dropping tildes in ( 480 )–( 483 )):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (505)
     @xmath   @xmath      (506)
     @xmath   @xmath      (507)
     @xmath   @xmath      (508)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (509)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (510)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (511)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (512)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath .

For comparison, the following are the decay rates as @xmath along a
typical timeline @xmath , where @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (513)
     @xmath   @xmath      (514)
     @xmath   @xmath      (515)
     @xmath   @xmath      (516)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (517)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (518)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath               (519)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (520)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

For typical points, from ( 517 )–( 520 ), we see that the spatial
derivative terms are negligible compared with the time derivative and
algebraic terms in the evolution equations ( 453 )–( 456 ). This
supports the BKL conjecture II in Section 3 that the spatial derivatives
in the EFEs for a typical cosmological model are not dynamically
significant in the past asymptotic regime.

For spike points, however, ( 509 ), ( 511 ) and ( 512 ) show that
despite asymptotic silence, the spatial derivative terms are of the same
order as the algebraic terms in the evolution equations ( 453 ), ( 455 )
and ( 456 ) respectively. This limits the validity of the BKL conjecture
II within this class of models to typical timelines.

For a general class of vacuum OT @xmath solutions, Kichenassamy &
Rendall 1998 [ 42 , equations (5)–(6)] gave an asymptotic expansion for
the metric functions @xmath and @xmath (see ( 458 )–( 459 )) as @xmath .
Rendall & Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] transformed this expansion to produce
expansions for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for a spiky solution. In order
to obtain asymptotic expansions for the derivative terms in the
evolution equations ( 453 )–( 456 ), we found it necessary to increase
the accuracy of their asymptotic expansions, as is done in Appendix II .

For typical points, the leading orders for the time and spatial
derivatives are ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 The big @xmath below is defined as follows:
@xmath means there exist constants @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath
satisfies @xmath for all @xmath greater (or less) than @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (521)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (522)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (523)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (524)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath satisfies @xmath . We see that the spatial derivatives
terms tend to zero as @xmath faster than the corresponding time
derivatives in the evolution equations ( 453 )–( 456 ). ⁴⁷ ⁴⁷ 47 @xmath
has a marginal impact on @xmath .

For spike points, the leading orders for the time and spatial
derivatives are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (525)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (526)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (527)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (528)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath satisfies @xmath . Equations ( 525 ) and ( 527 ) show that,
despite asymptotic silence, the spatial derivative terms are of the same
order as the algebraic terms in the evolution equations ( 453 ) and (
455 ) respectively. On the other hand, ( 528 ) shows that @xmath
dominates @xmath in the case @xmath . This casts more doubts on the BKL
conjecture II along the timelines corresponding to the spike points.

It should be noted that the results ( 521 )–( 528 ) do not reduce
exactly to the WM results because the WM solutions are special in a
number of respects. For proper reduction, set @xmath in the more
detailed expansions in Appendix II .

The main investigators of spikes (so-called Gowdy spikes in the context
of vacuum @xmath cosmologies) are Berger, Moncrief, Isenberg and their
collaborators. Berger & Moncrief 1993 [ 11 ] first discovered spikes in
numerical experiments. A more detailed numerical analysis is performed
by Berger & Garfinkle 1998 [ 10 ] .

#### 23 Effects of spatial inhomogeneity II: role of spatial derivative
terms

In this section, we discuss inherently non-SH dynamics.

##### Spike transitions

Not all spikes are permanent. In Garfinkle & Weaver 2003 [ 25 ] ,
numerical simulations show that for vacuum OT @xmath cosmologies, spikes
which develop during certain Kasner epochs are transient in the sense
that they recede to a smooth profile via spike transitions . ⁴⁸ ⁴⁸ 48
More precisely, spikes (as identified by their peak in the profile of
@xmath ) that form near the Kasner arc spanning from @xmath
counter-clockwise to the point @xmath are transient. Eventually,
however, new spikes may appear at exactly the same spike point @xmath ,
and may be permanent. Unfortunately we have been unable to provide
analytical heuristics to predict spike transitions.

In Chapter II , we shall illustrate transient spikes in @xmath
cosmologies with generic @xmath action, and describe spike transitions
in more detail. We shall see that @xmath is larger than at permanent
spikes, enough to change the sign of @xmath and initiate a spike
transition.

##### Shock waves

Shock waves can form if there are short-wavelength fluctuations with
large enough amplitude in the perfect fluid variables. Heuristically,
this can be explained as follows. For @xmath cosmologies with one tilt
degree of freedom, the evolution equation ( 347 ) for the tilt @xmath
has the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (529)
  -- -------- -- -------

While other terms are not negligible, the left hand side of ( 529 )
behaves like an inviscid Burgers’ equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (530)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is well-known that solutions of Burgers’ equation can develop shock
waves, depending on the initial conditions (see, for example, Whitham
1974 [ 84 ] , in which Chapter 4 is dedicated to Burgers’ equation). We
predict that @xmath cosmologies can develop shock waves in the perfect
fluid variables if the conditions are right, namely the occurrence of
short-wavelength fluctuations with large enough amplitude in the perfect
fluid variables @xmath . In other words, the larger @xmath is, the
sooner @xmath develops shock waves.

## Part II Numerical exploration of @xmath cosmologies

### Chapter \thechapter Equations for numerical simulations

In the remaining two chapters, we show a variety of numerical
simulations to support our analysis in Chapter I , and to explore new
phenomena.

For simplicity we restrict our considerations to perfect fluid models
with one tilt degree of freedom:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (531)
  -- -------- -- -------

although for some experiments we shall use vacuum models. In doing so,
the shear spatial gauge ( 367 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (532)
  -- -------- -- -------

As discussed in Section 11 in the context of SH dynamics, the stability
of the constraints is of great concern when doing numerical simulations.
The concern is even greater for simulations of PDEs, which are less
accurate than simulations of ODEs. Numerical experiments of @xmath
cosmologies show that the Gauss constraint ( 15 ) is the most unstable
one during the transient regime, and the resulting error is unacceptably
large. We remedy this problem by using ( 15 ) to determine @xmath . The
decision to use the @xmath constraint to determine @xmath (see ( 340 ))
also turns out to be equally important. The remaining @xmath and @xmath
constraints yield small, acceptable errors during the transient regime,
and are stable in the asymptotic regimes. Ideally, the errors should be
minimized, and the difficulties in doing so are discussed in Section 27
.

With the restrictions ( 531 )–( 532 ) and solving @xmath for @xmath ,
the state vector ( 369 ) reduces to the following for numerical
purposes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (533)
  -- -------- -- -------

together with the parameter @xmath , and we drop the index on @xmath .
The full system of 10 evolution equations and 2 constraint equations is
given in Appendix II . We write the system of evolution equations ( 664
)–( 672 ) symbolically as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (534)
  -- -------- -- -------

Boundary conditions are required for simulations of PDEs. We shall
prescribe periodic boundary condition , i.e. the numerical solutions are
required to satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (535)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is customary to do so for numerical simulations of @xmath
cosmologies.

By identifying @xmath with @xmath , we have used up some but not all of
the freedom in the choice of @xmath -coordinate. A change of @xmath
-coordinate that satisfies ( 417 ) preserves this identification. We
want to use all the freedom in the choice of @xmath when specifying the
initial conditions. Making @xmath in the initial conditions achieves
this, and also makes the simulations more efficient.

#### 24 Specifying the initial conditions

To perform a numerical simulation, we must first specify initial
conditions that satisfy the boundary condition ( 535 ) and the remaining
constraints @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (536)
     @xmath   @xmath      (537)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

A good way to specify the initial conditions is the following. We first
specify the following eight variables:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (538)
  -- -------- -- -------

on the interval @xmath , and the parameter @xmath . ⁴⁹ ⁴⁹ 49 Although
during the simulation we use ( 340 ) to calculate @xmath in terms of the
state variables @xmath , when specifying the initial conditions it is
more convenient to specify @xmath and use ( 340 ) to calculate @xmath
and hence @xmath . Because we are using the periodic boundary condition
( 535 ), the initial data must be @xmath -periodic. Then we calculate
successively the following four variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (539)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (540)
  -- -------- -- -------

from the constraints ( 537 ), ( 536 ), ( 15 ) and ( 340 ) respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (541)
     @xmath   @xmath      (542)
     @xmath   @xmath      (543)
     @xmath   @xmath      (544)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are freely specifiable positive constants, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (545)
  -- -------- -- -------

We often specify initial conditions which are so simple that @xmath and
@xmath can be computed by hand. We must make sure that ( 541 ) and ( 542
) yield @xmath -periodic @xmath and @xmath , i.e. we must ensure that (
538 ) satisfies ⁵⁰ ⁵⁰ 50 If @xmath , then @xmath does not have to
satisfy ( 546 ). Likewise if @xmath , then @xmath does not have to
satisfy ( 547 ).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (546)
     @xmath      (547)
  -- -------- -- -------

The tilt @xmath is obtained by solving ( 540 ), which is a quadratic
equation for @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (548)
  -- -------- -- -------

We must make sure that ( 538 ) and @xmath yield a @xmath that satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (549)
  -- -------- -- -------

One way to ensure this is to specify a large @xmath , as we now explain.

{comment}

Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are positive. Thus @xmath
if and only if @xmath .

Consider the following format for the initial data, which we shall use
in most numerical simulations in the next chapter:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (550)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the subscript 0 indicates a constant, and @xmath is a small
positive constant. Note that we have made the choice @xmath and @xmath
in order to satisfy ( 546 )–( 547 ). The remaining variables are
determined by ( 541 )–( 544 ) and ( 548 ). Equations ( 541 ) and ( 542 )
simplify to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (551)
  -- -------- -- -------

while @xmath and @xmath have complicated expressions. Expanding @xmath
as a power series in @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (552)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can ensure @xmath by choosing a sufficiently small @xmath and a
sufficiently large @xmath . It also helps to specify a small @xmath
(assuming @xmath ).

###### Timelike area gauge @xmath

If we use the timelike area gauge ( @xmath ), there is a simpler scheme.
We first specify

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (553)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath . Then we calculate successively

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (554)
  -- -------- -- -------

from ( 340 ), ( 537 ), ( 536 ) and ( 15 ) respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (555)
     @xmath   @xmath      (556)
     @xmath   @xmath      (557)
     @xmath   @xmath      (558)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are freely specifiable positive constants. Note
that in order to ensure that @xmath and @xmath are periodic, equations (
546 )–( 547 ) with @xmath must be satisfied.

###### Vacuum subcase

The scheme for the generic case does not apply to vacuum initial
conditions, while the scheme for the @xmath subcase above does. We now
provide a way to specify vacuum initial conditions with @xmath . We
choose @xmath and specify

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (559)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the @xmath and @xmath constraints ( 344 ) and ( 15 ) are solved for
@xmath and @xmath in sequence, yielding

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (560)
     @xmath   @xmath      (561)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (562)
  -- -------- -- -------

{comment}

###### Vacuum subcase

The scheme above does not apply to vacuum initial conditions. One scheme
that works for both vacuum and perfect fluid initial conditions is to
specify

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and then solve a quadratic equation for @xmath . However, the process is
more of a trial and error kind, since the solutions for @xmath often
turn out to be complex, and there are no intuitive ways to help choose
an initial condition that yields a real value for @xmath . This scheme
also involves a division by @xmath , which prevents us from specifying
an @xmath that has both signs.

{comment}

###### Ot @xmath subcase

For simulations of OT @xmath models, @xmath is zero and there is no
@xmath constraint. We have the full freedom to specify all the remaining
variables,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the initial condition. This scheme works for both vacuum and perfect
fluid initial conditions. For simulations of diagonal @xmath models, we
use the this framework with @xmath .

#### 25 Is the system hyperbolic?

We ask the following question: does the system of equations ( 534 ) lead
to a well-posed initial value problem? To answer this we rely on a
theorem that states that if ( 534 ) is symmetric hyperbolic, then it
leads to a well-posed IVP (see Friedrich & Rendall 2000 [ 24 , pages
147–157] ). By symmetric hyperbolic we mean @xmath is symmetric, or more
generally, that ( 534 ) can be multiplied by a symmetric positive
definite matrix @xmath so that @xmath is symmetric (see Friedrich &
Rendall 2000 [ 24 , pages 148, 157] ). One important notion of
hyperbolicity is strong hyperbolicity, which means @xmath is
diagonalizable. Strongly hyperbolic systems are also symmetric
hyperbolic in the general sense (see Friedrich & Rendall 2000 [ 24 ,
page 161] ). To our knowledge there are no other proofs of
well-posedness for quasi-linear systems of PDEs that satisfy other
notions of hyperbolicity. See Gustafsson et al . 1995 [ 28 , page 119]
for these notions in the context of linear PDEs.

The presence of @xmath (contained in @xmath and @xmath ) in @xmath
complicates the matrix. As a result we have been unable to determine
whether the system ( 534 ) is symmetric hyperbolic. ⁵³ ⁵³ 53 The system
is not strongly hyperbolic, because although @xmath has real
eigenvalues, it is not diagonalizable on a set of points with measure
zero. We comment that if we use the timelike area gauge, where @xmath is
identically zero, then the system is symmetric hyperbolic, ⁵⁴ ⁵⁴ 54 This
is proved by van Elst et al . 2002 [ 74 ] for OT @xmath cosmologies.
This result generalizes to the class of generic @xmath cosmologies with
one tilt degree of freedom, because the evolution equations for OT
@xmath are aumented by the @xmath equation ( 669 ), which has a zero
characteristic speed of propagation. and thus has a well-posed IVP.
Since we find that the numerical results obtained in this gauge and in
the separable area gauge are qualitatively the same, we are confident
that the separable area gauge is suitable for simulations.

#### 26 Accuracy of numerical schemes

In our numerical experiments, we make use of the following three
numerical schemes:

1.  the fourth order Runge-Kutta method ( RK4 ),

2.  the 3-step iterative Crank-Nicholson method ( ICN ), and

3.  the CLAWPACK code

(see Gustafsson et al . 1995 [ 28 , page 241] , Teukolsky 2000 [ 70 ] ,
and LeVeque 2002 [ 45 ] respectively). RK4 is a classic numerical solver
for ODEs, but is suggested for application to PDEs by Gustafsson et al
.. ICN is a new method developed by Choptuik, but is not
well-documented. CLAWPACK is developed by LeVeque, and is
well-documented in [ 45 ] .

We now explain the algorithm for each method briefly, and describe some
tests of their accuracy when applied to the system ( 534 ). To conform
with the notation in the literature on numerical algorithms for PDEs, we
denote the state vector @xmath by @xmath and rewrite the symbolic
equation ( 534 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (563)
  -- -------- -- -------

We denote the grid size by @xmath and the step size by @xmath . First,
we have to decide how to discretize the spatial partial derivative
@xmath . The central differencing scheme for the derivative gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (564)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is second order accurate, i.e. the error is of order @xmath . The
central differencing on five grid points is fourth order accurate:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (565)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see, e.g., Gustafsson et al . 1995 [ 28 , pages 19, 247] ).

Secondly, we have to give a scheme for time-stepping, i.e. to compute
@xmath , given @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath denote the computed values
for @xmath and @xmath respectively. The fourth order Runge-Kutta method
( RK4 ) is described as follows (see, e.g., Gustafsson et al . 1995 [ 28
, page 241] ). For brevity we write @xmath as @xmath (or think of @xmath
as an operator).

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Using Taylor polynomials, it is straightforward to show that RK4 is
fourth order accurate (the error in the spatial derivatives may for the
moment be ignored):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (566)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the power of @xmath in the error term is four orders higher than
that in the formula for @xmath . Now combining RK4 with the 5-grid
central difference scheme, one obtains a fourth order accurate finite
difference scheme.

The 3-step iterative Crank-Nicholson method ( ICN ) is described as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

ICN is second order accurate. ⁵⁵ ⁵⁵ 55 See Teukolsky 2000 [ 70 ] . While
an @xmath -th order Runge-Kutta method is @xmath -th order accurate,
Teukolsky’s analysis shows that all ICN methods are only second order
accurate, and the 3-step ICN method is the cheapest stable method among
them (see Teukolsky 2000 [ 70 ] ). We note that there are more
sophisticated implementations of the iterative Crank-Nicholson method
(Choptuik 2004 [ 16 ] ). Teukolsky claims that there is no benefit in
applying more iterations. Choptuik, however, has reservations about this
claim, on the basis that Teukolsky’s idealized analysis is incomplete.
Now combining ICN with the 3-grid central difference scheme, one obtains
a second order accurate finite difference scheme. Since RK4 evaluates
the equations four times at each time step while ICN only three, it
takes RK4 @xmath times as long to run as it takes ICN .

The CLAWPACK code (see LeVeque 2002 [ 45 ] ) handles the evolution
equations ( 534 ) in two stages for each time step, using the so-called
Godunov splitting (see LeVeque 2002 [ 45 , pages 380-388] ). In the
first stage, CLAWPACK solves the following system (referring to ( 534
)):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (567)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath must be diagonalizable. i.e. it can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (568)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a diagonal matrix of real eigenvalues, and @xmath is a
matrix constructed from the corresponding eigenvectors. The upwind
finite volume method (see LeVeque 2002 [ 45 , page 73] ) is then used to
discretize ( 567 ). To explain the discretization, consider rewriting (
567 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (569)
  -- -------- -- -------

pretending that @xmath is constant. Since @xmath is diagonal, this
system decouples into independent advection equations, and the
eigenvalues determine the velocities (and hence the upwind directions)
of the waves in the characteristic eigenfields @xmath . So we are able
to determine the upwind direction for each wave. In finite volume
methods, an @xmath -interval is divided into cells, and fluxes are
computed at the interface of two adjacent cells. To obtain the data at
the interface, some averaging scheme must be used (see LeVeque 2002 [ 45
, Section 15.3] ), and here we simply take the arithmetic average. The
discretization of ( 567 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (570)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (571)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath , where @xmath contains only positive eigenvalues while
@xmath contains only negative eigenvalues. The vector @xmath describes
fluxes to the right from the @xmath -th cell to the @xmath -th cell,
etc. For details see LeVeque 2002 [ 45 , pages 78–82] . The first stage
is first order accurate.

In the second stage, CLAWPACK solves the system

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (572)
  -- -------- -- -------

This part can be discretized by any ODE solver. We solve this part by
using the explicit Euler method,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is first order accurate.

Overall, CLAWPACK is first order accurate. While RK4 and ICN do poorly
in simulating shock waves (Taylor polynomials do not apply at points of
discontinuity), CLAWPACK sacrifices high accuracy for smooth solutions
for the ability to simulate shock waves reasonably well. The error
analysis of CLAWPACK near shock waves is based on conservative systems
of the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, the system ( 664 )–( 672 ) is not conservative, due to the
presence of inhomogeneity in @xmath and the non-conservative pair @xmath
. This will likely reduce the accuracy of CLAWPACK when simulating shock
waves. Another more serious abuse of CLAWPACK is that we have put @xmath
(contained in @xmath and @xmath ) in the right hand side of the
equations ( @xmath becomes @xmath ), ⁵⁶ ⁵⁶ 56 CLAWPACK requires a
coefficient matrix @xmath that is diagonalizable. By putting @xmath in
the left hand side, CLAWPACK is liable to crash due to unbounded
determinant of the @xmath matrix in ( 568 ). which makes it unsuitable
for shock waves simulations. The best we can do is to simulate shock
waves using the timelike area gauge @xmath . The abuse becomes
relatively harmless if @xmath is small. For example, CLAWPACK does a
better job than the other two schemes at simulating permanent spikes
under low resolution (see Section 27 ), so there is value in keeping
CLAWPACK .

To measure the rate of convergence for each method, we make three runs,
using 512, 1024 and 4096 spatial grid points. The data using 4096
spatial grid points serves as the reference, and the errors of the two
runs with cruder grids are compared. We use both @xmath and @xmath norms
to measure the errors. ⁵⁷ ⁵⁷ 57 Let @xmath be the @xmath -th component
of the vector @xmath evaluated at the @xmath -th grid point. Then the
@xmath norm of the error in @xmath is given by

@xmath

where @xmath is the number of grid points. The @xmath norm of the error
in @xmath is given by

@xmath

In Table 10 we present the errors in @xmath norm. A method is said to be
@xmath -th order accurate in time if its error (approximately) shrinks
by a factor of @xmath when the number of grid points is doubled. Errors
in @xmath norm are of similar size and are not presented. The initial
data is chosen to be ( 550 ) with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (573)
  -- -------- -- -------

The simulations run from @xmath to @xmath . Longer simulations will see
the formation of spikes. The order of accuracy is derived from Taylor
polynomial approximation. With decreasing resolution around the spikes,
the approximation becomes poorer and poorer, and eventually becomes
totally useless. Higher resolution will be needed to prolong
simulations. The CFL stability condition (see Gustafsson et al . 1995 [
28 , page 54] ) is set at @xmath . This serves as a cap for the step
size @xmath to maintain the stability of the solution. ⁵⁸ ⁵⁸ 58 We also
impose an absolute cap to the time step: @xmath for stability. The
preferred value for @xmath is set at @xmath , i.e. the step size is
computed as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (574)
  -- -------- -- -------

After the data at time @xmath is obtained, we check that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (575)
  -- -------- -- -------

If this is satisfied, we continue; otherwise we recalculate the data
with a smaller step size

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (576)
  -- -------- -- -------

This smaller step size will satisfy the CFL condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (577)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now since the reference solution is computed by the same method, we can
only conclude that each method converges at the respective rate. Do they
all converge to the real solution? To answer this we need an exact
solution against which the error of the methods can be measured.
Unfortunately there are no exact generic @xmath solutions available thus
far. The most suitable possible test solution is the WM solution (see
Section 19 ), which is an exact vacuum OT @xmath solution, containing
one arbitrary function @xmath . It is given by ( 478 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (578)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the test, we choose

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (579)
  -- -------- -- -------

The solution then satisfies periodic boundary conditions. The
simulations run from @xmath to @xmath . The CFL condition is set at
@xmath , and the preferred value for @xmath at @xmath . In Table 11 we
present the errors in @xmath in the @xmath norm. Errors in the @xmath
norm are similar and are not presented.

The WM solution can be transformed into a new solution (see Section 19
). We test the codes against this solution, using the initial condition
for the WM solution above. In Table 12 we present the errors in @xmath
in @xmath norm.

The tests confirm that the methods produce solutions that converge to
the exact solution at the expected rates, which gives us some confidence
that the methods are reliable.

#### 27 Unsatisfactory aspects of the numerical simulations

###### Instability of @xmath

The evolution equation for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (580)
  -- -------- -- -------

This constraint is stable into the past near Kasner equilibrium points.
However, when @xmath is large, @xmath grows as @xmath . This is a cause
for concern especially when @xmath grows at the beginning of the
simulation (i.e. before entering the asymptotic regime). Using finer
grids or taking smaller time steps reduces the size of @xmath , but is
very inefficient. Unfortunately, we find that adding the constraint in
the evolution equations ⁵⁹ ⁵⁹ 59 For example,

@xmath

does not change its instability. Constraint instability is a recurring
problem in numerical relativity. For other methods in controlling
constraint instability, see Lindblom et al . 2004 [ 50 ] .

###### Resolution

As we have not implemented an adaptive mesh refinement scheme,
high-resolution simulations are expensive for the numerical schemes we
have. This imposes a severe limitation when spikes occur. Without mesh
refinement, we can only adequately simulate spikes for a short time
before the spikes become too narrow to resolve numerically. If @xmath is
sufficiently large near a spike, RK4 can generate spurious oscillations,
while ICN also generate some overshoot. Only CLAWPACK handles spikes
reasonably well in all situations.

###### The dust case

For dust ( @xmath ) the equations are not strongly hyperbolic (the
matrix @xmath is not diagonalizable at any point in spacetime),
regardless of whether @xmath or not. We shall not simulate the dust case
in this thesis.

###### The Taub Kasner point @xmath

The Taub Kasner point @xmath given by @xmath causes difficulties for
numerical simulations. It causes blow-up in the @xmath -normalized
variables because @xmath is zero here. This problem cannot be avoided by
using Hubble-normalized variables or other gauges, because the Taub
Kasner point is qualitatively different from other Kasner points, namely
it is non-silent in the @xmath -direction. We can only simulate
solutions that do not get too close to the Taub Kasner point during the
period of interest. As a general rule of thumb, the more inhomogeneous
the initial condition is, the more likely we will run into the Taub
Kasner point at an early stage in numerical simulations.

### Chapter \thechapter Numerical simulations

In this chapter, we present a variety of numerical simulations of @xmath
cosmologies that confirm the analytical predictions made in Chapter I .
The numerical results also illustrate the spike transitions, which we
were unable to predict analytically in Chapter I . In addition we
describe simulations of the future asymptotic approach to de Sitter, and
the close-to-FL regime.

For most of the simulations, ⁶⁰ ⁶⁰ 60 The exceptions are the simulation
of vacuum models in Section 29.3 , the shock wave simulation in Section
31.2 , and the close-to-FL simulation in Section 33 . we shall specify
initial conditions by following the format ( 550 ) introduced in Chapter
II :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (581)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the subscript 0 indicates a constant. @xmath and @xmath are given
by ( 551 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (582)
  -- -------- -- -------

while @xmath and @xmath are computed numerically using ( 674 ), ( 544 )
and ( 548 ), and have complicated expressions. For more special @xmath
actions, we set the appropriate variables to zero.

While @xmath -normalized variables are used in the simulations,
Hubble-normalized variables are displayed in most of the plots.

#### 28 Asymptotic silence

In this section we shall provide evidence to support the occurrence of
asymptotic silence not only as @xmath , namely,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (583)
  -- -------- -- -------

but also as @xmath in the presence of a cosmological constant.

Using the format ( 581 ) for initial conditions, consider the following
initial data at @xmath , with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (584)
  -- -------- -- -------

We ran ICN with 512 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , and from @xmath
to @xmath storing data at intervals of @xmath . First, we plot the
maximum and minimum of @xmath and @xmath against @xmath in Figure 21 We
see that @xmath and @xmath decay exponentially both into the past and
into the future, supporting the conjecture that the past and future
dynamics are asymptotically silent. ⁶¹ ⁶¹ 61 Actually, this is only true
along almost all timelines. In Section 31.1 , we shall see that along
some timelines @xmath can become large, but the spatial resolution in
this run is too low to simulate it correctly. Thus it is reasonable to
say that the local background dynamics of @xmath cosmologies is the SH
dynamics.

#### 29 Background dynamics

In this section we illustrate the role of SH dynamics in @xmath
dynamics.

##### 29.1 Local Mixmaster dynamics

Still using the initial data ( 584 ), we plot the maximum and minimum of
@xmath and @xmath against @xmath in Figure 22 . We see that @xmath and
@xmath decay exponentially into the past, supporting the BKL conjecture
I.

Figures 23 – 24 show the evolution along a fixed timeline @xmath (the
grid point 100 of 512). They show the generalized Mixmaster dynamics
into the past and the approach to de Sitter into the future.

Evolving into the past from @xmath , the solution enters the Kasner
regime at about @xmath . One prominent @xmath transition is observed at
about @xmath , followed by an alternating sequence of @xmath and @xmath
transitions (see also Figure 24 below).

Figure 24 shows that @xmath is stuck at @xmath as @xmath , and tends to
a non-zero limit as @xmath . For more details about the future
asymptotics, see Section 32 .

Table 13 shows the expected and actual growth rates into the past
(positive value indicates growth into the past) along grid point 100, at
two selected times. The actual rates are in good agreement with the
expected rates, which can be inferred from the @xmath -normalized
version of ( 247 )–( 249 ).

##### 29.2 Spatial variation in the background dynamics

The timing of the transitions in Mixmaster dynamics varies from one
timeline to another. Continuing with the initial data ( 584 ), Figure 25
shows some snapshots of the triggers @xmath and @xmath , illustrating
this variation in the timing. The variation in the timing leads to a
pulse-like profile of the triggers.

As discussed in Section 17 , the particle horizon is given by @xmath .
Since @xmath at @xmath here and decays like @xmath , @xmath is
approximately equal to @xmath , and so information can travel only a
finite distance of @xmath as @xmath . But the pulses in Figure 25 travel
more than @xmath , which is only possible if they propagate faster than
light. How is this possible? In fact, the apparent superluminal speed is
an illusion created by the variation in the background SH dynamics from
one timeline to another (e.g. variation in the timing of the transitions
in Mixmaster dynamics). An analogy to this phenomenon is a Mexican wave
in a stadium.

##### 29.3 Multiple transitions

It is simplest to analyze multiple transitions in the absence of spikes
or step-like structures. Since it is difficult to produce a spike-free
solution over a very long run in a perfect fluid solution, ⁶² ⁶² 62 That
the initial condition for @xmath is large (see the comment following (
549 )) makes it difficult to predict whether a solution will be
spike-free and will stay away from the Taub Kasner point for a long
period of time. we resort to simulating vacuum solutions.

Using the scheme for the vacuum case in Section 24 , we choose @xmath
and specify the following vacuum initial condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (585)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 560 )–( 562 ).

We ran CLAWPACK with 512 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , storing
data at intervals of @xmath . Figure 26 shows bands of level curves
indicating the activation of the triggers @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The result is spike-free up to @xmath . Spikes occur in the lower right
quarter of Figure 26 .

In Figure 25 of the previous section, we saw that there is variation in
the timing of the transitions in Mixmaster dynamics, due to spatial
inhomogeneity. Figure 26 shows that the sequence of the transitions can
also vary from one timeline to another. For example, proceeding along
the timeline @xmath as @xmath , the solution undergoes an @xmath
transition first at about @xmath before undergoing a @xmath transition
at about @xmath . In comparison, proceeding along the timeline @xmath as
@xmath , the solution undergoes a @xmath transition first at about
@xmath before undergoing an @xmath transition at about @xmath . Thus, by
continuity, there must be timelines between @xmath and @xmath that
undergo both @xmath and @xmath transitions at the same time, i.e. they
undergo a multiple transition.

The intersection of the bands indicates multiple transitions. We see
that such intersections are inevitable in the global picture. Thus
multiple transitions will occur from time to time globally, as @xmath .
Locally along a fixed timeline, it is possible that the probability of
multiple transitions occurring will tend to zero as @xmath , in
agreement with the multiple transitions conjecture in SH dynamics, but
we cannot make a strong claim in this regard.

#### 30 Effects of spatial inhomogeneity I: role of saddles

In this section, we illustrate the role of saddle points in creating
step-like or spiky structures. We also take this opportunity to
illustrate the past attractors of diagonal and OT @xmath cosmologies.

##### 30.1 Step-like structures

We now illustrate step-like structures in the tilt variable @xmath in
diagonal @xmath cosmologies, and provide evidence to support the claim
that the past attractor is given by ( 502 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (586)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that diagonal @xmath cosmologies satisfy ( 379 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (587)
  -- -------- -- -------

Consider the following initial data at @xmath with @xmath (in
conjunction with ( 581 ) and ( 587 )):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (588)
  -- -------- -- -------

We ran CLAWPACK with 512 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , storing
data at intervals of @xmath . Figure 27 shows the snapshots of the tilt
variable @xmath at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We see the strong
suggestion that three step-like structures develop as @xmath : one
between @xmath , and two between @xmath and @xmath . The one between
@xmath involves an unstable state @xmath , while the two between @xmath
and @xmath involve a string of Kasner equilibrium points with @xmath and
@xmath that connect the stable arcs @xmath and @xmath .

Figures 28 – 30 show the snapshots of the variables @xmath in the @xmath
space. Each dot represents the state at a grid point. We see that the
state vector approaches the past attractor ( 289 ).

##### 30.2 Spiky structures

We now illustrate spiky structures in the trigger @xmath in OT @xmath
cosmologies, and provide evidence to support the claim that the past
attractor is given by ( 500 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (589)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that OT @xmath cosmologies satisfy ( 377 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (590)
  -- -------- -- -------

Consider the following initial data at @xmath with @xmath (in
conjunction with ( 581 ) and ( 590 )):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (591)
  -- -------- -- -------

We ran CLAWPACK with 512 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , storing
data at intervals of @xmath . Figure 31 shows the snapshots of @xmath
and the trigger @xmath at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We see the strong
suggestion that spikes develop as @xmath . Figures 32 shows the
snapshots of the variables @xmath in the @xmath space. Each dot
represents the state at a grid point. We see that the solution shadows
the Taub vacuum Bianchi II orbits on the sphere ( 489 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

along some grid points, as it approaches the stable Kasner arc between
@xmath and @xmath . This may be compared with the Taub vacuum Bianchi II
orbits shadowed by the transformed WM solution in Figure 16 . There are
two points stuck on the arc to the left of the @xmath Taub Kasner point,
creating two spikes. Along all other grid points, the orbits approach
the past attractor ( 589 ). The points closest to @xmath take the
longest to traverse the Taub vacuum Bianchi II orbits.

The simulations also confirm that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (592)
  -- -------- -- -------

along spike points, despite large spatial gradients. Thus asymptotic
silence holds along spike points. Our result has been mentioned in
Andersson et al . 2004 [ 3 , page S50] .

#### 31 Effects of spatial inhomogeneity II: role of spatial derivative
terms

In this section, we illustrate the role of spatial derivative terms in
creating spike transitions and shock waves.

##### 31.1 Spike transitions

Consider the following initial data at @xmath with @xmath (in
conjunction with ( 581 )):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (593)
  -- -------- -- -------

High resolution is essential to simulate a spike transition correctly.
We ran CLAWPACK with 16384 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , storing
data at intervals of @xmath . ⁶³ ⁶³ 63 The simulation in Section 28 does
not have high enough resolution to correctly simulate spike transitions,
but was acceptable for the typical background SH dynamics.

Figure 33 shows the orbits along three grid points: two typical points
at grid number 3000 and 3500, and the spike point at grid number 3267.
The typical points undergo a sequence of three transitions, while the
spike point undergoes a spike transition. The spike transition orbit is
a straight line, taking the solution to the Kasner point that is reached
by the sequence of @xmath – @xmath – @xmath transitions, in about the
same time.

Figure 34 shows the snapshots of @xmath , the triggers @xmath , @xmath
and the spatial derivative terms @xmath , @xmath on the interval between
grid point 3000 and grid point 3500. A spike forms at @xmath in all of
the variables, but @xmath also activates at the spike point (grid point
3267), and develops a very steep gradient. In addition, @xmath and
@xmath develop spikes that have bigger amplitudes than the spikes in
both @xmath and @xmath . A reversal of the spike in @xmath occurs some
time between @xmath and @xmath . The dynamics appears to be inherently
inhomogeneous.

We now take a closer look at the dynamics. Figures 35 – 36 show the
@xmath -normalized terms in the evolution equations ( 667 )–( 668 ) for
the pair @xmath . First, a spike forms in @xmath with the same mechanism
as permanent @xmath spikes. From Figure 35 , we see that @xmath is
significant enough that, when added to the algebraic terms on the right
hand side of the @xmath equation, it leads to a sign change in @xmath at
the spike point, which then activates @xmath at the spike point to start
the spike transition. From Figure 36 , we see that an active @xmath at
the spike point in turn gives a @xmath large enough that, when added to
the algebraic terms on the right hand side of the @xmath equation, it
leads to a sign change in @xmath at the spike point, which causes the
reversal of the spike in @xmath .

What separates transient spikes like these from the permanent spikes
that we observed in OT @xmath cosmologies? Here, @xmath is large enough
to activate @xmath at the spike point. In permanent spikes, @xmath is
too small, so @xmath still decays to zero at the spike point. Whether
@xmath is large enough depends on the Kasner point where the spike
occurs (see Section 23 ).

The terminology spike transition is introduced by the author and was
first referred to by Andersson et al . 2004 [ 3 , page S50] , who gave a
survey of regular transitions in vacuum OT @xmath cosmologies, using
Hubble-normalized variables. By examining the interplay between @xmath
and @xmath , we shed new light on the mechanism of spike transitions,
building on the work of Garfinkle & Weaver 2003 [ 25 ] . What we have
seen here is the transition of a so-called high-velocity spike. ⁶⁴ ⁶⁴ 64
The so-called velocity is equal to @xmath , and a spike transition is
called a “slide-down” in the velocity in [ 25 ] because @xmath decreases
by a predicted amount during a spike transition. Garfinkle & Weaver also
recognized that a sign change in the evolution equations is crucial for
a spike transition. In OT @xmath cosmologies, a high-velocity spike is
by definition a transient spike, which either reappears as a permanent,
low-velocity spike eventually or disappears [ 25 ] .

Similarly, a transient spike can occur in @xmath , and will undergo a
spike transition that is equivalent to a sequence of @xmath – @xmath –
@xmath transitions.

The simulation also suggests that spike transitions may violate
asymptotic silence: as @xmath , @xmath tends to zero, but @xmath becomes
large during a spike transition, due to the term @xmath (see equation (
675 )). ⁶⁵ ⁶⁵ 65 When doing linearization on the Kasner circles, we
dropped the spatial derivative terms. The linearized evolution equations
for @xmath and @xmath indicate that @xmath tends to zero into the past.
This linearization does not hold when the spatial derivative terms are
large enough, as in the case of spike transitions. In other words,
during a spike transition, the orbit does not shadow the silent
boundary. If spike transitions occur indefinitely as @xmath , then
asymptotic silence is violated. Inadequate numerical spatial resolution
confines the simulations to very short times, so we have not been able
to accurately simulate two consecutive spike transitions. ⁶⁶ ⁶⁶ 66 For a
fixed grid size @xmath , the largest gradient of a jump in a variable
@xmath that can be represented is @xmath . A finer grid size is needed
if the numerical gradient of a spike is observed to approach this upper
bound and @xmath is observed to be growing, otherwise the numerical
solution can underestimate @xmath and thus can delay or even prevent a
spike transition from occurring. This can mislead one to predict that
spike transitions will eventually stop as @xmath , or that @xmath tends
to zero as @xmath (see Andersson et al . 2004b [ 4 ] , Figure 2). We
shall leave this for future research.

There are still questions about what happens to low-velocity spikes in
generic @xmath cosmologies. Will they be permanent or will they undergo
transitions? We have been unable to specify initial conditions that
produce such transitions before numerical resolution becomes inadequate.
We shall also leave this for future research.

##### 31.2 Shock waves

Numerical experiments with shock waves show that the constraints @xmath
and @xmath (see ( 677 )–( 678 )) are unstable numerically near shock
waves. To avoid this problem, we shall set @xmath and @xmath to zero. As
mentioned in Section 25 , the presence of @xmath on the right hand side
may prevent the system from being symmetric hyperbolic, which may be bad
for simulations of shock waves. To avoid this problem we shall set
@xmath .

Consider the following initial data at @xmath with @xmath (using the
scheme for the case @xmath in Section 24 .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (594)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, a large @xmath is chosen to create inhomogeneities with a
short-wavelength (relative to the horizon). The amplitude in the
fluctuation of @xmath is also chosen to be large. These conditions are
favourable for the formation of shock waves.

We ran CLAWPACK with 512 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , and from
@xmath to @xmath storing data at intervals of @xmath . Figures 37 – 38
show the formation of a shock wave in the tilt variable @xmath into the
past and into the future respectively.

The shock wave subsequently smoothes out or dissipates asymptotically.
The mechanism of this dissipation is not clear. SH dynamics cannot
dissipate a discontinuity, but would a small @xmath term dissipate it?

Figure 39 shows a snapshot of all the variables into the future (at
@xmath ). We see that shock waves also appear in the profiles of @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , but not in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
which seem to become non-differentiable at the location of the shock
wave, but still continuous. The profiles of @xmath and @xmath seem
smooth, but it could be that their non-differentiability is barely
visible. Also plotted in Figure 39 are the @xmath -normalized Weyl
scalar @xmath and the Hubble-normalized Weyl scalar @xmath .

#### 32 Future asymptotics

In this section, we illustrate the future asymptotic behaviour of the
tilt variable @xmath , as predicted by ( 391 ).

Consider three sets of the following initial data at @xmath , with
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath (in conjunction with ( 581 )):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (595)
  -- -------- -- -------

Changing @xmath affects only the initial condition for @xmath .

We ran ICN with 512 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , storing data at
intervals of @xmath .

As predicted by ( 391 ), the limit of the tilt variable @xmath depends
on the parameter @xmath . Figure 40 plots the snapshots of @xmath for
the three solutions. This confirms that if @xmath , @xmath tends to
zero; if @xmath , @xmath tends to a function of @xmath that depends on
the initial condition; for @xmath , @xmath tends to @xmath , depending
on the initial condition. ⁶⁷ ⁶⁷ 67 That step-like structures can develop
in the case @xmath was first predicted by Rendall 2003 [ 61 ] .

As mentioned in Section 28 , the evolution is asymptotically silent as
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (596)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the solutions tend to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (597)
  -- -------- -- -------

The numerical decay rates agree with the analytical results of Lim et al
. 2004 [ 48 ] . Table 14 gives the predicted growth rates from [ 48 ] ,
and the typical absolute errors of the numerical decay rates. The errors
are small, indicating excellent agreement between numerical and
analytical results. Note that for the case @xmath , since @xmath tends
to an arbitrary function, we take @xmath as the signature function, and
determine the decay rate of @xmath at @xmath .

#### 33 Close-to-FL epoch

In this section, we describe the evolution of a cosmological model that
is close to the flat FL solution at @xmath . By “close to flat FL” we
mean the Hubble-normalized shear and the Weyl scalars are sufficiently
small, and @xmath is sufficiently close to 1 (see WE, page 62).

Consider the following initial data at @xmath for an OT @xmath cosmology
( @xmath ) with @xmath (using the scheme for the case @xmath in Section
24 ).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (598)
  -- -------- -- -------

The initial value for @xmath is chosen so that the initial value for
@xmath is close to zero (see Figure 44 ).

We ran CLAWPACK with 512 grid points, from @xmath to @xmath , storing
data at intervals of @xmath , and from @xmath to @xmath , storing data
at intervals of @xmath .

Figure 41 shows the evolution along the grid point 100 of 512. The
graphs of @xmath and @xmath show three distinct epochs – two asymptotic
and one intermediate. They are the Kasner asymptotic epoch from @xmath
to @xmath , the flat FL intermediate epoch from @xmath to @xmath , and
the de Sitter asymptotic epoch from @xmath to @xmath . The fact that the
flat FL epoch is of finite duration is a reflection of the fact that the
flat FL model is unstable ⁶⁸ ⁶⁸ 68 In the Hubble-normalized SH state
space, the flat FL solution is described by an equilibrium point that is
a saddle point, reflecting its instability within the SH context. The
simulations also reflect unstable inhomogeneous modes. into the future
and into the past. The transition from the flat FL epoch to the de
Sitter asymptotic epoch is rapid, with steep slopes in the graphs of
@xmath and @xmath . The transition from the Kasner epoch to the flat FL
epoch is less rapid, with a milder slope in the graph of @xmath . The
growth rate of @xmath is as expected, since @xmath for the Kasner
solutions, @xmath for the flat FL solution with @xmath , and @xmath for
the de Sitter solution. As @xmath increases, @xmath grows exponentially
until @xmath at @xmath , when @xmath reaches a maximum of @xmath and
starts to decrease exponentially. ⁶⁹ ⁶⁹ 69 Notice that the @xmath
constraint has an unacceptably large error at about @xmath . As a
result, the simulation loses accuracy temporarily. As mentioned in
Section 27 , stability of constraints is still an open issue in
numerical simulations.

Evolving into the past from @xmath , the solution enters the Kasner
asymptotic regime and approaches the Kasner arc @xmath . A snapshot of
the spatial profile at @xmath would show two spikes forming in @xmath ,
and the asymptotic spatial signature, i.e. the dependence of @xmath on
@xmath . This asymptotic behaviour is similar to the one shown in Figure
31 .

Evolving far into the future, the solution approaches the de Sitter
solution. A snapshot of the spatial profile at @xmath would show the
asymptotic spatial signature, i.e. the dependence of @xmath on @xmath .
This asymptotic behaviour is qualitatively the same as the one shown in
Figure 40 .

We now take a detailed look at the close-to-FL intermediate epoch.
Evolving into the future from @xmath , we observe oscillations in the
variables. Figure 42 shows in detail the evolution during the
close-to-FL epoch and the earlier part of the de Sitter epoch, during
which these oscillations occur. We see 45 oscillations in the pair
@xmath , 27 in @xmath , and 5 in @xmath . ⁷⁰ ⁷⁰ 70 There are also
oscillations in @xmath , approximately of amplitude @xmath , but these
are not visible in the graph because of the scale. How do these numbers
relate to the wavelengths of spatial inhomogeneities? Figure 45 shows
the snapshot at @xmath , revealing that the wavelength of spatial
inhomogeneities is @xmath in the pair @xmath , @xmath in @xmath , and
@xmath in @xmath . @xmath are gravitational field variables, whose
characteristic speed of propagation is the speed of light, while @xmath
is a matter field variable, whose characteristic speed of propagation is
the speed of sound, given by @xmath times the speed of light. ⁷¹ ⁷¹ 71
For characteristic eigenfields and their corresponding characteristic
velocities of propagation, see van Elst et al . 2002 [ 74 ] . Comparing
the numbers of oscillations with the wavelengths and taking into account
the speeds of propagation, we have excellent agreement – we see @xmath
as many oscillations in @xmath as in @xmath , because the wavelength of
spatial inhomogeneities in @xmath is @xmath times as long. Since @xmath
, we can predict that there should be @xmath as many oscillations in
@xmath as in @xmath , because waves in @xmath travel @xmath as fast as
@xmath do, and the wavelength of spatial inhomogeneities in @xmath is
@xmath times as long. The simulations agree with the prediction.

We also observe that the oscillations are most rapid at @xmath , when
@xmath reaches its maximum. This is expected, because the frequency is
equal to the speed of propagation divided by the wavelength. Recall from
( 406 ) that the coordinate speed of light is @xmath . Since we have
chosen a @xmath -coordinate such that @xmath , for a fixed wavelength
the frequency is proportional to @xmath . We note that the frequency
depends on the choice of @xmath -coordinate, and the physical frequency
should be computed with respect to the clock time, for which @xmath .
Since @xmath into the past and @xmath into the future, the physical
frequency actually decreases with time.

With the shear and spatial curvature variables staying close to zero
during the flat FL epoch and subsequently during the de Sitter epoch,
the instability of the flat FL model appears to be primarily due to the
growth of @xmath into the future, leading to growth in the Weyl
curvature, which describes anisotropy in the free gravitational field.
⁷² ⁷² 72 Such behaviour can also occur in SH cosmologies of Bianchi type
VII @xmath (see Nilsson et al . 1999 [ 57 ] ), i.e. the
Hubble-normalized Weyl curvature can be large even though the
Hubble-normalized shear is close to zero. The spatial derivative terms
are the largest at @xmath , when @xmath attains a maximum. The largest
spatial derivative terms are @xmath and @xmath , both of which have
magnitudes approximately equal to

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

Thus the Weyl scalars @xmath and @xmath (see ( 275 ) and ( 15 )–( 365
)), which contain spatial derivative terms, are approximately @xmath at
@xmath . This growth in the Weyl curvature scalars mirrors the growth of
@xmath and the decrease of the wavelength of inhomogeneities relative to
the particle horizon. From @xmath onwards, the Weyl curvature scalars
decrease, reflecting the decrease of @xmath and the increase of the
wavelength of inhomogeneities relative to the event horizon. Figure 43
shows the evolution of the Weyl scalars along the grid point 100 of 512,
confirming the above argument.

We have performed a variety of simulations of @xmath cosmologies with a
close-to-FL epoch. Decreasing the initial size of @xmath will increase
the duration of the flat FL epoch, defined by @xmath , @xmath , into the
future. On the other hand, this change will allow more time for @xmath
to grow, which will in turn increase the Weyl scalars significantly.
Increasing the initial value of @xmath will also increase the Weyl
scalars. We comment that there are three modes (with two fields in each
mode) that develop oscillations, namely @xmath describing acoustic
waves, and @xmath and @xmath describing gravitational waves. In the
initial condition ( 598 ) we introduced three different wavelengths into
the three modes ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ). Coupling between these
three modes does occur, but is rather weak. For example if @xmath
initially the gravitational wave modes will subsequently turn @xmath on,
with @xmath and @xmath modes. We note that the two fields in each mode
can have different wavelengths.

In conclusion we note that the simulations during the close-to-FL epoch
@xmath can be viewed as non-linear perturbations of the flat FL model.
It would be interesting to use simulations of this nature to test the
validity of the linear perturbations of the flat FL model that are used
extensively in cosmology.

### Chapter \thechapter Conclusion

In this thesis, by constructing a unified framework, analyzing explicit
solutions, providing heuristic arguments, and performing numerical
simulations, we have made considerable progress in understanding the
dynamics of inhomogeneous cosmologies with one spatial degree of
freedom, the so-called @xmath cosmologies. We have highlighted the role
of spatially homogeneous cosmologies, in particular the tilted models,
in providing the background dynamics.

The dynamics of tilted SH cosmologies is still not well-understood. In
Chapter I , we have given a unified classification scheme for @xmath
cosmologies and for @xmath -compatible SH cosmologies, based on the
@xmath action and on the tilt degrees of freedom. In Chapter I , this
classification leads to a unified system of equations and spatial gauge
choice that is valid for @xmath -compatible SH cosmologies of all
Bianchi types. By analyzing the stability of the Kasner equilibrium
points, we have shown that the occurrence of Mixmaster dynamics is
determined by the @xmath action, and that the tilt determines whether
the fluid vorticity is dynamically significant near the initial
singularity.

The notion of asymptotic silence provides the link between @xmath and SH
dynamics. This link enabled us to establish that Mixmaster dynamics
occurs in a @xmath cosmology if and only if the @xmath action is
generic, by making use of the analysis of Mixmaster dynamics in SH
cosmologies. We have also given the past attractors for subclasses of
@xmath cosmologies that do not permit Mixmaster dynamics.

We have made significant progress in understanding the development of
steep spatial gradients. In Chapter I , we have given a detailed
analysis of two classes of explicit solutions, the first one with
step-like structures, and the second one with spikes. The second one is
new, and is the only known explicit @xmath solution with spikes. We have
made a detailed comparison of the asymptotic size of different terms in
the evolution equations, which revealed that spatial derivative terms
are not always negligible. Furthermore, the growth of spatial derivative
terms triggers the so-called spike transitions. As a result, the BKL
conjecture II does not hold in general for @xmath cosmologies.

All numerical simulations of @xmath cosmologies to date have considered
vacuum models, and have used a metric formulation. Chapter II is one of
two pieces of work, the other being Andersson et al . 2004 [ 4 ] [ 2 ] ,
in which numerical simulations of @xmath cosmologies have been performed
in a dynamical system framework. Our work complements that of Andersson
et al . in that they consider the past asymptotic dynamics of vacuum
@xmath cosmologies, whereas we have considered the full range of the
dynamics for non-vacuum models in which the matter content is a
radiation perfect fluid and a positive cosmological constant.

Our simulations show that, for models that are close to FL at some time,
the evolution consists of three distinct epochs, namely the past and
future asymptotic epochs and the close-to-FL intermediate epoch. The
numerical results support the following conclusions, within these
epochs.

-   Past asymptotic silence, future asymptotic silence (if @xmath ), the
    BKL conjecture I, and the Kasner Attractivity Conjecture are valid
    along almost all orbits of a typical @xmath cosmology.

-   Mixmaster dynamics occurs along a typical timeline of a typical
    @xmath cosmology in the past asymptotic regime, provided that the
    group action is generic.

-   The dynamics in asymptotically silent regimes consists of the
    background SH dynamics and a spectrum of inhomogeneous phenomena, in
    which the trigger variables and the wavelengths of inhomogeneities
    play crucial roles.

-   A trigger variable that has both signs causes step-like or spiky
    structures to form.

-   A spike transition occurs if the spatial derivative of a trigger
    causes the time derivative in the evolution equation to change sign.

-   Sufficiently short wavelength spatial inhomogeneities in the matter
    variables can lead to the formation of shock waves.

-   A long enough close-to-FL epoch allows the wavelength of spatial
    inhomogeneities to decrease, which leads to wave-like phenomena and
    potentially a large Weyl curvature.

-   Wave-like phenomena disappear as the solution enters the past
    asymptotic regime or the de Sitter future asymptotic regime, which
    is asymptotically silent.

We conclude by commenting on future research that this thesis leads to.
Firstly, the unified formulation that we have given provides a framework
for proving the conjectures, in particular the asymptotic silence
conjecture, the BKL conjecture I, and the Kasner Attractivity
Conjecture, that appear to govern the asymptotic dynamics of tilted SH
and @xmath cosmologies. Secondly, the analysis of the tilted SH
cosmologies can now be completed using the unified formulation. Thirdly,
it is possible that further analysis of the close-to-FL simulations,
which represent non-linear perturbations of the flat FL model, may shed
light on an important question: how reliable are the standard linear
perturbation analyses of the flat FL model, which play a fundamental
role in cosmology?

### Chapter \thechapter @xmath action

In this appendix, we prove Proposition \thechapter .1 in Section 8 about
@xmath models with a hypersurface-orthogonal KVF. We split the
proposition into two parts: Proposition \thechapter .1 and its
corollary.

###### Proposition \thechapter.1.

Consider a @xmath model presented in a group-invariant orbit-aligned
frame with @xmath and @xmath tangent to the @xmath orbits. Then the
@xmath admits a hypersurface-orthogonal KVF if and only if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (599)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

“ @xmath ”: Let @xmath be a HO KVF, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (600)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expanding this yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (601)
     @xmath   @xmath      (602)
     @xmath   @xmath      (603)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Using ( 57 ), equations ( 603 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (604)
  -- -------- -- -------

The group-invariant frame yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (605)
     @xmath   @xmath      (606)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which are then contracted with @xmath and substituted into ( 601 ) and (
602 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (607)
  -- -------- -- -------

respectively. Equations ( 604 ) and ( 607 ) combine to yield ( 599 ). ∎

“ @xmath ”: Assuming ( 599 ), use the rotation freedom to set ⁷³ ⁷³ 73
For convenience we introduce the following notation:

@xmath (608)

and

@xmath (609)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (610)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then ( 599 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (611)
  -- -------- -- -------

The evolution equations for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and the @xmath
constraint then imply that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (612)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equations ( 610 )–( 612 ) imply that the frame vector @xmath is
hypersurface-orthogonal. We also have, trivially,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (613)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Lemma 1 below, this means @xmath is parallel to a KVF. Thus this
KVF is also hypersurface-orthogonal, and is independent of the choice (
610 ). ∎

Lemma 1

Consider a @xmath model presented in a group-invariant orbit-aligned
frame with @xmath and @xmath tangent to the @xmath orbits. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (614)
  -- -------- -- -------

if and only if @xmath is parallel to a KVF.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be KVFs. As seen in the proof of the Proposition,
the group-invariant frame yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (615)
     @xmath   @xmath      (616)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and likewise for @xmath .

“ @xmath ”: Assuming @xmath is parallel to @xmath , we have @xmath .
Then ( 615 )–( 616 ) imply that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (617)
  -- -------- -- -------

or equivalently ( 614 ), as required to prove. ∎

“ @xmath ”: Assuming ( 614 ), or equivalently,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (618)
  -- -------- -- -------

we obtain the following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (619)
  -- -------- -- -------

and likewise for @xmath . Equation ( 619 ) has a very special form. If
@xmath at one point in spacetime, then ( 619 ) implies that @xmath at
every point in spacetime.

If @xmath or @xmath , then @xmath or @xmath is parallel to @xmath and we
are done. If not, pick any point P and a constant K so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (620)
  -- -------- -- -------

But @xmath satisfies the equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (621)
  -- -------- -- -------

which now implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (622)
  -- -------- -- -------

at every point in spacetime. Thus @xmath is parallel to @xmath and we
are done. ∎

Corollary of Proposition \thechapter .1

Consider a @xmath model presented in a group-invariant orbit-aligned
frame with @xmath and @xmath tangent to the @xmath orbits. If the @xmath
admits a hypersurface-orthogonal KVF, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (623)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

Using ( 604 ) and ( 607 ), we simplify ( 605 ) and ( 606 ) to the
following:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (624)
     @xmath   @xmath      (625)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We shall then differentiate ( 604 ) and ( 607 ). First, using ( 64 ) and
( 624 ), @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (626)
  -- -------- -- -------

which implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (627)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, using ( 68 ) and ( 625 ), @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (628)
  -- -------- -- -------

which implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (629)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, using ( 65 ) and ( 624 ), @xmath and @xmath combine to yield

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (630)
  -- -------- -- -------

which implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (631)
  -- -------- -- -------

as required. It also follows from ( 599 ) and ( 623 ) that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (632)
  -- -------- -- -------

∎

### Chapter \thechapter Rotation formulae

For @xmath cosmologies, the spatial gauge freedom is represented by a
position-dependent rotation of the spatial frame vectors @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (633)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath -compatible SH cosmologies, the rotation is restricted to
@xmath .

Writing the commutators using ( 633 ) gives the formulae for the
transformation of the variables (regardless of @xmath - or
Hubble-normalization) under a rotation:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (634)
     @xmath   @xmath      (635)
     @xmath   @xmath      (636)
     @xmath   @xmath      (637)
     @xmath   @xmath      (638)
     @xmath   @xmath      (639)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Other variables, namely @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , are not affected by the rotation.

Note that the determinant of @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (640)
  -- -------- -- -------

is invariant if @xmath , but will change if @xmath also depends on
@xmath . The sign of @xmath is thus significant for @xmath -compatible
SH cosmologies, but not for @xmath cosmologies.

### Chapter \thechapter Asymptotic expansions at spike points

For a general vacuum OT @xmath solution, Kichenassamy & Rendall 1998 [
42 , equations (5)–(6)] gave a generic expansion for the metric
functions @xmath and @xmath (see ( 458 )–( 459 )):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (641)
     @xmath   @xmath      (642)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath satisfies @xmath . The above expansion is inadequate in
satisfying the evolution equations ( 453 )–( 456 ). To obtain an
adequate expansion, we start with the vacuum Bianchi II solution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (643)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . We replace the constants @xmath and @xmath by arbitrary
functions of @xmath and integrate the evolution equations ( 453 )–( 456
) to obtain updated @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in succession.
Finally, we integrate the asymptotic expansion for @xmath and @xmath to
obtain the asymptotic expansion for @xmath and @xmath , using ( 459 ).

The necessary expansion for @xmath and @xmath is as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (644)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (645)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (646)
     @xmath      (647)
     @xmath      (648)
  -- -------- -- -------

Rendall & Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] transform the Kichenassamy-Rendall
expansion ( 641 )–( 642 ) to produce expansions for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath for the transformed solution. ⁷⁵ ⁷⁵ 75 The temporal and spatial
coordinates used by Rendall & Weaver 2001 [ 62 ] are @xmath and @xmath ,
which are related to ours according to @xmath For example, @xmath here
would correspond to @xmath in [ 62 ] . We shall transform ( 644 )–( 645
) to obtain a consistent expansion for the transformed solutions @xmath
. The resulting expansions for the transformed solution are as follows.
Along @xmath , where @xmath : ⁷⁶ ⁷⁶ 76 It turns out that the asymptotic
expansions for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the same as the
time derivative of the asymptotic expansions ( 649 )–( 652 ), and so we
do not list them.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (649)
     @xmath   @xmath      (650)
     @xmath               (651)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (652)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (653)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (654)
     @xmath   @xmath      (655)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (656)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Along typical points: ⁷⁷ ⁷⁷ 77 It turns out that the asymptotic
expansions for the temporal and spatial derivatives of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are the same as the temporal and spatial derivatives
of the asymptotic expansions ( 657 )–( 660 ), and so we do not list
them.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (657)
     @xmath   @xmath      (658)
     @xmath   @xmath      (659)
     @xmath   @xmath      (660)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The above expansion is consistent with the evolution equations ( 453 )–(
456 ). To simplify to the expansion for the transformed WM solution in
Section 22 , set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (661)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case, the @xmath and @xmath terms have the same power and they
cancel each other in the expansion for @xmath , since @xmath from ( 646
) and ( 661 ).

The above expansion is a new result, and provides the asymptotic
expansion in the framework of the orthonormal frame formalism.

### Chapter \thechapter Equations for numerical simulations of @xmath
models

Following the derivation in Section 15 , we arrive at a system of
equations ( 329 )–( 350 ) with @xmath -normalized variables for @xmath
cosmologies. As mentioned at the beginning of Chapter II , we shall
restrict our considerations to @xmath cosmologies with one tilt degree
of freedom. In doing so, the shear spatial gauge ( 367 ) simplifies to (
532 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (662)
  -- -------- -- -------

We drop the index on the remaining tilt variable @xmath , and simplify
the evolution equation ( 354 ) for @xmath by collecting the @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath terms into an @xmath term. As explained in Chapter II
, we solve the constraint ( 15 ) to determine @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath have the same evolution equation, we can save
numerical resources by writing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (663)
  -- -------- -- -------

and evolve @xmath only, and obtain @xmath from the initial conditions.
See Section 24 for more discussion of the initial conditions.

Numerical experiments show that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
prone to getting out of range, e.g. @xmath becoming negative. To prevent
this we evolve @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath instead.

The resulting system for numerical simulations, given below, consists of
9 evolution equations ( 664 )–( 672 ) and two constraint equation ( 677
)–( 678 ).

Evolution equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (664)
     @xmath   @xmath      (665)
     @xmath   @xmath      (666)
     @xmath   @xmath      (667)
     @xmath   @xmath      (668)
     @xmath   @xmath      (669)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (670)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (671)
     @xmath   @xmath      (672)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (673)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (674)
     @xmath   @xmath      (675)
     @xmath   @xmath      (676)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Constraint equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (677)
     @xmath   @xmath      (678)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For simulations in the de Sitter asymptotic regime (where @xmath and
@xmath tend to zero), we use @xmath and @xmath as variables to maintain
numerical precision.

{comment}

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (679)
     @xmath   @xmath      (680)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (681)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (682)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------