## 4.4 Application to a two-level subsystem

We now apply our new theory to describe the dynamics of a two-level
subsystem interacting in a non-diagonal way with a general environment.
Thanks to a simplification, the equations of our theory take in this
case a sufficiently simple form to allow analytical solutions and an
easy identification of the physical processes in play. This
simplification consists in neglecting the contribution of the diagonal
elements of the environment coupling operator in the basis diagonalizing
the Hamiltonian of the environment. It should be noticed that this
simplification can be the feature of many systems. For instance, it is
exactly satisfied for any random matrix model in which the environment
coupling operator @xmath has a vanishing ensemble average. In this case,
the average of the matrix elements @xmath over the ensemble of random
matrices @xmath also vanishes for all eigenvectors @xmath of @xmath .

The Hamiltonian of a two-level subsystem interacting in a non-diagonal
way with an environment is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where
@xmath @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the @xmath Pauli matrices,
@xmath @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the two-level subsystem,
@xmath @xmath is the energy spacing between the two levels of the
subsystem,
@xmath @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the environment,
@xmath @xmath is the coupling operator of the subsystem,
@xmath @xmath is the coupling operator of the environment,
@xmath @xmath is the coupling parameter between the subsystem and the
environment.
The subsystem eigenvalue equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

The two-level subsystem density matrix is, in our new theory,
distributed in energy as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energy-distributed elements of the subsystem density matrix evolve
according to our new non-Markovian equation ( 4.26 ). In the subsystem
eigenbasis, equation ( 4.2 ) is given in the present case by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the distributed population and by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the coherences. Performing the Markovian approximation on equation (
4.4 ) and ( 4.4 ) or, equivalently, using the Markovian equation (
LABEL:2Bbaab ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the population and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the coherences. We see that the population and the coherence
dynamics are coupled together by the first-order term in @xmath in
equation ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.4 ). As mentioned before, to simplify the
analysis, we will decouple them by assuming that the coupling operator
of the environment is diagonal in the eigenbasis representation of the
environment Hamiltonian : @xmath for all @xmath . Doing this, all the
first-order terms in @xmath in equation ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.4 ) disappear.
Let us now define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using equation ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.4 ), we find that the population dynamics
can be studied with the variable @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and the coherence dynamics with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We also find that @xmath is a constant of motion. If one chooses the
initial condition of the total system to be the product of a general
subsystem density matrix with a microcanonical distribution at energy
@xmath for the reservoir, we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and, therefore, the reduced density matrix of the subsystem reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We conclude that @xmath . This means that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If the initial condition of the coherences is strictly ”local” in the
energy of the environment (i.e. a true delta distribution) and if the
Markovian approximation is exact, the non-local terms in the coherence
evolution equations ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.4 ) do not contribute to the
coherence dynamics and can be neglected. However, the initial condition
is never strictly ”local” in the real world. Furthermore, the
non-Markovian initial effects also contribute to give a width to the
distribution. Therefore, even if these non-local effects are generally
small, neglecting these terms in the coherence evolution has to be
considered as an approximation in order to get analytical solutions for
the subsystem dynamics. Notice that the terms we neglect are non-local
only if @xmath is not too small compared to the typical energy scale of
variation of the microcanonical correlation function @xmath . If @xmath
is not too small, our assumption is not valid and our new equation
reduces to the Redfield equation (see appendix C ). However, for the
population, the non-local character of the dynamics is strong and cannot
be neglected. This is precisely the improvement of our new theory with
respect to the Redfield theory. Performing the local approximation on
the coherence dynamics ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.4 ), the dynamics of the
populations and of the coherences can be rewritten

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.70)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The solutions of the equation ( 4.70 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.72)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using ( 4.62 ), we obtain the final result for the two-level subsystem
reduced dynamics which reads

@xmath @xmath @xmath (4.73) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

The two-level subsystem Markovian dynamics obeys a biexponential
relaxation of the populations and an oscillatory exponential relaxation
for the coherences.
Our results are consistent with the expected result at equilibrium for a
large environment. In fact, the coherences disappear on long time scales
and the populations reach an equilibrium value which is given by the
canonical Boltzmann distribution. This is shown using the property (
4.50 ) which becomes in case of the two-level subsystem

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using now the fact that @xmath , we find that the equilibrium value of
the population becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is precisely the canonical expectation value of the population at a
temperature given by the microcanonical temperature of the environment.
Once again, we see that our new theory recovers the expected results
from statistical mechanics when the environment becomes large enough.

The Redfield equation applied to the two-level system is derived in
appendix C . One can notice that, in general, the solutions predicted by
our new theory and those predicted by the Redfield theory are not the
same. The population dynamics is very different. The relaxation rate as
well as the equilibrium value is different. But the coherence dynamics
is similar. Both theories predict an exponential damping of the
oscillating coherences at the same rate but the frequency of the
oscillations differs only by the Lamb shift. One can assume for a very
large environment that the microcanonical environment correlation
function is almost constant on energies of the order of the subsystem
typical energies around its microcanonical energy @xmath . As we have
seen in section 4.3 , in this case our new equation reduces to the
Redfield equation. In fact our population equation [ @xmath in equation
( 4.73 )] reduces in this case to the Redfield population dynamics [
@xmath in equation( C.9 )]. However, we had to do the non-local
approximation to derive an analytical expression for the coherence
dynamics. But this approximation fails when the environment becomes too
large. Therefore, in this case, our approximated coherence equations [
@xmath and @xmath in equation ( 4.73 )] have to be replaced by the
Redfield coherence equations [ @xmath and @xmath in equation( C.9 )].

## Chapter 5 The spin-GORM model

In the previous chapter, we have presented a weak-coupling kinetic
theory extending the Redfield theory to subsystems interacting with a
finite environment. The conditions of validity of these quantum kinetic
equations remain however little known. It is indeed very important to
understand what are the conditions (in particular the minimum size)
under which a quantum system can display an irreversible relaxation
towards an equilibrium state. It is the purpose of this chapter to
contribute to the clarification of these questions by studying the
simple model of a two-level system or spin ¹ ¹ 1 Spin means in what
follows a spin @xmath and is therefore equivalent to a two-level system.
interacting with a random-matrix environment. Indeed, work done during
the last decade has shown that typical quantum systems with a classical
chaotic dynamics presents properties of random matrices on small energy
scales [ 7 , 35 , 39 , 87 ] . Here, we consider the Hamiltonian of the
environment as well as the operator of coupling between the spin and the
environment to be given by random matrices taken in a statistical
ensemble of Gaussian orthogonal random matrices. This defines a model
that we called the spin-GORM model [ 23 , 24 ] . Its total Hamiltonian
can be numerically diagonalized and, therefore, its physical properties
can be computed numerically. Furthermore, for this model many results
can be obtained analytically. It is therefore a prototype model to test
and to compare the different kinetic theories. Similar models using
Gaussian orthogonal random matrices [ 32 , 54 ] or using banded random
matrices [ 14 , 15 , 57 , 64 , 71 ] have been studied. It has been shown
that the dynamics of a subsystem interacting with an environment trough
an interaction term modeled by random matrices present common features
with other types of interaction terms found in the literature [ 57 ] .

The spin-GORM model differs from the spin-boson model by the density of
states of the environment. Instead of monotonously increasing with
energy as in the spin-boson model, the density of states of the
environment obeys Wigner’s semicircle law in our model and is thus
limited to an interval of energy with a maximum density in between. We
notice that such densities of states appear in systems where a spin is
coupled to other (possibly dissimilar) spins as, for instance, in NMR,
in which case the density of states of the other spins forming the
environment also present a maximum instead of a monotonous increase with
energy. Our model may therefore constitute a simplification of such kind
of interacting spin systems. Our main purpose is to understand the
conditions under which a kinetic description can be used in order to
understand the relaxation of the spin under the effect of the coupling
with the rest of the system, which we refer to as a complex environment.

Our study of the spin-GORM model is separated in four parts. In section
5.1 , we define the model. In section 5.2 , we study the spectral
properties of the total system. In section 5.3 , we study the different
regimes of the spin relaxation dynamics. Finally in section 5.4 , we
investigate the equilibrium distributions of the subsystem and of the
total system.

### 5.1 The model

We are interested in the study of a total system composed of a simple
subsystem (with a few discrete levels) interacting with a complex
environment (with many levels). A prototype of such system is given by a
two-level subsystem interacting with an environment defined in terms of
random matrices. The von Neumann equation of this system reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the total Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where
@xmath @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the @xmath Pauli matrices,
@xmath @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the two-level subsystem,
@xmath @xmath is the energy spacing between the two-levels of the
subsystem,
@xmath @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the environment,
@xmath @xmath is the coupling operator of the subsystem,
@xmath @xmath is the coupling operator of the environment,
@xmath @xmath is the coupling parameter between the subsystem and the
environment.

The well-known spin-boson model [ 30 , 55 , 90 ] is a particular case of
this total system where @xmath corresponds to an infinite harmonic
oscillator lattice and @xmath is linear in the degrees of freedom of the
environment. Here, we want to define a new model, the spin-GORM model,
also described by the total Hamiltonian ( 5.2 ) and for which @xmath and
@xmath are Gaussian orthogonal random matrices (GORM) (see appendix D
for some basic properties of GORM).

Such a model can represent for example an electronic spin traveling in a
semiconducting quantum dot in the shape of a chaotic billiard and,
furthermore, submitted to a magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of
the dot. The quantum dot contains a localized ferromagnetic impurity
with a classical magnetic dipole. The two spin levels of the traveling
electron are split by the magnetic field and interact through a magnetic
dipole-dipole interaction in a non-diagonal way with the classical
magnetic dipole of the localized ferromagnetic impurity. Since the
position and momentum operators of the electron are associated with a
classically chaotic dynamics, they can be represented by Gaussian
orthogonal random matrices according to the Bohigas-Giannoni-Schmit
conjecture [ 7 ] . This system is schematically depicted in figure 5.1 .

Let us now discuss the random matrix aspect of the spin-GORM model in
more detail. As we said, we want to model a two-level subsystem that
interacts with an environment that has a complex dynamics. Here, complex
is used in a generic way. The complexity can come, for example, from the
fact that the corresponding classical system is chaotic [ 7 , 35 , 39 ,
87 ] like in a quantum billiard or for the hydrogen atom in a strong
magnetic field. It can also come from large number of couplings in an
interacting many-body system as in nuclear physics [ 35 ] or in
interacting fermion systems such as quantum computers [ 35 , 5 ] . In
the sixties, Wigner [ 9 , 62 , 73 ] was the first to develop
random-matrix theory for the purpose of modeling spectral fluctuations
of complex quantum systems containing many states interacting with each
other. This tool has now become very common in many fields from nuclear
physics to quantum chaos. This is the reason why we consider random
matrices to characterize the complexity of the environment operators.
The environment operators of the spin-GORM model, @xmath and @xmath ,
are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are two different @xmath Gaussian orthogonal
random matrices with mean zero. Their non-diagonal (diagonal) elements
have standard deviation @xmath ( @xmath ). @xmath and @xmath are two
different realizations of the same random-matrix ensemble and have
therefore the same statistical properties. @xmath and @xmath are the
standard deviations of the non-diagonal elements of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. For these random matrices, the width of their averaged
smoothed density of states is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see Appendix D ).
It is interesting to define the model in such a way that, when @xmath is
increased, the averaged smoothed density of states of the environment
increases without changing its width @xmath . The width can be fixed to
unity. This is equivalent to fixing the characteristic time scale of the
environment. For doing this, it is necessary to rescale the parameters
as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The von Neumann equation of the spin-GORM model becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the rescaled total Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

As announced, we have now @xmath .
In what follows, without loss of generality, @xmath will always be taken
equal to unity. Notice that, to model an environment with a
quasi-continuous spectrum, the random matrix must be very large ( @xmath
).
In order to get ensemble averaged results, one has to perform averages
over the different results obtained for each realization of ( 5.6 ).
When we use finite ensemble averages, the number of members of the
ensemble average will be denoted by @xmath .
We see that the Hamiltonian ( 5.6 ) is characterized by three different
parameters: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We define three different
domains in the reduced parameter space corresponding to a fixed @xmath
in order to facilitate the following discussion. These three regimes are
represented in figure 5.2 : domain A with @xmath ; domain B with @xmath
; domain C with @xmath .

### 5.2 Spectral analysis

In this section, we study the spectrum of the complete system for the
different values of the parameters. This study is important in order to
understand the different dynamical behaviors that we encounter in the
model.

Let us begin by defining the notations in the simple case where there is
no coupling between the two parts of the total system ( @xmath ). The
isolated subsystem has two levels separated by the energy @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The environment has the standard spectrum of a GORM

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The Hamiltonian of the total system without interaction
between the subsystem and the environment is thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the spectrum is therefore given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The eigenvectors are tensorial products of both the subsystem and
environment eigenvectors:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now define the notations in the opposite case, when the coupling
term is so large that the Hamiltonian of the subsystem and of the
environment can both be neglected ( @xmath ). Using the unitary matrix
@xmath acting only on the subsystem degrees of freedom

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the total Hamiltonian becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .
After having defined the notation in the two extreme cases @xmath and
@xmath , we start the study of the spectrum with interaction @xmath .
The total spectrum is given by the eigenvalues @xmath that are solutions
of the eigenvalue problem:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . It is very difficult to obtain analytical results for
this problem. We will therefore study the total spectrum using a method
of numerical diagonalization of the total Hamiltonian.

#### 5.2.1 Smoothed density of states

In order to have a quantitative understanding of the global aspect of
the spectrum (on large energy scales), we will study the total perturbed
averaged smoothed density of states.

The environment-averaged smoothed density of states obeys the semicircle
Wigner law (see equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the continuous variable corresponding to the environment
energy @xmath . Therefore, when @xmath , the total averaged smoothed
density of states is the sum of the two environment semicircular
densities of states which correspond to both states of the two-level
system (see equation ( 5.10 )):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the continuous variable corresponding to the total
energy @xmath . The semicircular densities @xmath and @xmath are
schematically depicted in figure 5.3 for different values of @xmath .
The numerical density of states of the total system corresponding to
@xmath are depicted in figure 5.4 (a)-(c).
When @xmath (meaning that the coupling term becomes dominant in the
Hamiltonian), the averaged smoothed density of states of the total
system (see equation ( 5.14 )) is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the continuous variable corresponding to the total
energy @xmath . This result can be observed in figure 5.4 (a) for @xmath
(because @xmath ).
When @xmath , the total averaged smoothed density of states is also
plotted in figure 5.4 . The main observation is that there is a
broadening of the complete spectrum when one increases @xmath . In
figure 5.4 (a), we see that the averaged smoothed density of states
changes in a smooth way from ( 5.17 ) to ( 5.2.1 ). But in figure 5.4
(b) and much more in figures 5.4 (c) and (d), the two semicircular
densities @xmath and @xmath seem to repel each other as @xmath
increases. This is due to the fact that the levels of a given
semicircular density do not interact with each other but only interact
with the levels of the other semicircular density. This is a consequence
of the non-diagonal form of the coupling. Therefore, having in mind the
perturbative expression of the energies (see equation ( E.6 ) of
Appendix E ), one understands that when @xmath is nonzero, the
eigenvalues that are repelling each other with the most efficiency are
the ones closest to the center of the total spectrum.

#### 5.2.2 Eigenvalue diagrams

The global effect of the increase of @xmath on the eigenvalues has been
studied with the average smoothed density of states. But in order to
have an idea of what happens on a finer energy scale inside the
spectrum, it is interesting to individually follow each eigenvalue
@xmath as a function of @xmath on an eigenvalue diagram.

The first thing to note (see figure 5.5 ) is that the increase of the
coupling induces a repulsion between the eigenvalues. The result is the
broadening of the total spectrum as we already noticed on the smoothed
averaged density of states. If one looks closer inside the fine
structure of the eigenvalue spectrum, we see that there is no crossing
between the eigenvalues. This is a consequence of the fact that there is
no symmetry in the total system. Therefore, the non-crossing rule is
always working. Each time two eigenvalues come close to each other, they
repel each other and create an avoided crossing. One can notice that
there is a large number of avoided crossings inside the region where the
two semicircles @xmath and @xmath overlap (see figure 5.3 in order to
visualize the overlapping zone that extends from @xmath to @xmath ). But
outside this overlapping zone, there are very weak avoided crossings
(and of course no crossing) and all the eigenvalues appear to move in a
regular and smooth way. The regions seen in figures 5.5 (a), (b) and (d)
are inside the overlapping zone and the one in figure 5.5 (e) is
outside. In figure 5.5 (c), the lower part of the diagram is inside the
overlapping zone and the upper part is outside. This phenomenon is due
to the fact that the eigenvalues of a given semicircular density do not
interact with the eigenvalues of their own semicircular density but only
with those of the other semicircular density. It is the consequence of
the non-diagonal nature of the coupling in the spin degrees of freedom.
When the coupling becomes large enough ( @xmath ), the avoided crossings
also disappear inside the overlapping zone. Around @xmath and inside the
overlapping zone, there is a smooth transition from an avoided-crossing
regime that gives rise to a turbulent and complex @xmath evolution to
another regime without much interaction between the eigenvalues that
gives rise to a smooth @xmath evolution.

#### 5.2.3 Spacing distribution

The eigenvalue diagrams only give us a qualitative understanding of the
fine energy structure of the spectrum. For a more quantitative study, it
is interesting to look at the spacing distribution of the spectrum.

When @xmath , each eigenspace @xmath , corresponding to a different
subsystem level, has a Wignerian level spacing distribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

But the total spectrum is obtained by the superposition with a shift
@xmath of two of such spectra. The superposition creates a Poissonian
component to the total spacing distribution in the overlapping zone (
@xmath to @xmath ). A Poissonian distribution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we choose to fit the total spacing distribution by the
mixture

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

This choice of the form of the fit is empirical but reasonable because
the correlation coefficient of the fit is always close to one (between
@xmath and @xmath ).
We computed the spacing distribution and made the fit ( 5.20 ) in order
to compute the mixing coefficient @xmath for different values of @xmath
in the case where the overlapping zone covers almost the whole spectrum
( @xmath ). The results are plotted in figure 5.6 . We see that there is
a specific region of @xmath values where the total spacing distribution
is close to a pure Wignerian one. This region corresponds to the
situation where @xmath , i.e., when the typical intensity of the
interaction between the non-perturbed levels [ which is @xmath since the
first order correction in perturbation theory is zero in our model ]
becomes of the order of the mean level spacing @xmath in the total
system. In this region, the level repulsion is maximal and effective
among almost all the states. In the limit @xmath , the spectrum is again
the superposition of two semicircle distributions, one for the @xmath ’s
and one for the @xmath ’s according to equation ( 5.14 ). As a
consequence, one gets a Poissonian type of spacing distribution. The
other @xmath cases will have a Wignerian spacing distribution outside
the overlapping zone and a mixed one (like for the case @xmath ) inside.
This can be visually seen on the eigenvalue diagram that we studied
before.

#### 5.2.4 The shape of the eigenstates (SOE)

We want now to have some information about the eigenstates of the total
system inside the overlapping zone of the two semicircular densities.

Following [ 14 ] , we define the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We call local density of states (LDOS) the function @xmath for fixed
@xmath and varying @xmath .
We call shape of the eigenstates (SOE) the function @xmath for fixed
@xmath and varying @xmath .
We here focus on the SOE. The SOE tells us how close a perturbed
eigenstate ( @xmath ) at energy @xmath is from the non-perturbed
eigenstate ( @xmath ) at energy @xmath . If the SOE is a very narrow
function centered around @xmath , the concept of a non-perturbed
eigenstate is still useful. This regime corresponds to very small
coupling, for which the interaction intensity is lower than the mean
level spacing @xmath , and will be called to the localized regime. In
the limit @xmath , this regime disappears. If one increases the
coupling, the interaction intensity between the non-perturbed states
begins to be larger than the mean level spacing between the states:
@xmath . The non-perturbed levels start to be ”mixed” by the interaction
and the SOE starts then to have a Lorentzian shape with a finite width
@xmath , centered around @xmath . This regime is called the Lorentzian
regime. If one further increases the coupling parameter, the SOE begins
to spread over almost the whole spectrum. This regime is called the
delocalized regime.
In the banded random matrix model of [ 14 ] , the regimes are classified
according to a different terminology and there is an additional regime
corresponding to a spreading that goes beyond the energy range where the
coupling acts (due to the finite coupling range of the banded matrices).
The motivation for our change of terminology will become clear in the
study of the dynamics.
The Lorentzian regime can be separated into two parts. For small
coupling, the width of the Lorentzian @xmath is smaller or of the order
of magnitude of the typical energy scale of variation of the averaged
smoothed density of states of the environment @xmath : @xmath . For
larger coupling, the Lorentzian width extends on an energy scale larger
than the typical energy scale of variation of the density of states of
the environment. Therefore, one has @xmath in the former case and @xmath
in the latter case. The different regimes are represented in figures 5.7
and 5.8 .

To represent the SOE of the spin-GORM model, we discretize the energy
axis in small cells of the order of the mean level spacing @xmath and we
average the SOE over @xmath realizations of the random-matrix ensemble.
We see in figure 5.9 (a) the typical shape of the SOE going from the
perturbative regime ( @xmath ) to the beginning of the Lorentzian one (
@xmath ). In figure 5.9 (b), we see the SOE across the Lorentzian regime
( @xmath ). We also see the delocalized regime, when @xmath and the SOE
gets completely flat ( @xmath ). Figure 5.9 (c) shows the width of the
Lorentzian obtained from a fit made on the SOE curve. The correlation
coefficient of the fit helps us to determine the region of the
Lorentzian regime where the SOE is very well fitted by a Lorentzian. It
has been verified that the width of the Lorentzian is independent of
@xmath in the Lorentzian regime. Figure 5.9 (d) (log-log) shows that the
width of the Lorentzian has a power-law dependence in the coupling
parameter close to two in the Lorentzian regime.

#### 5.2.5 Asymptotic transition probability kernel (ATPK)

An interesting quantity, which is close to the SOE, but which has a nice
physical interpretation, is the asymptotic transition probability kernel
(ATPK).

The transition probability kernel (TPK) gives the probability at time
@xmath to be in the level @xmath if starting from @xmath . It is defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ATPK is the time average of the TPK

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The distribution of the ATPK in energy is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ATPK has an intuitive physical interpretation. It represents the
probability after a very long time to end up in a non-perturbed state
@xmath , having started from the initial condition @xmath . The ATPK is
the convolution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .
Since we are interested in a random matrix model and for the purpose of
studying the dynamics, we will perform averages of two different kinds.
The first kind of average is a microcanonical average over states
belonging to the same given energy shell of width @xmath for a given
realization of the random-matrix ensemble used in our total Hamiltonian.
The second kind of average is an ensemble average over the @xmath
different realizations of the random matrices ensemble. For the
microcanonical average, a choice of the width of the energy shell @xmath
has to be done in such a way that it is large enough to contain many
levels (to get a good statistics) and small enough to be smaller than or
equal to the typical energy scale of variation of the averaged smoothed
density of states of the environment @xmath . Therefore, the adequate
choice of the width of the energy shell corresponds to @xmath .
Different ATPK are depicted in figure 5.10 where there is no
random-matrix ensemble average @xmath . In figure 5.10 (a), the ATPK is
a microcanonical average inside the energy shell at energy @xmath and of
width @xmath . ”Pin” denotes the total probability of staying inside the
energy shell after a very long time. @xmath is on the border between the
localized and the Lorentzian regime and @xmath in the delocalized
regime. We see that, until @xmath , the main probability stays in the
initial energy shell. But when the Lorentzian regime starts, the
probability spreads over energies larger than @xmath (here @xmath ). In
figures 5.10 (b) and (c), no average has been done. The initial
condition is a non-perturbed pure state (corresponding to an energy
close to zero) and one can see the individual probability of being on
another non-perturbed state for the different regimes. We can see that
in the localized regime the probability of staying on the initial state
is much more important than the probability of leaving it. We also see
that the Lorentzian regime starts when the initial state loses its
privileged position containing the main probability and, therefore, when
the neighboring levels begin to have an important fraction of the total
probability.

### 5.3 Spin dynamics

In this section, we study the different relaxation regimes of the spin
in the spin-GORM model. This study relies on a detailed comparison
between the numerical exact dynamics (subsection 5.3.3 ) and the
theoretical predictions in the weak-coupling limit (subsection 5.3.1 )
and in the strong-coupling limit (subsection 5.3.2 ). The important
question of the dynamics of a statistical ensemble versus the dynamics
of a single element of the ensemble is investigated in subsection 5.3.4
.

The exact spin dynamics in the spin-GORM model is obtained from the von
Neumann equation ( 5.5 ) using the reduced density matrix @xmath . In
this study, the total system has always a given finite and constant
energy. We also always consider initial conditions for which the
subsystem is in any state and the environment is in a microcanonical
state at a given fixed energy @xmath corresponding to a uniform
distribution inside an energy shell centered at @xmath and of width
@xmath . @xmath is chosen in such a way that it is large enough to
contains many levels (to get a good statistics) and small enough to be
smaller than or equal to the typical energy scale of variation of the
averaged smoothed density of states of the environment @xmath .
Therefore, the adequate choice for the width of the energy shell
corresponds to @xmath . The dynamics is then averaged over the @xmath
realizations of the random-matrix ensemble.

#### 5.3.1 The weak-coupling regime (@xmath)

In this subsection, we make the theoretical study of the dynamics of the
spin, weakly interacting with its random-matrix environment. This means
that we apply the weak-coupling theory that we developed in chapter 4 to
the spin-GORM model.

We derived in section 4.1 of chapter 4 a kinetic equation to describe
the evolution of a subsystem (with a discrete spectrum) weakly
interacting with its environment (with a quasi-continuous spectrum) and
applied this equation in section 4.4 to a two-level subsystem
interacting in a non-diagonal way with any environment. The spin-GORM
model is in fact a specific case of the two-level subsystem model
studied in section 4.4 where the environment operators are Gaussian
orthogonal random matrices as defined in section 5.1 . The central
quantity characterizing the environment operators in the weak-coupling
kinetic theories is the correlation function of the environment. If one
is able to obtain a simple expression for the correlation function of
the environment in the spin-GORM model, all the results of section 4.4
apply to this chapter by replacing the correlation functions by their
random-matrix expressions.
We therefore start by evaluating the correlation function of the
environment and its Fourier transform in the spin-GORM model. Using the
random-matrix environment operators that we defined in section 5.1 to
write the spin-GORM Hamiltonian ( 5.6 ), we find that the Fourier
transform of the environment correlation function defined by equation (
A.19 ) of appendix A is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Averaging the Fourier transform of the environment
correlation function over the random-matrix ensemble, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

To simplify the notations, we will use the convention

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the environment has a spectrum that is dense enough to
perform the quasi-continuous limit and using the smoothed density of
states given by ( 5.16 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This means that

@xmath (5.30)

The environment correlation function can now be obtained by taking the
inverse Fourier transform of ( 5.30 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Performing the integral we get

@xmath (5.32)

@xmath is the Bessel function of the first kind. We insist on the fact
that these two results suppose that the environment is quasi-continuous
( @xmath ) and that the random-matrix ensemble average has been
performed ( @xmath ).
Given these fundamental quantities, the results of section 4.4 directly
apply to our present study of the spin-GORM model. The non-Markovian
dynamics of the subsystem is given by ( 4.62 ) using ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.4
). The order @xmath term is neglected because in the spin-GORM model the
random-matrix ensemble average of @xmath vanishes. The non-Markovian
population dynamics become

@xmath @xmath @xmath (5.33) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

where the quantities @xmath obey the equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This non-Markovian spin dynamics can be computed numerically. In the
following we will refer to this equation [( 5.33 ) with ( 5.3.1 ) and (
5.3.1 )] as ” new NM ” which stands for ”our new non-Markovian
equation”.
Notice that the application of the non-Markovian version of the Redfield
equation [( C.5 ) with ( C ) and ( C ) in appendix C ] to the spin-GORM
model is performed in the same way by the replacement of the Fourier
tranform of the environment correlation function by its expression (
5.3.1 ) and by neglecting the order- @xmath term which disappears due to
the random-matrix average. In the following we will refer to this
equation as ” Redfield NM ” which stands for ”non-Markovian Redfield
equation”.

We now focus on the Markovian spin dynamics. We can again simply apply
the results of section 4.4 to the spin-GORM model. The analytical
expression ( 4.73 ) can be used if one evaluates the spin-GORM
expression of the different environment-dependent quantities @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This can be done easily because all these
quantities depend on the Fourier transform of the environment
correlation function which is now given by ( 5.30 ). Therefore, using (
4.73 ) with ( 4.70 ) and ( 4.4 ), the final solution of our new
Markovian equation, to which we later will refer to as ” new M ”, can be
written

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

where the two population relaxation rates are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

while the coherence relaxation rate is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

the Lamb shift affecting the coherence frequencies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.40)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which after solving the integral gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The two asymptotic population values are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.43)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Notice that the Redfield Markovian equation for the spin dynamics, which
we will refer to as ” Redfield M ”, can be obtained in a similar way
using ( C.9 ), where the population as well as half of the coherence
relaxation rate is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

the asymptotic value of the populations by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and where the Lamb shift @xmath is the same as for our new equation (
5.41 ).
We recall that our new equation has been shown to be equivalent to the
Redfield equation when the typical energy scale of the system (typical
energy spacing between the system levels) can be considered small
compared to the typical energy scale of variation of the environment
correlation function ² ² 2 The only restriction to this statement
concerns the analytical expression for the Markovian coherence dynamics
which has been derived by making the non-local approximation as
explained in section 4.4 . Because of the fact that this assumption is
not satisfied when @xmath , the Markovian Redfield analytical expression
has to be used in this specific case. . In the spin-GORM model, this
condition is reduced to @xmath .

#### 5.3.2 The strong-coupling regime (@xmath)

We are now interested in making a theoretical prediction for the spin
dynamics when the coupling parameter @xmath is very large and,
therefore, dominant in front of @xmath and @xmath .

The dynamics of the subsystem is fully described by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Using the following unitary transformation acting on the
degrees of freedom of the spin

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can therefore rewrite ( 5.3.2 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is easy to check that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the following perturbative expansion of the evolution operator to
order zero in @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and using the fact that @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the following notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.55)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Because @xmath is diagonal in the basis that diagonalizes @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we perform an ensemble average over different realizations of @xmath
and use the statistics of the random-matrix eigenvectors [ 9 , 62 , 73 ]
, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Equation ( 5.55 ) therefore becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.58)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using the relations ( 5.48 ), we therefore have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.59)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now perform the following ensemble average over different
realizations of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.60)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the Bessel function of the first kind and where we have
used the fact that @xmath is an odd function. Performing this ensemble
average over ( 5.59 ) and using ( 5.50 ), we finally find

@xmath @xmath @xmath (5.61) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

These equations are valid up to corrections @xmath and @xmath , and are
averaged over the @xmath and the @xmath realizations even if we have
dropped the explicit notation. We have therefore found a well-defined
behavior of the system dynamics when the coupling parameter @xmath is so
large that the coupling term can be considered to contribute alone to
the dynamics. We have again supposed that the environment is continuous
( @xmath ) and that the random-matrix ensemble averages have been
performed ( @xmath ).

#### 5.3.3 Numerical results

We will now present the numerical results on the dynamical evolution of
the spin in the spin-GORM model. This will give us the opportunity to
compare the theoretical predictions made in the two preceding
subsections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 with the exact dynamics obtained
numerically.

The different parameter domains represented in figure 5.2 will play an
important role in our discussion on the dynamics.

##### Weak-coupling (domain A)

The most important point we want to investigate is the validity of our
new weak-coupling kinetic theory. To do this, we will now compare the
non-Markovian version of our new equation with the numerical exact von
Neumann equation, staying in the parameter domain A (see figure 5.2 )
which corresponds to the weak-coupling regime. Figures 5.11 (a) and 5.11
(b) show the time evolution described by both equations at different
@xmath values using a @xmath time scaling. The very important result is
that the non-Markovian equation is valid not only for values of @xmath
below an upper bound, but also above a lower bound. The lower bound of
the coupling parameter corresponds in our spectral analysis to the
border between the localized and the Lorentzian regime of the SOE. We
recall that this bound corresponds to a value of the coupling parameter
for which the first nonzero correction to the unperturbed energy levels
of the total system becomes of the order of the mean level spacing
between these coupled levels ( @xmath . This bound however disappears in
the limit of a continuous environment spectrum ( @xmath ). The upper
bound corresponds to the transition between the Lorentzian @xmath regime
and the Lorentzian @xmath regime (see figure 5.8 ). This bound is
located to a value of the coupling parameter for which the width of the
SOE in the Lorentzian regime becomes larger than the typical energy
scale over which the density of states of the environment varies. In
figure 5.11 (a), we can see that when @xmath is smaller than the upper
bound (localized regime of the SOE), the non-Markovian version of our
perturbative equation reproduces the initial dynamics but not the total
relaxation process to the equilibrium value. One can see in figure 5.11
(b) that our perturbative equation again looses its validity when @xmath
cannot be considered as a perturbation anymore.

##### Non-Markovian vs. Markovian dynamics

We have often used the Markovian approximation in the various
derivations of our new weak-coupling master equation presented in this
thesis. We argued that this approximation was justified on time scales
longer than the characteristic time scale of the environment @xmath
(which corresponds to the typical decay time of the environment
correlation function), i.e., if @xmath is much smaller than the
characteristic time scale of the subsystem @xmath . In the spin-GORM
model, the characteristic time scale of the environment given by ( 5.32
) is of the order @xmath and the characteristic time scale of the spin
dynamics is given by @xmath . It is interesting to test this prediction
by numerically comparing the Markovian version (”new M”) with the
non-Markovian version of our equation (”new NM”). Notice that, using the
@xmath time scaling, the Markovian equation is independent of @xmath .
The discrepancy between the non-Markovian and the Markovian equation is
therefore a direct measure of the non-Markovian effects. The curves of
figures 5.11 (a) and 5.11 (b), for which @xmath , confirm our
theoretical predictions. In fact, in figure 5.11 (a), the Markovian and
the non-Markovian versions of our new equation are so close that we only
plotted the second one. This is expected because the discrepancy is
predicted to occur on a time scale @xmath which is here too short to be
noticed. However when @xmath increases on the curves of figure 5.11 (b),
we see that the non-Markovian initial dynamics increases due to the
increase of the predicted discrepancy region @xmath .

##### Pure non-Markovian dynamics (domain B)

In the parameter domain B (see figure 5.2 ), we are in the situation
where @xmath . Here, the Markovian version of our equation is predicted
to be never valid and only the non-Markovian version can be used. This
situation is shown in figure 5.11 (c), where we compare the Markovian
and the non-Markovian versions of our perturbative equation with the
numerical exact dynamics given by the von Neumann equation. As
predicted, the Markovian version of our equation does not reproduce at
all the dynamics. But the non-Markovian equation reproduces this
behavior with a very high accuracy. The frequency of the oscillations
corresponds to the subsystem frequency @xmath and the damping of these
oscillations occurs on a time scale corresponding to the environment
characteristic time scale @xmath . Notice that this pure non-Markovian
dynamics scales in time according to @xmath .

##### Strong-coupling (domain C)

We now want to verify our theoretical prediction of the spin dynamics in
the strong-coupling regime corresponding to the parameter domain C (see
figure 5.2 ). We see in figure 5.11 (d) that when @xmath becomes large
enough for the coupling term to dominate the total Hamiltonian, the
dynamics obeys our predicted Bessel-function behavior derived in
equation ( 5.61 ). It is important to notice that this behavior scales
in time according to @xmath .

##### Summary of the different dynamical regimes

We summarized in figure 5.12 the different types of spin relaxation that
one can encounter in the spin-GORM model. These different types of spin
relaxation correspond to the different parameter domains A, B and C.
Each of these different relaxations has a characteristic time scaling.
For each of them we have found a valid theoretical description.

##### Our new equation vs. Redfield equation

We have motivated the extension of the Redfield theory to our new
weak-coupling kinetic theory by the fact that when the system energy
becomes larger than the typical energy scale of variation of the density
of states of the environment, the energy conservation of the total
system has to be taken into account. We now want to verify this
statement by comparing the Redfield equation predictions (Markovian and
non-Markovian) for the spin population relaxation in the spin-GORM model
with the exact numerical results and with the prediction of our new
master equation (Markovian and non-Markovian). We place ourself in the
parameter domain A, where the weak-coupling applies, and choose an
environment with a number of states such that the weak-coupling kinetic
description is satisfied ( @xmath ). Figures 5.13 (a), 5.13 (c) and 5.13
(d) depict the global relaxation of the spin population for increasing
values of the energy splitting @xmath . In accordance with what we
argued on theoretical grounds in chapter 4 , we see in these figures
that the larger the energy splitting @xmath of the system is, the bigger
is the difference between the Redfield equation and our master equation.
We also see that our equation always fits very well with the exact von
Neumann equation, which is not the case for the Redfield equation.

These results are a really strong support for the importance of our new
theory. As expected and as already discussed, we see in figures 5.13 (a)
and 5.13 (c)- 5.13 (d) that the Markovian equations are, on time scales
longer than @xmath , really close to the non-Markovian equations. An
interesting result can be deduced by comparing the non-Markovian results
of the Redfield equation with the non-Markovian results of our new
equation in figures 5.13 (b) and 5.13 (e)- 5.13 (f). In fact, on a
shorter time scale of the order @xmath , there is no difference between
the Redfield and our new equation, and both give correct results. The
discrepancy between the Redfield equation and the exact dynamics when
@xmath is large enough, only occurs on longer time scales. This can be
interpreted by the fact that, in quantum mechanics, energy conservation
only takes place on long time scales ³ ³ 3 This fact can be easily seen
on the Pauli equation. . This is particularly explicit in figure 5.13
(f) where the relaxation of the spin population occurs in a pure
non-Markovian regime (the Markovian version of the Redfield equation as
well as our new equation predict no evolution in this case). We finish
our comparison between the Redfield theory and our new weak-coupling
kinetic theory by showing in figure 5.14 the dynamics of the population
as well as of the coherences of the spin. As predicted in section 5.3.1
, the Redfield coherences dynamics is really close to the one predicted
by our new equation. They only slightly differ by their Lamb shift.
However, our new equation reproduces the exact dynamics with a higher
accuracy than the Redfield equation.

##### Energy-distributed populations and coherences

We conclude the comparison of the exact spin dynamics with our new
equation by representing the evolution of the energy-distributed
elements of the spin density matrix. These objects are the central
elements of our new theory and are obtained, as we have seen in chapter
4 , by a projection of the total density matrix. The very high
similarity between the numerically exact dynamics of the
energy-distributed spin density matrix element (obtained by the
projection of the total density matrix evolving according to the exact
von Neumann equation) and this same dynamics predicted from our new
theory (see figure 5.15 and 5.16 ) is once again a really strong support
for the validity of our new theory. The non-local aspect (in energy) of
the population dynamics due to the energy conservation of the total
system can be very well seen in figure 5.15 . The almost local aspect of
the coherence dynamics can be seen in figure 5.16 . One notices however
the slight non-local effect at an energy of @xmath from the initial
energy.

#### 5.3.4 Average versus individual realizations

An interesting point is the comparison, for the subsystem dynamics,
between the averaged (random-matrix ensemble averaged or
microcanonically averaged) dynamics and the dynamics of an individual
realization within the statistical ensembles. This latter corresponds to
a dynamics generated by an initial condition that corresponds to a pure
state and without any random-matrix average ( @xmath ).

We see in figure 5.17 (c)-(f) the dynamics of a system with a small
energy spacing @xmath for different values of @xmath . The solid line
represents the random-matrix and microcanonically averaged dynamics. The
dashed lines depict some of the individual members of the random-matrix
ensemble corresponding to an initial pure state inside the total
unperturbed energy shell. We see that the larger @xmath is, the closer
the individual trajectories are from the averaged trajectories. We
therefore have, when @xmath is large enough, that the individual
realizations are self-averaging in the random-matrix and microcanonical
ensembles. In order to quantify this behavior, we plotted in figure 5.17
(a) the variance between the individual trajectories and the averaged
trajectories as a function of time for different values of @xmath . We
observe that this variance decreases as @xmath . In figure 5.17 (b), we
show that the asymptotic value of the variance decreases with a
power-law dependence with respect to @xmath . We again see the
connection with the SOE regimes. In the localized regime (figure 5.17
(c)), the dynamics is governed by very different individual trajectories
oscillating with a very few frequencies that differ from one individual
trajectory to another. This is a consequence of the fact that the
perturbed levels are still close to the non-perturbed ones and are only
slightly affected by neighboring non-perturbed levels. In the Lorentzian
regime (figures 5.17 (d)-(e)), each individual trajectory follows
roughly the averaged trajectory and contains a very large number of
different frequencies. This shows that the interaction ”mixes” many of
the non-perturbed levels, deleting the discrete structure of the
spectrum. Therefore, we can say that our new master equation derived in
chapter 4 holds with a given accuracy for a majority of individual
trajectories if @xmath is large enough to satisfy @xmath with @xmath and
a constant @xmath , in the limit @xmath .

### 5.4 Equilibrium distributions

In this section, we want to study the properties of the distribution
reached on very long time in the spin-GORM model. In other words, we
want to study the spin-GORM equilibrium properties. In subsection 5.4.1
, we study the equilibrium properties of the spin. In subsection 5.4.2 ,
we investigate the conditions under which the spin thermalizes. Finally,
in subsection 5.4.3 , we study the thermalization of the total system.

#### 5.4.1 Equilibrium distribution of the subsystem

As we have seen in the preceding sections, the spin coherences always
decay to zero on long time scales due to the environment interaction.
Therefore, the only element left in the spin density matrix on these
long time scales are the populations which are described by the spin
observable @xmath . This observable evolves in time according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The time-averaged value of @xmath is obtained performing the following
time average:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.63)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We see that this time averaged value clearly depends on the initial
condition.
An important result of our numerical simulation, which holds everywhere
on the parameter space and for all kinds of initial conditions, is that
the observed equilibrium value given by the exact von Neumann equation
corresponds very well to the time-averaged value ( 5.63 ). The study of
the equilibrium properties of the subsystem is therefore equivalent to
the study of the time averaged quantities ( 5.63 ).
We will use an initial condition for the total system which is the
product of a microcanonical distribution at energy @xmath for the
environment with a spin up state for the subsystem

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have therefore that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

An interesting point is to understand when the Markovian version of our
new weak-coupling kinetic equation predicts the correct population
equilibrium value. We want therefore to compare the exact equilibrium
distribution given by the time averaged populations @xmath of ( 5.63 )
with @xmath in ( 5.42 ) (because for the initial condition ( 5.64 ),
@xmath and therefore the equilibrium distribution predicted by our
kinetic equation in ( 5.3.1 ) is such that @xmath ).
This comparison is done in figure 5.18 where we plotted the time
averaged value @xmath as function of the initial energy of the
environment @xmath . The different curves in figures 5.18 (a) and 5.18
(b) correspond to different values of @xmath . We compare these curves
to the @xmath independent curve given by our new weak-coupling kinetic
equation and corresponding to a microcanonical distribution inside the
energy shell of the total system. As expected from our preceding study
of the dynamics, we find again that, when @xmath is too small, the
”mixing” between the levels inside the total energy shell is not
sufficient to reach equipartition in this shell and our kinetic
equation, which assumes equipartition, overestimates the equilibrium
values. If @xmath is too large, our kinetic equation again gives bad
results as expected from the restriction to weak couplings of our
equation. As already observed in the previous section, the prediction of
our new kinetic equation are correct in a characteristic region of
@xmath . The beginning of this region corresponds to @xmath values such
that @xmath at which the transition from the localized to the Lorentzian
regimes occurs in the SOE. Remember that this critical value goes to
zero when @xmath . The end of this region corresponds to @xmath values
that cannot be considered anymore as perturbative (when the width of the
Lorentzian SOE becomes larger than @xmath the typical energy scale of
variation of the environment density of states). Figures 5.18 (c) and
5.18 (d) show very explicitly that @xmath scales like @xmath . This
again confirms our previous analysis which pointed out the importance of
the quantity @xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Thermalization of the subsystem

One of the important questions is to understand the conditions under
which the subsystem thermalizes under the effect of a weak interaction
with the environment or, in other words, under which conditions the
subsystem relaxes to a canonical distribution corresponding to the
microcanonical temperature of the environment.

We begin by recalling these conditions in the general case of a small
subsystem weakly interacting with its environment. The isolated total
system is composed of the subsystem and the environment and has the
total energy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the energy of the environment and @xmath the energy of the
subsystem. We suppose that the contribution of the interaction energy
between the environment and the subsystem is negligible compared to the
total energy. The microcanonical environment entropy is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of states of the environment available at
energy @xmath . This number can be related to the density of states of
the environment @xmath using the fact that @xmath , where @xmath is a
small energy interval but contains many states of the environment. The
microcanonical temperature of the environment is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It can be expanded in the subsystem energy as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

because we suppose that the subsystem energy is much smaller than the
environment energy. The specific heat capacity of the environment is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

is satisfied, the temperature expansion can be truncated as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we understand that if equation ( 5.71 ) is satisfied, the
environment plays the role of a heat bath because its temperature is
almost not affected by the subsystem energy.
Now, we suppose further that the interaction between the subsystem and
the environment, even if small, is able to make the total probability
distribution microcanonical on the total energy shell at energy @xmath .
We suppose also that the energy levels are discrete and, therefore, that
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath are discrete indices, respectively, for
the subsystem and the environment. Therefore, the probability @xmath for
the subsystem being at energy @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of states of the environment available at
energy @xmath , and @xmath the number of states of the total system
available at energy @xmath . Using equations ( 5.68 ) and ( 5.71 ), one
gets that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the normalization @xmath , one finally gets the well-known
canonical probability distribution for the subsystem

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .
We conclude that two conditions are necessary in order to thermalize the
subsystem to a canonical probability distribution due to the interaction
with the environment: a large heat capacity of the environment @xmath
and a microcanonical distribution on the total energy shell.

Let us apply this result to the spin-GORM model.
The density of states of the environment is in this case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the microcanonical temperature of the environment is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the heat capacity is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first condition ( 5.71 ) in order to thermalize the spin to a
canonical probability distribution becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is depicted in Fig 5.19 . The second condition to have a
microcanonical distribution on the total energy shell is satisfied (as
we discussed in section 5.4.1 ) when @xmath . In this case, the
populations of the spin obey the equilibrium distribution predicted by
our new kinetic equation (see ( 5.3.1 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

The canonical distribution of the spin populations, at the
microcanonical temperature of the environment, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the two conditions for the spin thermalization are satisfied, then
@xmath and @xmath should be equal.
The comparison between these two quantities can be seen in figure 5.20
for different subsystem energies. We see, as expected, that the smaller
the spin energy is the better the comparison is.

We can therefore conclude that under these two conditions ( @xmath and
@xmath ), the random matrices of the spin-GORM model can model an
environment that behaves as a heat bath and that thermalizes the spin.
The particularity of this environment due to the semicircular density of
states is that the microcanonical temperature can be negative (when the
initial energy of the environment is positive). Usual environments have
positive microcanonical temperatures due to their monotonic increasing
density of states.

#### 5.4.3 Thermalization of the total system

Until now, we have always considered initial conditions of the
environment corresponding to microcanonical distributions at a given
energy like in ( 5.64 ). We now want to consider initial conditions of
the environment corresponding to a canonical distribution at a given
temperature. We also suppose that the spin is up, so that the total
initial condition reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

We therefore have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting to ask how the probability distribution looks like at
equilibrium when the interaction is on.
One can clarify this point by plotting @xmath versus energy. One uses
the following energy representation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the total system thermalizes and reaches a canonical distribution for
the total system at an effective temperature @xmath , one would have
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

because

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we shall see, it is the case if, again, @xmath is large enough to
induce ”mixing” between the states: @xmath .
Indeed, one sees in figure 5.21 (a) that, for @xmath , the states of the
total system corresponding to the upper level of the spin are
exponentially populated and the ones corresponding to the lower level
are not. When the interaction is turned on and increased, one can notice
that the probability distribution starts to accumulate around a mean
effective canonical distribution. As expected, this accumulation becomes
significant when @xmath and, in this case, the total system can be
considered as having thermalized. One can calculate the final effective
temperature that the total system has reached after interaction. This
effective temperature is depicted in figure 5.21 (b) as a function of
@xmath . The correlation coefficient indicates whether the exponential
fit of the final effective temperature is good or not. The effective
temperature obeys the following law: @xmath . We also show in figure
5.21 (c) the comparison between the time-averaged value of @xmath ((
5.63 ) with ( 5.84 )) and its canonical average computed with the
effective temperature (( 5.63 ) with ( 5.84 )). One sees that, when
@xmath , both coincide.
It is important to realize that this thermalization is not statistical
in the sense of the equivalence between the ensembles. It is an
intrinsic thermalization due to the complexity of the interaction
between the states. This thermalization appears at a critical value of
the coupling parameter when the interaction term becomes of the order of
or larger than the mean level spacing of the total system.

## Chapter 6 Quantum diffusion

In this final chapter, we will focus on a particularly important quantum
kinetic process: quantum diffusion.
Quantum diffusion is a quantum transport process where the transported
quantity is the position of a particle on a spatially extended
subsystem. Understanding quantum diffusion is of huge importance,
especially in nanosystems. When the particles transported on the
nanosystem have a charge, the transport properties of these particles
determine the electric conduction properties of the nanosystem. And one
of the most common ways to study nanosystems such as quantum dots,
nanotubes, or single linear molecules, is through their electric
conduction. Furthermore, the technological applications of these
electronic devices are really promising.
If the subsystem is invariant under spatial translations, the Bloch
theorem allows us to associate a Bloch number or wavenumber with each
mode of the evolution superoperator. The dynamics of such a
translationally invariant system is diffusive on long time scales if the
dispersion relation, connecting the smaller real part of the mode
eigenvalues (corresponding to the slower exponential relaxation modes)
to the Bloch number, is parabolic around zero wavenumber. The
proportionality coefficient between the eigenvalue and the squared
wavenumber is then the diffusion coefficient. Such a dispersion relation
cannot be found in an isolated quantum subsystem where the real parts of
the mode eigenvalues are always zero. Therefore, we want to see if such
a diffusive dispersion relation can occur in a translationally invariant
subsystem weakly interacting with an environment. Our study is based on
the Redfield equation (see section 3.5 ) and the environment is
therefore considered infinite.
Various attempts have been made in the literature to understand
diffusion in quantum subsystems. Many of the early studies focused on
polaron motion [ 27 , 43 ] . Later studies used a kind of Quantum
Brownian Motion model extended to periodic potentials [ 11 , 12 , 13 ,
26 , 60 , 81 , 82 , 92 ] . However, it seems to us that none of them
have avoided the presence of a non-translationally invariant term in the
interaction Hamiltonian between the subsystems and its environment.
Furthermore, they almost always use a path integral formalism, which has
the advantage of sometimes giving non-perturbative results but is not
easy to use, especially for numerical simulations. Our study, which
relates to the full diagonalization of the evolution operator and
therefore gives access to the complete dynamical information, seems to
us to be a particularly interesting approach to diffusion in quantum
systems.

The plan of this chapter is the following. Our translationally invariant
model is defined in section 6.1 by weakly coupling a one-dimensional
tight-binding Hamiltonian with a single energy band to a
delta-correlated environment. The dynamics of this system is ruled by a
Redfield quantum master equation. The long-time evolution of the model
can be studied in terms of the eigenvalues and the associated
eigenstates of the Redfield superoperator, as explained in section 6.2 .
The eigenvalue problem is exactly solved for a finite chain in section
6.3 . We show in section 6.4 that diffusion dominates the long-time
dynamics if the chain is large enough. The Liouvillian spectrum of the
infinite chain as well as the temperature dependence of the diffusion
coefficient are given in section 6.5 . We finally summarize the results
in section 6.6 .

### 6.1 Defining the system

#### 6.1.1 Subsystem

Let us consider a translationally invariant one-dimensional subsystem
described by the following Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

represented in the site basis @xmath , where @xmath takes the values
@xmath . @xmath is the length of the chain. We have here chosen periodic
(Born-van Karman) boundary conditions.

Such a Hamiltonian, called tight-binding or Hückel Hamiltonian, is a
simple model of spatially periodic subsystem and has therefore a wide
range of applications. The tight-binding Hamiltonian is for instance
commonly used in solid state physics to describe the electronic band
structure of weakly interacting solids [ 3 ] , in polymer physics to
describe electronic conduction along the polymer backbone or polymer
optical properties [ 40 , 41 ] , as well as to understanding the
conduction properties of carbon nanotubes [ 80 ] . This Hamiltonian
describes a process of quantum tunneling from site to site. The
parameter @xmath is given in terms of the overlap between the
wavefunctions localized at the sites and is proportional to the quantum
amplitude of tunneling.

The stationary Schrödinger equation of the tight-binding Hamiltonian is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the eigenvalues are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the eigenvectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . The closure relation is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Accordingly, the energy spectrum of the Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ) contains a
single energy band of width @xmath and the motion of the particle would
be purely ballistic without coupling to a fluctuating environment.

#### 6.1.2 Coupling to the environment

We now suppose that the subsystem is embedded in a large environment.

The Hamiltonian of the total system composed of the one-dimensional
chain and its environment is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the environment Hamiltonian, @xmath the subsystem
coupling operators, @xmath the environment coupling operators, and
@xmath the coupling parameter which measures the intensity of the
interaction between the subsystem and its environment.

The dynamics of the total system is described by the von Neumann
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Liouvillian superoperator of the total system. The
reduced dynamics for the density matrix @xmath of the subsystem is known
to obey a Redfield quantum master equation for weak coupling to the
environment. We have systematically derived this equation by second
order perturbation theory in section 3.5 from the complete von Neumann
equation for the total system ( 6.7 ). On time scales longer than the
correlation time of the environment, the Redfield quantum master
equation is Markovian and reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is called the Redfield superoperator and where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The correlation function of the environment which contains all the
necessary information to describe the coupling of the subsystem to its
environment is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the canonical equilibrium state of the environment.
Rigorous results show that the long-time dynamics of the subsystem is
indeed ruled by the Redfield superoperator according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for weak coupling to its environment [ 44 , 45 ] .

Let us now specify the interaction of the subsystem with its
environment. We define the subsystem coupling operators as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

They are diagonal operators in the site basis of the subsystem taking
the unit value if the particle is located on the site @xmath and zero
otherwise. These operators have the properties:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We need now to specify the environment operators by the choice of the
environment correlation functions. We make two assumptions:
Assumption 1 : The environment dynamics has a very fast evolution
compared to the subsystem dynamics. Therefore, the environment
correlation functions decay in time so fast with respect to the
characteristic time scales of the subsystem evolution, that they can be
assumed to be Dirac delta distributions in time.
Assumption 2 : The environment has very short range spatial
correlations, much shorter than the distance between two adjacent sites
of the subsystem. Accordingly, the environment correlation functions
decay in space so fast that they can be assumed to be given by Kronecker
delta in space.
These two assumptions mean that each of the environmental fluctuations
at the different subsystem sites are statistically independent. The
environment correlation functions are thus given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the operators ( 6.9 ) in the Redfield equation ( 6.8 ) therefore
become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the fast decay of the temporal and the spatial correlations (
6.15 ) and the properties of the subsystem coupling operators ( 6.12 ),
the Redfield equation we have to solve takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It can easily be verified by projecting this equation onto the site
basis that it is translationally invariant (shifting all the site
indices appearing in the projected equation by a constant does not
modify the equation). Furthermore, this equation preserves the complete
positivity of the density matrix because it has the Lindblad form [ 56 ]
which is the result of a coupling with delta correlation functions [ 30
] .

### 6.2 Diagonalizing the Redfield superoperator

The eigenvalues @xmath and associated eigenstates @xmath of the Redfield
superoperator are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a set of parameters labeling the eigestates. Because the
Redfield superoperator is not anti-Hermitian, its eigenvalues can be
complex numbers with a nonzero real part. The eigenvalue problem of the
Redfield superoperator is important because the time evolution of the
quantum master equation can then be decomposed onto the basis of the
eigenstates as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dynamics is therefore given by a linear superposition of exponential
or oscillatory exponential functions. Since the reduced density matrix
of the subsystem has @xmath elements, there is a total of @xmath
eigenvalues and associated eigenstates.

#### 6.2.1 Bloch theorem

Since the system is invariant under spatial translations, we can apply
the Bloch theorem to the eigenstates of the Redfied superoperator.
Thanks to this theorem, the state space of the superoperator can be
decomposed into independent superoperators acting onto decoupled sectors
associated with a Bloch number, also called wavenumber [ 3 ] .

Let us define the superoperator @xmath of the spatial translation by
@xmath sites along the system ( @xmath is an integer) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use the notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This superoperator must have the group property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the translational symmetry of the system, the translation
superoperators commute with the Redfield superoperator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the Redfield superoperator as well as the translation
superoperators have a basis of common eigenstates. If @xmath denotes the
eigenvalues of the translation superoperator, we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, because of the unitarity of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 6.22 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of equations ( 6.25 ) and ( 6.26 ), we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Bloch number, also called the wavenumber. Finally,
we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

A useful consequence is that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to determine the allowed values of the Bloch number, we write
by using equation ( 6.4 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Due to equation ( 6.28 ), we also have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Multiplying both sides of equations ( 6.31 ) and ( 6.32 ) by @xmath ,
taking the sum @xmath of it, and identifying them, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now notice that if @xmath , then @xmath . Using finally the
periodicity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we find with ( 6.28 ) that the Bloch number takes the values

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Accordingly, the Redfield superoperator can be block-diagonalized into
@xmath independent blocks, which each contains @xmath eigenvalues as we
shall see in the following.

#### 6.2.2 Simplifying the problem

We will now formulate the eigenvalue problem of the Redfield
superoperator in each sector labeled by a given wavenumber @xmath .

For this purpose, we project equation ( 6.18 ) onto the site basis using
the explicit expression ( 6.1.2 ) of the Redfield superoperator. We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.37)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using equation ( 6.29 ) and replacing @xmath by @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.38)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Making the change of variable

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain the simpler eigenvalue equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 6.3 Finite chain

#### 6.3.1 The eigenvalue problem

We can write the expression ( 6.40 ) in matrix form (we no longer write
the index @xmath to simplify the notation)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues, @xmath the eigenvectors of size @xmath
, and @xmath the following @xmath matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We look for eigenstates of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving equation ( 6.43 ) with ( 6.45 ) gives

-   for @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.46)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (6.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.48)
      -- -------- -- --------

Solving the homogeneous linear system of equations ( 6.47 ) and ( 6.48 )
and replacing @xmath by ( 6.46 ), one gets the characteristic equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using equation ( 6.36 ), we find:

  -- -- -- -------- -- --------
           @xmath      (6.51)
           @xmath      (6.52)
           @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -- -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath integer. From now on, we shall speak of even (respectively
odd) @xmath , if @xmath corresponds to an even (respectively odd)
integer @xmath in equation ( 6.36 ). Therefore, the characteristic
equation ( 6.49 ) becomes

-   for @xmath odd:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.54)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath even or for @xmath and @xmath odd:
    either

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.55)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    or

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.56)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath odd or for @xmath and @xmath even:
    either

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.57)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    or

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.58)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We solve equations ( 6.54 )-( 6.58 ) as follows.

#### 6.3.2 The diffusive eigenvalue @xmath

We first look for an eigenvalue @xmath which is real and should
correspond to a monotonic exponential decay. With this goal, we suppose
that the angle @xmath is complex

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the eigenvalue ( 6.46 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

This eigenvalue is real under the condition that @xmath which is
satisfied for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

We notice that the condition @xmath is also satisfied for @xmath but it
can be shown that this other case leads to the same eigenvalue as ( 6.61
). If we introduce the conditions ( 6.59 ) and ( 6.61 ) in equations (
6.54 ), ( 6.55 ), and ( 6.57 ), we get

-   for @xmath odd:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.63)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath even or for @xmath and @xmath odd:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.64)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath odd or for @xmath and @xmath even:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.65)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath , the right-hand side of these equations tends to
unity if a non-vanishing solution @xmath exists. In this limit, this
solution is thus given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which exists only if @xmath . Because

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the corresponding eigenvalue should be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

However, for a finite chain with @xmath , we expect a correction @xmath
to the solution @xmath . Replacing this correction in equations ( 6.63
), ( 6.64 ), and ( 6.65 ), we obtain by Taylor expansion that

-   for @xmath odd:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.69)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath even or for @xmath and @xmath odd:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.70)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath odd or for @xmath and @xmath even:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.71)
      -- -------- -- --------

up to corrections of @xmath . Using the expression ( 6.62 ), we finally
obtain the eigenvalue

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.72)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is respectively given by equations ( 6.69 ), ( 6.70 ), and
( 6.71 ). Accordingly, the correction @xmath to the eigenvalue decreases
exponentially fast with the size @xmath of the chain.

Using equations ( 6.41 ) and ( 6.42 ), we finally obtain the eigenvalue

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.73)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The eigenvalue @xmath corresponding to a vanishing wavenumber @xmath is
always in the spectrum of the Redfield superoperator. The associated
eigenstate describes the stationary equilibrium state. At low
wavenumbers @xmath , we recover the dispersion relation of diffusion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the diffusion coefficient

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

which justifies calling @xmath or @xmath the diffusive eigenvalue.

We notice that the diffusive eigenvalue no longer exists beyond the
critical value @xmath . Since the matrix ( 6.44 ) has a total of @xmath
eigenvalues, we expect further non-diffusive eigenvalues in a number of
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , as confirmed in the following
subsections.

#### 6.3.3 The eigenvalues @xmath

Beside the diffusive eigenvalue, we expect eigenvalues corresponding to
the chain-like structure of the matrix ( 6.44 ). To obtain these
eigenvalues, we set @xmath so that equations ( 6.54 ), ( 6.55 ), and (
6.57 ) can be written respectively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
     @xmath      (6.77)
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now expand @xmath around @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , the solutions of equations ( 6.79 ), ( 6.80 ), and ( 6.81 )
are respectively given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.84)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath is rejected in equations ( 6.83 ) and ( 6.85 ). It is
due to the fact that @xmath does not correspond to an eigenvector
because it can be seen that @xmath in equation ( 6.45 ) cannot be an
eigenvector of equation ( 6.44 ).

Using the expansion ( 6.82 ) in equations ( 6.79 ), ( 6.80 ) and ( 6.81
) with @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (6.86)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath for equation ( 6.79 ) and @xmath for equations ( 6.80 ) and
( 6.81 ). The eigenvalue ( 6.46 ) is now given by the expansion

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.87)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using equation ( 6.86 ) in ( 6.87 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.88)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Consequently, we have

-   for @xmath odd, using equation ( 6.88 ) with ( 6.83 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.89)
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath even or for @xmath and @xmath odd, using
    equation ( 6.88 ) with ( 6.84 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.90)
                                    @xmath   
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath odd or for @xmath and @xmath even, using
    equation ( 6.88 ) with ( 6.85 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.91)
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 6.3.4 The eigenvalues @xmath

The solutions of equation ( 6.56 ) are simply given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

We reject @xmath and @xmath because the corresponding eigenvector does
not exist in these cases. Similarly, the solutions of equation ( 6.58 )
are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently, we have the further eigenvalues:

-   for @xmath and @xmath even or for @xmath and @xmath odd, using
    equation ( 6.46 ) with ( 6.92 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.94)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath and @xmath odd or for @xmath and @xmath even, using
    equation ( 6.46 ) with ( 6.93 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.95)
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 6.3.5 The eigenvalues @xmath

An important observation is that, for @xmath , the expansion ( 6.82 )
which implies @xmath is satisfied everywhere, i.e., for all the values
of @xmath and therefore for all the eigenvalues. However, for @xmath ,
the Taylor expansion around @xmath in equation ( 6.82 ) is only valid if
@xmath . Therefore, a transition zone exists around @xmath . According
to equation ( 6.46 ), this transition corresponds to the critical value
of the eigenvalue given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, for @xmath , the expansion ( 6.82 ) around @xmath is only
valid if @xmath . For @xmath , we should instead consider the asymptotic
expansion of @xmath around @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which leads to another family of eigenvalues existing for @xmath .

If @xmath , the solutions of equations ( 6.79 ), ( 6.80 ) and ( 6.81 )
are respectively given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.98)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.99)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.100)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Because of the condition @xmath with the critical values ( 6.96 ), we
should only consider the angles in the interval @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.101)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

so that the integer @xmath in equations ( 6.98 ), ( 6.99 ), and ( 6.100
) is restricted to take the intermediate values @xmath which do not
reach the extreme values.

Using the expansion ( LABEL:spec2aaa ) in equations ( 6.79 ), ( 6.80 ),
and ( 6.81 ) with @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.102)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath for equation ( 6.79 ) and @xmath for equations ( 6.80 ) and
( 6.81 ).

Using equation ( 6.102 ) in ( 6.87 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.103)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Consequently, we have

-   for @xmath odd, using equation ( 6.103 ) with ( 6.98 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.104)
                                    @xmath   
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

-   for @xmath and @xmath even or for @xmath and @xmath odd, using
    equation ( 6.103 ) with ( 6.99 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.105)
                                    @xmath   
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

-   for @xmath and @xmath odd or for @xmath and @xmath even, using
    equation ( 6.103 ) with ( 6.100 ):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.106)
                                    @xmath   
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

with the aforementioned restriction on the values of the integer @xmath
.

#### 6.3.6 The eigenvalues @xmath

For @xmath and @xmath even or @xmath and @xmath odd, two special
eigenvalues exist in the limit @xmath around @xmath and @xmath . They
can be obtained by taking @xmath and directly solving equation ( 6.55 )
to get in both cases

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Inserting in equation ( 6.87 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.108)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 6.3.7 Description of the spectrum

Rewriting the eigenvalues ( 6.46 ) of the Redfield superoperator with
their explicit dependence in terms of equation ( 6.42 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath can take @xmath different values because @xmath and @xmath
take @xmath values each. Remembering that according to equation ( 6.41 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we conclude that we have found in this section all the eigenvalues of
the Redfield superoperator. We list them in Tables 6.1 and 6.2 according
to the parameter regime in which they hold.

We now discuss the main features of the spectrum when the different
physical parameters are varied. This discussion is based on our
analytical results for the eigenvalues and on the comparison between
these results and the eigenvalues obtained by numerical diagonalization
of the Redfield superoperator. Since the eigenvalues @xmath are related
to the Redfield superoperator eigenvalues @xmath by equation ( 6.110 ),
we notice that all the eigenvalues of the complete spectrum always
satisfy @xmath or, equivalently, @xmath . The imaginary part of @xmath
is simply proportional by a factor @xmath to the imaginary part of
@xmath .

We start by studying the @xmath eigenvalues @xmath obtained by fixing
the wavenumber @xmath (even or odd) and varying @xmath . For given
physical parameters ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ), fixing @xmath
is equivalent to fixing @xmath .

For @xmath , the analytical expressions of the eigenvalues which concern
us are summarized in Table 6.1 . Two families of eigenvalues ( @xmath
and @xmath ) enter in the discussion for @xmath odd, and three families
( @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ), for @xmath even. The numerical
eigenvalues are plotted in figures 6.1 (a), 6.2 (a), and 6.3 (a) and are
in very good agreement with the analytical results. The sole diffusive
eigenvalue @xmath has a real part and no imaginary part. The @xmath
other eigenvalues, either belongs to the @xmath family for @xmath odd or
to the @xmath and @xmath families for @xmath even. The eigenvalues
@xmath and @xmath have an imaginary part which extends from @xmath to
@xmath and they generate oscillations in the dynamics as we shall see in
the following section. The real part of the @xmath eigenvalues is small
and tends to zero in the large @xmath limit. The real part of the @xmath
eigenvalues is always zero.

For @xmath , the diffusive eigenvalue @xmath has disappeared after
merging with the other eigenvalues and the situation is slightly more
complicated. The situation for a moderate value of @xmath is depicted in
figures 6.1 (b), 6.2 (b), and 6.3 (b) while the analytical expressions
of the eigenvalues are given in Table 6.2 . Since @xmath no longer
exists, we have the two families of eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath if
@xmath is odd, and the three families @xmath , @xmath and @xmath if
@xmath is even. Two regions of the spectrum have to be distinguished.
The eigenvalues @xmath exist in the region where @xmath while the
eigenvalues @xmath exist in the region where @xmath . We observe that
the extra family of eigenvalues @xmath has appeared because of the
collision with the diffusive eigenvalue @xmath . We can see in figures
6.1 (b), 6.2 (b), and 6.3 (b) that the analytical results of Table 6.2
reproduce very well the eigenvalues obtained by numerical
diagonalization in the two regions. Here again, the number of
eigenvalues is equal to @xmath for a given wavenumber @xmath , the
imaginary part of the eigenvalues extends from @xmath to @xmath , and
the real parts of all eigenvalues tends to zero in the large @xmath
limit.

A special situation occurs when @xmath is increased to large values.
This situation is depicted in figures 6.1 (c), 6.2 (c), and 6.3 (c). The
situation is similar to the previous one but the region @xmath has
disappeared so that the family of eigenvalues @xmath corresponding to
the expansion @xmath no longer exists. For @xmath odd and for @xmath
even with @xmath odd, these eigenvalues are replaced by the eigenvalues
@xmath eigenvalues. For @xmath even and @xmath even, we find the two
eigenvalues @xmath beside the family of eigenvalues @xmath . The
agreement between the analytical and numerical results is very good here
also. As before, the imaginary part of all these eigenvalues extends
from @xmath to @xmath and their real parts tends to zero in the large
@xmath limit.

A global view of the complete spectrum of the @xmath eigenvalues of the
Redfield superoperator is depicted in figure 6.4 by varying the
wavenumber @xmath in a third dimension. Here, we only consider for
simplicity the case where @xmath is odd. The relation between the
wavenumber @xmath and the parameter @xmath is given by equation ( 6.42
). The wavenumber @xmath varies in the first Brillouin zone or,
equivalently, in the interval @xmath . We see in figure 6.4 (a) that the
diffusive eigenvalues @xmath exists for all the values of the wavenumber
in the case @xmath which implies @xmath . However, if @xmath , the
diffusive eigenvalue @xmath disappears as expected for some values of
the wavenumber corresponding to @xmath . This situation is observed in
figure 6.4 (b).

For very large values of @xmath , the diffusive branch of the spectrum
is reduced to the sole eigenvalue at @xmath , as seen in figure 6.4 (c).
In this case, diffusion has disappeared from the spectrum which only
contains eigenvalues associated with damped oscillatory behavior. The
diffusive branch can be supposed to have disappeared when its last
nonzero eigenvalue disappears in equation ( 6.73 ). Therefore the
diffusive branch disappears when the value of @xmath for the first
nonzero eigenvalue corresponding to @xmath is larger than the critical
value @xmath . This happens when the coupling parameter exceeds the
critical value given by

@xmath (6.111)

This disappearance of the diffusion branch can be observed in figure 6.4
(c). We notice that the diffusive branch always exists in the
infinite-system limit ( @xmath ) in which case @xmath can be arbitrarily
small.

### 6.4 Dynamical analysis

We have described in the previous section the complete spectrum of the
Redfield superoperator. We now need to discuss the dynamical
implications of our spectral analysis.

#### 6.4.1 Theoretical predictions

The spectrum of the Redfield superoperator determines the full dynamics
of the subsystem interacting with its environment. In fact, projecting
equation ( 6.19 ) in the site basis and using the Bloch property ( 6.28
), we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that the imaginary part of the eigenvalues @xmath will generate
oscillations in the dynamics and that the real part of these eigenvalues
will generate a damping. The contribution to the long-time dynamics from
the modes of the Redfield superoperator corresponding to the eigenvalues
@xmath which have a large real part is very small. Only the modes
corresponding to eigenvalues with a small real part will significantly
contribute to the long-time dynamics and therefore to the transport
property of the system. Here, we want mainly to focus on the long-time
dynamics.

As pointed out in subsection 6.3.7 , the subsystem evolves in a
non-diffusive regime if the chain is small enough @xmath . In this
regime, there is no diffusive eigenvalue so that the long-time dynamics
is dominated by the eigenvalues @xmath describing the decay of the
quantum coherences. The lowest relaxation rate is of the order of
magnitude of the real part of the eigenvalues belonging to the @xmath
family of Table 6.2 . Using equation ( 6.110 ), we find that this rate
is given by

@xmath (6.113)

We notice that these eigenvalues have a non-vanishing imaginary part so
that the slowest modes relax exponentially but with oscillations. This
means that the oscillating modes relax on the same time scales as the
non-oscillating ones. These damped oscillations are reminiscent of a
similar behavior in the spin-boson model [ 55 ] . We can thus interpret
these damped oscillations as due to the damping of the quantum
coherences.

For a sufficiently large chain @xmath , these damped oscillations
disappear because the eigenvalue of the Redfield superoperator with the
smaller real part is now the diffusive eigenvalue @xmath . In this case,
the lowest relaxation rate is given according to equation ( 6.74 ) by

@xmath (6.114)

because the wavenumber of the slowest nontrivial mode takes the value
@xmath and is inversely proportional to the length @xmath of the chain.
The signature of the diffusive regime is therefore that the relaxation
rate scales as @xmath .

This behavior is consistent with the famous Einstein relation for the
definition of the diffusion coefficient. Indeed, we can define the
position operator of the subsystem @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The variance of the position is therefore given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where, using Eq ( 6.112 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the newly defined coefficients @xmath . In the long-time limit and
for a sufficiently large chain, only the diffusive branch @xmath of
eigenvalue spectrum will significantly contribute to the dynamics and
one can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Using @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which becomes in the limit of an arbitrarily large chain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we choose an initial condition of the density function centered on a
given site, @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, we recover the well-known Einstein relation for the diffusion
coefficient

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This demonstration is also a justification for calling @xmath or @xmath
the diffusive eigenvalue.

#### 6.4.2 Numerical results

The previous theoretical predictions are confirmed by the numerical
integration of the Redfield equation. We always take @xmath .

Let us define the quantity we computed. Equation ( 6.112 ) can be
written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . If we introduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.124)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

using equation ( 6.5 ), we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.125)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The evolving quantity we have computed is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we recall that @xmath . We consider that the subsystem has initial
conditions given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that @xmath . The quantity @xmath is initially equal to unity
( @xmath ) and tends to zero after a long time ( @xmath ) in an
exponential way determined by the smallest non-vanishing real part of
the eigenvalues @xmath .

Figures 6.5 (a) and 6.5 (b) show the same relaxation curves of @xmath
but for two different time scalings. The different curves correspond to
different values of the coupling parameter @xmath , but to the same
chain size @xmath . Figure 6.5 (a) has the scaling @xmath , which is
characteristic of the non-diffusive regime and figure 6.5 (b) has the
scaling @xmath , which is characteristic of the diffusive regime.
Therefore, the curves in figure 6.5 (a) with the same time scaling
correspond to values of the coupling parameter such that @xmath (in the
non-diffusive regime) and they relax with oscillations at rates given by
equation ( 6.113 ). On the other hand, the curves of figure 6.5 (a) with
the same time scaling correspond to values of the coupling parameter
such that @xmath (in the diffusive regime) and they relax exponentially
without oscillations at a rate given by equation ( 6.114 ).

Figure 6.6 shows the scaling @xmath in the diffusive regime for
different curves at the same value of the coupling parameter but for
different chain sizes @xmath . This figure numerically demonstrates the
property of diffusion in our model.

An important remark is that the time scaling of the non-diffusive regime
is naturally expected from perturbation theory. Indeed, according to
perturbation theory, the relaxation rates are proportional to the square
of the coupling constant @xmath . We recall that the Redfield quantum
master equation is obtained by second-order perturbation theory in the
coupling parameter from the complete von Neumann equation for the
subsystem interacting with its environment. It is quite remarkable that
the time scaling of the relaxation in the diffusive regime is completely
different since the relaxation rate depends on the inverse of the square
of the coupling constant.

In figure 6.7 to figure 6.9 , we have represented the evolution of the
probability @xmath to be on a given site of the subsystem for tree
different values of the coupling parameter. In figure 6.7 , the coupling
parameter is zero and the subsystem evolution is Hamiltonian. We can
notice the interferences showing the coherent character of the dynamic.
In figure 6.8 , the coupling parameter is such that the subsystem
relaxes in the non-diffusive regime. The dynamic still has interference
patterns, but it is damped by the dissipation. Let’s notice too that the
center of the wave packet travels along the subsystem. Finally, in
figure 6.8 , the coupling parameter is now such that the subsystem
relaxes in the diffusive regime. The subsystem dynamic is no longer
coherent and the interference pattern has disappeared. We also notice
that the center of the wave packet no longer moves but that its width
spreads diffusively.

### 6.5 Infinite chain

#### 6.5.1 Spectrum

The spectrum of the infinite chain coupled to its environment can be
obtained from the spectrum of the finite chain in the infinite size
limit @xmath . The wavenumber @xmath becomes a continuous parameter
varying in the first Brillouin zone @xmath .

For given wavenumber, the diffusive eigenvalue @xmath or @xmath given by
equation ( 6.73 ) remains isolated. Consequently, we obtain the result
by which the dispersion relation of diffusion is exactly given by the
analytical expression

@xmath @xmath @xmath (6.128)

The diffusion coefficient

@xmath (6.129)

is proportional to the square of the parameter @xmath of the
tight-binding Hamiltonian and inversely proportional to the parameter
@xmath of the coupling to the environment. The transport is therefore
due to the tunneling from site to site, which is hindered by the
environmental fluctuations proportional to @xmath . The eigenvalue (
6.128 ) can be considered as a Liouvillian resonance [ 44 , 45 ] similar
to the Pollicott-Ruelle resonances describing diffusion in classical
systems [ 29 ] .

For @xmath , the diffusive eigenvalue exists for all the values of the
wavenumber @xmath , as seen in figure 6.10 (a).

For @xmath , the diffusive eigenvalue only exists for all the values of
the wavenumber in the range

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as seen in figure 6.10 (b).

Beside the isolated diffusive eigenvalue, the spectrum at given
wavenumber @xmath contains a continuous part obtained by the
accumulation of the eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in
the limit @xmath . Indeed, in this limit, all these eigenvalues
accumulate into a segment of straight line given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.131)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath [see equations ( 6.109 ) and ( 6.110 )]. This
part of the spectrum is also depicted in figure 6.10 and describes the
time evolution of the quantum coherences which are damped at the
exponential rate @xmath with possible oscillations due to their
non-vanishing imaginary part @xmath .

#### 6.5.2 Temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient

In order to obtain the temperature dependence of the relaxation rates
and the diffusion coefficient, we need to specify the coupling of the
subsystem to its environment. In general, the coupling of a subsystem to
its environment is described by the time correlation function. This
correlation function is determined in terms of the spectral strength
@xmath according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Fourier transform of the environment correlation function, which is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is therefore related to the spectral strength by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the upper and lower signs respectively hold for @xmath and @xmath
. Using equation ( A.7 ), ( 3.30 ) and ( 3.32 ), one can notice that the
spectral strength of the environment is proportional to the imaginary
part of the environment susceptibility

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Empirical forms for the spectral strength are often used in the
literature [ 55 , 92 ] such as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a cutoff frequency and @xmath a constant. The
environment is called ohmic if @xmath , subohmic if @xmath , and
superohmic if @xmath . Such empirical forms for the spectral strength
are used to specify the dynamics of the subsystem over times longer than
@xmath , which is of the order of magnitude of the time scale of the
environment. Therefore, such spectral strengths are of primary
importance to characterize the dependence of @xmath at small
frequencies. In the zero-frequency limit, the quantity

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is well defined and non-vanishing only in the ohmic case @xmath , which
we consider here.

In our model [see equation ( 6.15 )], the environmental correlation
function is given by a Dirac delta distribution @xmath . Therefore, the
Fourier transform of the environmental correlation function is constant

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This assumption is acceptable if the dynamics of the environment is much
faster than the dynamics of the subsystem. Therefore, using equations (
6.137 ) and ( 6.138 ), the following identification can be established

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the diffusion coefficient can now be written with an explicit
temperature dependence

@xmath (6.140)

The conductivity @xmath can be obtained using the Einstein relation

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.141)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath is the electric charge of the carriers, @xmath their
density, and @xmath their chemical potential. Assuming a low density of
carriers, the chemical potential depends on the density according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the conductivity is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the conductivity decreases as @xmath with the temperature. We
notice that similar dependences are also obtained for the electric
conductivity in conducting polymers [ 40 ] and in Fermi liquids [ 59 ,
72 ] . This inverse power law is due to the existence of a single
conduction band in our model. The transport is therefore confined in
this band and no thermally activated transport process occurs in this
model. Our diffusive transport phenomenon can be viewed as the result of
the tunneling of the particle through the potential barriers of the
system. This tunneling is more and more affected as the temperature
increases.

We expect that a crossover would occur to a regime where the diffusion
coefficient has a temperature dependence of Arrhenius type if one
considered a system with at least two conduction bands. In such systems,
we should find that a crossover between the quantum tunneling regime and
a thermally activated transport regime when @xmath becomes comparable to
the energy spacing between the two bands [ 19 , 43 , 53 , 74 , 88 , 92 ]
. From this viewpoint, the present model with a single energy band
describes low-temperature behaviors.

### 6.6 Summary

In the present chapter, we have defined a simple translationally
invariant subsystem which interacts with its environment by correlation
functions which are delta-correlated in space and time. The reduced
dynamics of the subsystem is described by a Redfield quantum master
equation which takes, for such environments, a Lindblad form. Thanks to
the invariance under spatial translations, we could apply the Bloch
theorem to the subsystem density matrix. In this way, we succeeded in
getting analytical expressions for all the eigenvalues of the Redfield
superoperator. These eigenvalues control the time evolution of the
subsystem and its relaxation to the thermodynamic equilibrium. Two kinds
of eigenvalues were obtained: the isolated eigenvalue ( 6.128 ) giving
the dispersion relation of diffusion along the one-dimensional subsystem
and the other eigenvalues ( 6.131 ), which describe the decay of the
quantum coherences, i.e., the process of decoherence in this subsystem.
The properties of the subsystem depend on the length @xmath of the
one-dimensional chain, on the width @xmath of the energy band of the
unperturbed tight-binding Hamiltonian and on the intensity @xmath of the
environmental noise multiplied in the combination @xmath with the square
of the coupling parameter @xmath of perturbation theory.
We discovered that for a finite chain, there are two regimes depending
on the chain length @xmath and the physical parameters @xmath and @xmath
.
For a finite and sufficiently small chain, there is a non-diffusive
regime characterized by a time evolution with oscillations damped by
decay rates proportional to @xmath . The oscillations are the time
evolution of the quantum coherences. This non-diffusive regime exists if
the coupling parameter is smaller than a critical value which is
inversely proportional to the square root of the chain size @xmath :
@xmath .
For larger chains, we are in the diffusive regime with a monotonic decay
on long times at a rate controlled by the diffusion coefficient. In this
regime, the slower relaxation mode relaxes exponentially in time with
the scaling @xmath .
In the limit of an infinite chain @xmath and for non-vanishing coupling
parameter @xmath , the non-diffusive regime disappears and the subsystem
always diffuses.
The diffusion coefficient is proportional to the square of the width
@xmath of the energy band and inversely proportional to the intensity
@xmath of the environmental noise. Accordingly, we are in the presence
of a mechanism of diffusion in which the quantum tunneling of the
particle from site to site is perturbed by the environmental
fluctuations. For an ohmic coupling to the environment, the diffusion
coefficient is inversely proportional to the temperature. By using the
Einstein relation between the diffusion coefficient and the
conductivity, this latter is inversely proportional to the square of the
temperature.
Because the present model is very simple and shares some basic features
of quantum diffusion and conductivity, we believe that it can easily be
used to understand how quantum transport by diffusion can emerge out of
quantum coherent behaviors as in a molecular wire or in a carbon
nanotube in the form of a loop which becomes larger and larger.

## Chapter 7 Conclusions

The main goal of this thesis has been to understand the emergence of
kinetic processes such as transport, decoherence and relaxation to
equilibrium in quantum nanosystems. The understanding of these
irreversible processes is of fundamental importance for the potential
technological applications in the new field of nanosciences.

### 7.1 Summary of the main results

In the two first chapters of this thesis, we have briefly reviewed the
important results already known in the understanding of irreversible
quantum processes. In chapter 2 , we have presented the important
general concepts (quantum statistical ensemble, projected dynamics,
Markovian evolution) necessary to understand how an irreversible
evolution can arise from the reversible von Neumann equation. In chapter
3 , we have reviewed the well-known and widely used theories of quantum
irreversibility (linear response theory, Pauli equation, Redfield
equation) by deriving them from the same perturbative expansion of the
von Neumann equation in order to show their similarities and
differences. In particular, we pointed out the link that exists between
the Fourier transform of the correlation functions (appearing in the
linear response theory and the Redfield theory) and the Fermi golden
rule (that is a central quantity for the Pauli equation).

#### 7.1.1 Emergence of relaxation and decoherence in nanosystems

In the traditional approaches like the Redfield theory, the study of the
irreversible dynamics of a small quantum system interacting with an
environment relies on the assumption of an infinitely large environment.
Assuming that the environment is infinite means that it is not affected
by the interaction with the small quantum system, and, therefore, does
not evolve and stays in its initial state. Of course this hypothesis
greatly simplifies the calculation but is not always valid, especially
in the new context of nanotechnologies. Indeed, there are nanosystems in
which a subsystem interacts with other degrees of freedom forming a
finite environment. In such cases, the environment is not sufficiently
large to remain unaffected by the interaction with the small quantum
subsystem. In this respect, an extension of the Redfield theory to
finite environment, where the subsystem affects the environment and of
course vice versa, is necessary. This first major achievement of this
thesis is presented in chapter 4 .

The central quantity of our new theory is the subsystem reduced density
matrix, but distributed in the environment energy. This quantity is
obtained by applying a projection operator acting on the full density
matrix of the total system and which depends on the energy of the
environment. Let us notice that the projection operator used in the
standard Redfield theory simply leads to the reduced density matrix of
the subsystem without keeping information on the state of the
environment. Thanks to our projection operator, it is possible to
monitor how the subsystem populations and coherences are distributed
over the energy of the environment. Our equation correctly takes into
account the exchanges of energy between the subsystem and the
environment satisfying the total system energy conservation, which is
not the case if the Redfield equation is applied to a finite
environment. Our new theory is derived from a second-order perturbative
expansion of the total von Neumann equation and is therefore valid at
weak couplings between the subsystem and the environment. Another
condition is that the initial condition of the environment has to be an
invariant state (i.e. it has to commute with the environment
Hamiltonian). Furthermore, only our equation gives a consistent
understanding, based on detailed balance, of the way a canonical
subsystem equilibrium distribution (at a temperature given by the
microcanonical temperature of the environment) can arise when the
initial state of the environment is a microcanonical distribution and
when the environment has a large heat capacity. This indicates that
applying the Redfield theory to systems where the environment is in an
initial microcanonical state is not valid and that only our new theory
is correct to describe kinetic processes within the microcanonical
ensemble. When the environment becomes very large compared to the
subsystem, we showed that, as expected, our new equation reduces to the
Redfield equation.
We have applied our new theory to a two-level subsystem interacting in a
non-diagonal way with a general environment. Assuming that the
environment coupling operator in the environment eigenbasis
representation vanishes, we have been able to obtain analytical
expressions for the bi-exponential relaxation of the subsystem
population toward their equilibrium value and for the oscillating
relaxation of the subsystem coherences toward zero. This assumption is,
in particular, exact in models where the environment coupling operators
are given by random matrices thanks to the average over the
random-matrix ensemble.

The spin-GORM model studied in chapter 5 of this thesis is a particular
case of such models where the environment operators (the environment
Hamiltonian as well as the environment coupling operator) are given by
random matrices taken in this case from the Gaussian orthogonal
ensemble.
In the first part of our study of this model, we focused on various
spectral quantities (density of states, mean level spacing, SOE, ATPK).
We classified the parameter space in three qualitatively distinct
domains and we identified a crossover at which the various spectral
quantities change qualitatively. This crossover occurs at the value of
the coupling parameter (between the spin and the environment) at which
the interaction between the different coupled states becomes of the
order of the mean-level spacing between these states. For values of the
coupling parameter below this critical point, the spectral quantities
are almost not affected by the coupling and look basically as if there
was no coupling. But for values of the coupling parameter beyond this
crossover, qualitative changes in the various spectral quantities occur.
It should be noticed that when the spectrum becomes continuous, the
mean-level spacing and the crossover, both go to zero.
The second part of the study of the spin-GORM model focuses on the
subsystem (spin) dynamics. We identified three characteristic regimes of
the spin relaxation corresponding to the three parameter domains
identified in the spectral study. The first domain corresponds to weak
couplings (between the spin and the environment) and to situations where
the energy splitting between the two states of the spin is small
compared to the energy width of the environment spectrum. In this
domain, the relaxation is exponential and scales in time as @xmath . The
second domain also corresponds to weak couplings, but the energy
splitting between the two states of the spin is now large compared to
the energy width of the environment spectrum. In this domain, the
relaxation is a purely non-Markovian dynamics (typically rapid
oscillations at the spin frequency damped on a time scale of the order
of the environment correlation function time scale) and scales in time
as @xmath . The last domain corresponds to very large couplings (larger
than the spin energy splitting and than the environment spectral width).
In this domain, the spin relaxation scales like @xmath and is governed
by a Bessel function of the first kind @xmath .
The study of the weak-coupling regime of this model was of special
interest for us because it allowed a detailed comparison between the
spin dynamics predicted by our theory, the Redfield theory, and the
exact numerical results computed with the von Neumann equation for the
total system. On one hand, this study confirmed the necessity of
extending the Redfield theory to our new theory when the typical spin
energy becomes non-negligible compared to the typical energy scale of
variation of the environment density of states or, equivalently, when
the heat capacity of the environment multiplied by the microcanonical
temperature of the environment becomes of the order or smaller than the
energy splitting between the two levels of the spin. On the other hand,
this study showed that both theories predict the same dynamics on
non-Markovian short time scales. Finally, and this is the second central
result of this thesis, this study allowed us to find a very important
criterion for the validity of kinetic equations in finite quantum
systems. In fact, for values of the coupling parameter @xmath between
the spin and the environment below the crossover that we identified in
the spectral study, the exact dynamics does not follow the prediction of
our kinetic theory. The crossover take place at the critical value
@xmath , where @xmath is the number of energy levels in the environment.
It is only beyond this crossover that the kinetic theory applies. As
expected, the critical value goes to zero in the thermodynamic limit
and, consequently, the kinetic theory is always valid. Let us notice
however that the coupling parameter cannot be too large, otherwise the
weak-coupling assumption at the origin of the kinetic theory fails. It
is conjectured that the existence of such a crossover to see kinetic
processes is a general result and that kinetic processes only occur in
finite quantum systems when the typical interaction terms between the
coupled levels becomes larger than the mean level spacing between these
coupled levels. The interaction has to be large enough to somehow ”mix”
the coupled levels, so that the unperturbed structure of the spectrum
disappears.
This conclusion was strengthened by noting the fact that a
self-averaging property arises for values of the coupling parameter
beyond the crossover. In fact, if the initial condition of the total
system is chosen to be a pure state at a given energy of the
environment, when the coupling parameter is below the crossover, the
subsystem dynamics is strongly oscillating and does not follow the
microcanonically averaged dynamics at this environment energy. However,
when the coupling parameter is above the crossover, the pure state
dynamics starts to be smoother and to follow the microcanonically
averaged one. This self-averaging behavior is reminiscent of classical
ergodicity and it is a very important point to understand the emergence
of kinetic processes in quantum systems.
In the last part of the spin-GORM model study, we focused on the
equilibrium properties of the subsystem (spin), but also of the total
system. Once again, we found that the equilibrium spin distributions
expected from our kinetic theory are valid if the values of the coupling
parameter are beyond the crossover. We also showed that when the heat
capacity of the environment is large, the subsystem thermalizes at a
temperature given by the microcanonical temperature of the environment.
We finally showed that the complexity of internal couplings (given by
random matrices) can have the effect of thermalizing the total system
without the need of an external heat bath.

#### 7.1.2 Transport in nanosystems

Finally, in chapter 6 , we have defined a simple model in which a
translationally invariant subsystem interacts with an environment by a
coupling in terms of correlation functions which are delta-correlated in
space and time. The subsystem is a one-dimensional tight-binding
subsystem made of @xmath sites and possessing a single energy band of
width @xmath . The intensity of the delta-correlated environmental noise
is given by @xmath and the intensity of the subsystem-environment
interaction by @xmath . For weak coupling, the reduced subsystem
dynamics is described by a Redfield quantum master equation which takes,
for such correlation functions, a Lindblad form. Thanks to the Bloch
theorem, we succeeded in getting analytical expressions for all the
eigenvalues of the Redfield superoperator. By studying the Redfield
superoperator spectrum we discovered that for a given system ( @xmath
and @xmath given) interacting with a given environment ( @xmath given),
there are two subsystem relaxation regimes, depending on the intensity
of the interaction between the subsystem and its environment ( @xmath ).
These two relaxation regimes are separated from each other by a critical
value of the coupling parameter @xmath . In the diffusive regime
corresponding to @xmath , a diffusive branch exists in the Redfield
superoperator spectrum which contains at least one nonzero eigenvalue.
In this regime, the slower relaxation mode relaxes exponentially in time
with a scaling @xmath . In the non-diffusive regime corresponding to
@xmath , the last nonzero eigenvalue of the diffusive branch has
disappeared. The slower relaxation mode of this regime relaxes
exponentially in time but with oscillations and with a scaling @xmath .
In the limit of an infinitely large number of sites on the subsystem
@xmath , and for the nonzero value of the coupling parameter, the
non-diffusive regime disappears ( @xmath ) and the subsystem always
diffuses. We showed that the existence of the diffusive branch in the
Redfield superoperator spectrum implies an Einstein relation for the
diffusion coefficient and that the inverse temperature dependence of the
diffusion coefficient can be established if one considers our model of
environment as the infinitely fast environment limit (fast compared to
the subsystem dynamics) of an ohmic environment. Demonstrating the
existence of quantum diffusion on a spatially extended system
constitutes the third central result of this thesis.

### 7.2 Perspectives

The study of quantum kinetic equations started a long time ago and
prestigious names are associated with this issue. The earlier results
where first obtained by Pauli [ 68 ] in the late twenties with the
derivation of the Pauli equation and later (in the fifties and sixties)
by Van Hove [ 91 ] , Montroll [ 65 ] , Zwanzig [ 97 ] and others with
more systematic derivations of the Pauli equation. These early studies
only focus on the subsystem population dynamics. Studies focusing on the
full subsystem density matrix started at the end of the fifties with the
first derivation of the Redfield equation by Redfield [ 77 ] and have
continued until now with various systematic derivation of this equations
by Cohen-Tannoudji [ 16 ] , Kubo [ 51 ] , Gaspard [ 30 ] and others. In
these studies of the Redfield equation, it is an external environment
which generates the irreversible dynamics on the subsystem and one has
to assume that this environment is large enough not to be affected by
the subsystem. Our kinetic equation is a new step in the theory of the
quantum kinetic processes, because we further extend the previous
theories to include in our description some variables of the environment
(here the environment energy) in order to study the irreversible
dynamics of a subsystem interacting with an environment which can be
affected by the subsystem dynamics. The quantity on which our theory
focuses is the density matrix of the subsystem distributed over the
environment energy.

Our new approach to kinetic processes in quantum systems is certainly an
important new tool to deepen our knowledge of the foundation of
statistical mechanics in quantum systems, especially because of the
growing interest for the understanding of irreversible behavior such as
decoherence in nanosystems. In these nanosystems, one often encounters
”structured” environments (i.e. environments with a density of states
which highly varies on short energy scales). As soon as one wishes to
study the dynamics of a subsystem interacting with such environments,
one has to take into account the effects of the changes in the energy of
the environment caused by the subsystem if the subsystem energy is equal
or larger than the typical energy scales of the environment density of
states. This requirement is fulfilled in our new theory.

Spintronics could provide situations in which models similar to the
spin-GORM model could apply. In spintronics, one studies the spin of an
electron moving in a nanodevice. If the energy difference between the
two spin states of the electron (due for example to an applied magnetic
field) is not negligible compared to the typical energy scales of
variation of the density of states of the nanodevice, again, a correct
kinetic theory should take into account the effect of the spin on the
nanodevice. The correct description of the electronic spin relaxation
and decoherence in such devices has a huge importance for potential
nanotechnologies such as quantum computers.

It should be possible to extend our new theory in order to obtain a mean
field equation for many-body systems. Such an extension could allow the
description of the dynamics of an ensemble of interacting particles
where energy conservation plays an important role. In fact, we have seen
that our equation is the only kinetic equation giving an adequate
description of the irreversible relaxation of a subsystem interacting
with an environment described by a microcanonical state. Such kinds of
extension could possibly lead for example to quantum kinetic equations
for Bose-Einstein condensates.

Our kinetic equation allows us to follow the dynamics of each element of
the subsystem density matrix as a distribution in the energy of the
environment. Our theory could therefore play an important role in order
to understand the quantum measurement within a pure quantum scheme where
the measured system as well as the measurement apparatus are described
by quantum mechanics. The density matrix of the measured system would be
distributed over the energy of the measurement apparatus allowing
possible interesting interpretations.

Stochastic Schrödinger equations describing the wave function dynamics
of a subsystem interacting with its environment have been intensely
studied during this last decade [ 21 , 31 , 89 ] . These equations will
probably play an important role in the future to describe individual
elements of a quantum statistical ensemble. It has been shown that if
ensemble averaged, such equations obey the well-known master equations.
Stochastic Schrödinger equations corresponding in this way to the
Redfield equation were also obtained [ 31 ] . An interesting issue would
be to find the stochastic Schrödinger equations which, if ensemble
averaged, gives our new kinetic equation.

The results in the last chapter of this thesis open perspectives on
transport in nanosystems.

Investigating quantum transport in a translationally invariant model
with at least two conduction bands is an important extension of the
single band model studied in this thesis. In fact, in such a double band
model, two kinds of transport are possible. At very low temperatures,
only the lower conduction band is filled, and the transport occurs by
the tunneling of the particle through the potential barriers. At high
temperatures, the thermal fluctuations coming from the environment are
sufficiently strong to allow the particle to jump from a conduction band
to another and the transport occurs mainly by thermal hopping. This
second type of transport becomes effective when the temperature creates
energy fluctuations comparable to the energy gap between the conduction
bands. At low temperatures in the tunneling regime, we have seen that
the transport is slowed down when the temperature is increased. At high
temperatures where the transport by hopping is dominant, one expects an
Arrhenius temperature dependence of the transport coefficient.
Therefore, at a given temperature, a crossover between the two transport
regimes should exist.

In our model of quantum diffusion we have used semi-qualitative
arguments in order to assert that normal transport (transport with a
well-defined transport coefficient) can only occur if the environment
spectral strength is ohmic. Here we may wonder if superohmic or subohmic
environments generate abnormal transport on the subsystem, as suggested
by possible extension of our ohmic model studied in chapter 6 and also
by Refs. [ 58 , 92 ] .

In this thesis we have encountered the criterion @xmath twice for the
emergence of irreversible processes in nanosystems. In the spin-GORM
model, @xmath is the number of states of the environment. In the model
of quantum diffusion, @xmath is the number of sites of the
translationally invariant system. Despite the different meanings of
@xmath in both cases, it is worthwhile to make the analogy. One can
wonder if such a criterion for having kinetic processes in finite
quantum systems will replace in the future the much stronger criterion
of the thermodynamic limit (which requires @xmath ).

## Appendix A Correlation functions of quantum systems

The correlation function between two operators @xmath and @xmath of a
quantum system with Hamiltonian @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an invariant density matrix such that @xmath . The
correlation function has the property @xmath .
The Fourier transform of the correlation function is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Fourier transform of the correlation function has the property
@xmath .

##### General properties

The correlation function can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that @xmath and @xmath are real and have the property

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The Fourier transform of the correlation function can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

If we define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

we can separate the real and the imaginary parts of the Fourier
transform of the correlation function in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### The case of a discrete spectrum

If the spectrum of @xmath is discrete ( @xmath ), the correlation
function reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Fourier transform of the correlation function reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .
For the canonical case @xmath where @xmath , the correlation function
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its Fourier transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the microcanonical case where @xmath with @xmath , the correlation
function reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its Fourier transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the pure case @xmath , the correlation function reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its Fourier transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### The case of a quasi-continuous spectrum

The spectrum of @xmath is quasi-continuous if the discrete eigenvalues
are so densely distributed in energy that one can use a continuous
description for the energy ( @xmath ) and that the operator of interest
can be considered as a smooth function of the energy in the eigenbasis
representation of the system.
In this case, taking the quasi-continuous limit means that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the density of states of the system at energy @xmath .
The correlation function of a quasi-continuous system reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its Fourier transform

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the canonical case, the correlation function of a quasi-continuous
system reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its Fourier transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the microcanonical case, the correlation function of a
quasi-continuous system reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and its Fourier transform

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We notice that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and therefore that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### KMS property

The usual KMS (Kubo-Martin-Schwinger) property, which is easy to verify,
is that the canonical correlation function satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the Fourier transform, on gets that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The microcanonical analogue of the canonical KMS property is also easy
to verify and is given by the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In fact, by averaging ( A ) over energy with a canonical weight as in (
A.28 ), one recovers ( A ). However the KMS property is not as simple
and therefore as useful in the microcanonical case as in canonical case.

## Appendix B Systems with a large heat capacity

Here we consider an isolated system with a dense spectrum described by a
density of states @xmath . The statistical state of the system is
described by a microcanonical distribution at energy @xmath . For such a
system, the microcanonical entropy is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of states in the energy shell which is given
by the density of states @xmath multiplied by the small width of the
energy shell @xmath . The microcanonical temperature is defined as
follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The microcanonical heat capacity is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( B.1 ), we can connect the density of states of the system at two
different energies as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Now, we suppose that the energy @xmath by which the energy of the system
has been increased is small enough to perform an expansion of the
entropy @xmath in @xmath around @xmath . Using ( B.2 ) and ( B.3 ) we
can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

This means that if the heat capacity of the system is large enough to
neglect the second order term in ( B.5 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

( B.4 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . This shows that a Boltzmann distribution, characterising
a canonical ensemble, can naturally emerge from a microcanonical
description. We also notice that the microcanonical temperature of a
system satisfying ( B.6 ) can be considered constant on energy scales of
order @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

## Appendix C Redfield equation for two-level subsystems

In this appendix we apply the Redfield equation ( 3.5.2 ) to a two-level
subsystem interacting in a non-diagonal way with its environment. The
Hamiltonian of the total system is given by ( 4.55 ). The non-Markovian
Redfield equation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the population and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the coherences. Performing the Markovian approximation, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the population and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.4)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

for the coherences. Now we use the Bloch variables given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Assuming as we did in section 4.4 that @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Notice that even if
@xmath , the order @xmath term in the Redfield equation can vanish using
the redefinition ( 3.101 ) and ( 3.102 ). , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The solutions of this equation are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It can finally be noticed that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we recall that @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are real functions.

## Appendix D Gaussian orthogonal random matrices (GORM)

A Gaussian orthogonal random matrix (GORM) @xmath is characterized by
@xmath , the size of the matrix, and by the parameter @xmath , which
enters the Gaussian probability distribution @xmath of the whole matrix.
The statistical properties of a GORM are preserved under orthogonal
transformations. Because the matrix is symmetric, each non-diagonal
element @xmath is equal to its transposed @xmath . The @xmath
independent matrix elements of @xmath are Gaussian random numbers of
mean zero. The standard deviation of the non-diagonal matrix elements
@xmath and the standard deviation of the diagonal matrix element @xmath
are related to @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The density of states of the GORM @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the smoothed density of states by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a small energy interval which is large enough to contain
many states in order for @xmath to be smooth. The averaged smoothed
density of states is an ensemble average of @xmath realizations of the
GORM. Such an ensemble is called Gaussian orthogonal ensemble (GOE). It
is well known [ 62 , 73 , 9 ] that the ensemble averaged smoothed
density of states @xmath obey the Wigner semicircle law in the limit
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The domain of energy where the eigenvalues are distributed (i.e., the
width of the semi-circle) is @xmath . Notice that when @xmath , @xmath ,
and therefore @xmath follows the semi-circle law. The following notation
is used in the present paper: @xmath .

## Appendix E Perturbation theory for the spin-GORM model

There is no analytical way of getting a general form of the eigenvalues
@xmath of the total system, but the three terms in Eq. ( 5.6 ) have
different orders of magnitude, depending on the value of the parameters
@xmath and @xmath . The system and the environment Hamiltonians are of
order @xmath and @xmath , respectively, while the coupling term is of
order @xmath . Therefore, we can examine the different extreme cases
that can be treated perturbatively.

@xmath :

When the system and the environment Hamiltonians are larger than the
interaction term in Eq. ( 5.6 ), we can treat the interaction term in a
perturbative way, taking the system and the environment Hamiltonian as
reference,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we replaced the index @xmath by the two indices @xmath . The
perturbed energy is given to the second order by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We notice that the first nonzero correction to the non-perturbed
eigenstate is of order @xmath .

@xmath :

When @xmath is large compared to @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 5.6 ), it is
possible to consider the interaction term as the reference Hamiltonian
and to treat @xmath and @xmath as small perturbation. Transforming ( 5.6
) by a unitary matrix acting only on the system degree of freedom, we
get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-perturbed reference Hamiltonian is therefore,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath and @xmath be respectively the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . The energy of the perturbed Hamiltonian is
thus given to the second order perturbation in @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath :

In this case, the environment Hamiltonian is large compared to the
system Hamiltonian and the interaction term so that they both can be
considered as perturbations. We get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath :

We now suppose that the system Hamiltonian taken as reference is large
compared to the environment Hamiltonian and the interaction term, so
that these last two terms can be considered as perturbations. We then
get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Two additionals situations, @xmath and @xmath , could be considered but
cannot be treated perturbatively because no reference basis exists in
which @xmath and @xmath are simultaneously diagonal.