of “Recent approaches to high-dimensional American and Bermudan option
pricing”,
by Frederik S Herzberg, Merton College, University of Oxford

A number of Bermudan option pricing methods that are applicable to
options on multiple assets are studied in this thesis, one of the
dominating questions being the natural scaling needed to extrapolate
from Bermudan to American (both approximate and “exact”) option prices.
Among the Bermudan option pricing techniques discussed in more detail
will be (1) the use of cubature formulae for symmetric measures to price
non-perpetual Bermudan options, and (2) réduite-based approximation of
subharmonic functions (corresponding to piecewise harmonic interpolation
in the one-dimensional setting). These (iterative) algorithms shall be
proven to be sound in a sense that is yet to be made precise. Also, for
each iteration sequence resulting from these algorithms, monotone
convergence to the least fixed point of the iteration procedure will be
shown. (As part of an appendix, the fixed points of a Bermudan option
pricing algorithm based on polynomial interpolation shall be
characterised as well.)

If the iteration procedure is based on cubature, a linear convergence
rate of the iteration sequence can be derived. Moreover, for a couple of
practically relevant settings one can find @xmath estimates for a
non-perpetual American option pricing algorithm based on cubature.

At the outset of this dissertation, the existence of exercise regions
for multi-dimensional Bermudan options is established; afterwards one
can proceed to prove bounds on the American-Bermudan barrier put option
price difference (“continuity correction”) when the argument of this
function – as a function of the logarithmic start price – approaches the
exercise boundary. In particular, results of Feller’s shall be
generalised to show that an extrapolation from the exact Bermudan prices
to the American price cannot be polynomial in the exercise mesh size in
the setting of many common market models, and more specific bounds on
the natural scaling exponent of the non-polynomial extrapolation for a
number of (both one- and multi-dimensional) market models will be
deduced.

Finally, three approximate @xmath -hedging algorithms for
high-dimensional derivative securities are proposed and implemented,
alongside with a measure of comparing their effectiveness.

Acknowledgements. The author is highly indebted to Professor Terry Lyons
for numerous helpful discussions. Furthermore, he gratefully
acknowledges a post-graduate scholarship of the German National Academic
Foundation ( Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes ) which funded the
first year of work on this Dissertation, as well as a pre-doctoral
research grant of the German Academic Exchange Service (
Doktorandenstipendium des Deutschen Akademischen Austauschdienstes ).
