### 5.3.3 The case @xmath

Now we consider the case @xmath for a non-symmetrical stationary point
with @xmath , @xmath . The following equations must hold (from Eqs. (
5.11 )-( 5.13 )):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.23)
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.25)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

The last equation can be fulfilled only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see this, assume that @xmath . In that case the following equality
must hold:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But this implies @xmath . The case @xmath was treated separately in the
previous Subsection.

We also have to check the condition b) of ( 5.10 ). Taking only the
quadratically divergent terms, Eq. ( 5.16 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to fulfill condition b) the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

must hold. This can be achieved by choosing the sign of @xmath equal to
the sign of @xmath .

For the condition c) we need the Hessian of @xmath . For @xmath , using
Eqs. ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.25 ) in the calculation we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Considering only terms of order @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, using Eq. ( 5.28 ), we see that the Hessian matrix possesses two
positive eigenvalues and one equal to zero. Expanding in @xmath the next
contribution to the eigenvalue, which is zero at leading order, is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the Hessian evaluated at the point given by Eqs. ( 5.23 ) and
( 5.25 ) is positive definite.

We compare this local minimum with the symmetrical point @xmath . To do
that we do not calculate the Hessian at @xmath , we just compare the
value of @xmath at the two points. Using the following two equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can see that the asymmetric point has a lower energy than the
symmetric one.

We consider now the Lagrangian ( 5.1 ) in the approach used in Section 3
, i.e. without introducing auxiliary fields. Doing that, one should
investigate the possibility of having further symmetry breaking mass
terms besides the mass terms @xmath , with @xmath . Additional terms
like @xmath would in general violate the @xmath symmetry in the
four-fermion interaction term (by going to the fermion mass basis, the
coupling @xmath can become complex) while a term like @xmath would break
the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry. The auxiliary field method offers,
as we saw, a convenient framework to treat these phenomena. We saw that
the VEVs of the auxiliary fields are real and that @xmath . This is
equivalent to show that these additional mass terms ( @xmath and @xmath
) are not dynamically generated. Considering only the usual mass terms
we obtain the following gap equations ³ ³ 3 A numerical analysis of
these equations including also gluon exchange is made in [ 65 ] for
@xmath . for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where negative mass parameters are allowed. Eq. ( 5.34 ) is shown
diagrammatically in Fig. 5.1 . For Eq. ( 5.35 ) there is an analogous
representation. One can also see that Eqs. ( 5.34 ), ( 5.35 ) may be
obtained from Eqs. ( 5.23 ), ( 5.25 ).

Now we discuss Eqs. ( 5.34 ) and ( 5.35 ) assuming @xmath . These
equations can only be fulfilled if @xmath and @xmath are both zero or
both non-zero. We consider @xmath and estimate the values of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath which are needed in order to have non-vanishing quark
masses. From these equations we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . For the top-bottom mass ratio this implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain non-zero quark masses (remember we are assuming here
@xmath ) the couplings @xmath must then obey the equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the condition for having only one Higgs doublet, @xmath , holds, one
obtains @xmath as expected.

For a given @xmath ( @xmath ), the values of @xmath and @xmath which
fulfill Eq. ( 5.38 ) describe a hyperbola. @xmath , @xmath need not
necessarily be positive. As in the previous cases, in order to obtain
quark masses much smaller than @xmath , it is necessary to consider the
terms suppressed by a factor @xmath and do fine-tuning.

There is a question for which we do not present a direct answer because
it involves fine-tuning of many parameters: Given the parameters of the
theory, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , is there symmetry breaking or
not? It is enough to say that if Eqs. ( 5.34 ) and ( 5.35 ) can be
fulfilled (with @xmath ), EWSB occurs. We do not give here an analogon
to the symmetry breaking condition @xmath obtained for the minimal
scheme.

In summary we have seen in this Subsection that for a @xmath interaction
term of the form given in Eq. ( 5.1 ) with @xmath EWSB occurs if Eqs. (
5.34 ) and ( 5.35 ) are fulfilled (with @xmath ). Besides, the @xmath
symmetry is not spontaneously broken. For the auxiliary field analysis
we restricted ourselves to the case where both auxiliary Higgs doublets
condense, because only in this case spontaneous electromagnetic or
@xmath symmetry breaking are possible. In Section 6 we shall see that
for a four-fermion interaction term involving the 3 families,
spontaneous @xmath violation can occur.

### 5.4 Composite Higgs boson masses

#### 5.4.1 Goldstone bosons

In order to calculate the mass spectrum of the composite Higgs bosons,
it is helpful to identify the Higgs boson degrees of freedom which
correspond to Goldstone bosons. In this Subsection we express the
neutral and charged Goldstone bosons in the auxiliary field basis. We
shall use this information for choosing a convenient basis for the
calculation of the Higgs boson self-energies.

The Goldstone theorem states that for every spontaneously broken
generator of a continuous global symmetry a massless boson, i.e., a
Goldstone boson, appears. If the broken symmetry is a local one, the
Goldstone boson does not appear in the physical particle spectrum of
theory. In this case the Higgs mechanism takes place: The Goldstone
boson is absorbed by the gauge boson associated with the broken local
symmetry, which in turn gets massive. A massive gauge boson possesses 3
degrees of freedom, one more than a massless one.

If a global symmetry is broken by the VEVs of some scalar fields, the
Goldstone theorem says also how to express the associated Goldstone
boson field as a function of the scalar fields. The Goldstone bosons are
given by the infinitesimal displacements of the scalar field VEVs under
the transformations generated by the broken generators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Goldstone boson fields, @xmath the broken
generators, and @xmath represents the VEVs of the scalar fields. Let us
write the VEVs of @xmath and @xmath , given in Eq. ( 5.8 ), using a real
matrix (only to avoid @xmath factors)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the two columns refer to the two Higgs doublets and the four rows
refer from above to below to the real part of the neutral component, the
imaginary part of the neutral component, the real part of the charged
component, and the imaginary part of the charged component,
respectively. The broken generators of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.41)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.42)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

Inserting into Eq. ( 5.39 ) we obtain the following expressions for the
charged and neutral Goldstone boson fields

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.44)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

where the fields @xmath , @xmath are components of the Higgs fields
@xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Change of Basis of Auxiliary Fields

We define new bases for the auxiliary fields in the neutral and charged
sectors. We choose the new bases in such a way that the Goldstone
bosons, identified in the previous Subsection, become basis vectors.
Later we calculate the two-point proper-vertex matrices in these bases.
The advantage is that in each sector, neutral and charged, one of the
basis vectors of the proper-vertex matrix is already an eigenvector with
associated eigenvalue equal to zero, i.e. a pole of the propagator.

In the four-dimensional neutral sector we define the new basis by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the orthogonal transformation matrix @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field @xmath is the normalized Goldstone boson found in Eq. ( 5.45
). In this new basis the mass term of the neutral bosonic fields is
given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.48)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.49)
  -- -- -- --------

Now we turn to the charged sector which is composed of two charged
fields. The new basis is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the charged field @xmath is the normalized charged Goldstone boson
found in Eq. ( 5.44 ). In this new basis the mass term for the charged
scalar fields is given by

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

We shall use these auxiliary field bases in the Subsection 5.4.4 and in
Chapter 6 .

#### 5.4.3 The case @xmath

For @xmath the neutral sector is approximately twice as large as the
neutral sector of the minimal scheme (see Section 4.3 ). In the neutral
sector of the minimal scheme one continuous symmetry is spontaneously
broken. A Goldstone boson appears. Besides there is a neutral Higgs
boson with a mass equal to @xmath . In the present case there are, at
least classically, two broken symmetries. The one with the quantum
numbers of the @xmath boson and the PQ symmetry. We obtain here a
Goldstone boson and an axion [ 10 ] . The PQ symmetry is actually
anomalous which implies that the axion ⁴ ⁴ 4 An axion at the electroweak
scale is experimentally ruled out. gets a mass from instanton
contributions. Furthermore in analogy with the minimal scheme there are
two Higgs bosons with masses @xmath and @xmath .

Let us now consider the charged sector. The relevant part of the
Lagrangian is given in the quark mass basis by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath proper vertex matrix of the charged fields, shown
diagrammatically in Fig. 5.3 , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see Eq. ( 4.36 ) for the definition of @xmath ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

First we evaluate the matrix @xmath for a vanishing external momentum
squared:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The determinant of @xmath is zero. This reflects the appearance of the
expected charged Goldstone boson. To find the mass of the charged
composite Higgs, we need the value of @xmath at which the second
eigenvalue of @xmath becomes 0. If we make the following approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath states, e.g., for @xmath , the matrix @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last matrix has vanishing eigenvalue at @xmath . If one calculates
the second eigenvalue from @xmath without the last approximation, one
finds that the charged Higgs mass, for example for @xmath , differs only
by 1%.

#### 5.4.4 The case @xmath

Now we consider the case when @xmath and both auxiliary fields condense.
Let us first calculate the composite Higgs masses in the neutral sector.
It is convenient to adopt the auxiliary field basis defined in Eqs. (
5.46 )-( 5.49 ) in which the neutral Goldstone boson field is one of the
basis vectors. The orthogonal matrix @xmath is given, for @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that only the VEV of @xmath is different from zero, @xmath . The
Yukawa coupling term involving the neutral fields @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the couplings @xmath are the Yukawa couplings in the quark mass
basis. Due to the condition ( 5.26 ) these are real coupling constants
which can differ from the respective Yukawa couplings in the weak basis
@xmath only by a sign. Using Eq. ( 5.46 ) we obtain the Yukawa term in
the new basis:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dots represent analogous terms for the bottom field. The only
difference which appears in the @xmath -quark terms is that in this case
it is necessary to replace @xmath by @xmath , as we can see from Eq. (
5.60 ). There are top-loop and bottom-loop contributions to the
two-point functions we want to calculate. These two contributions have
however the same form. A change of the sign in front of @xmath has no
consequences for the neutral two-point functions.

As we saw at the beginning of this Chapter the Lagrangian we consider is
@xmath -invariant. This symmetry is also not broken by the vacuum of the
theory because @xmath . As a consequence the @xmath -even ( @xmath and
@xmath ) and the @xmath -odd ( @xmath and @xmath ) fields do not mix and
the @xmath two-point proper vertex matrix is a block diagonal one.

The Feynman diagrams we have to calculate are shown in Fig. 5.2 . Using
Eqs. ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.25 ), the non-vanishing two-point functions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.62)
                                @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in the @xmath -odd sector, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.65)
                                @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in the @xmath -even sector. The factor @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The masses of the bound states are given by the values of @xmath at
which the proper vertex matrix has vanishing eigenvalues. From Eqs. (
5.63 ) and ( 5.64 ) we see that at @xmath a zero eigenvalue with
associated eigenvector @xmath , the neutral Goldstone boson, appears. In
the @xmath -even sector the @xmath entry of the @xmath matrix is of
order ⁵ ⁵ 5 It follows from the reasoning after Eq. ( 5.25 ) that @xmath
. @xmath and therefore, for @xmath , much bigger than the other matrix
elements. In first approximation the smaller eigenvalue of this matrix
is given by @xmath . From Eq. ( 5.66 ) we see that the propagator has a
pole located at @xmath . The other two eigenvalues, associated with a
@xmath -even and a @xmath -odd field, are of order @xmath .

Now we treat the charged sector in an analogous way. We use the
auxiliary field basis defined in Eqs. ( 5.50 ) and ( 5.4.2 ). The Yukawa
terms are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the left and right projectors. For the
two-point proper vertices, represented by the diagrams of Fig. 5.3 , we
obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.71)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.73)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have here a similar situation as in the neutral @xmath -odd sector.
The @xmath element is of order @xmath and the other elements of the
matrix vanish at @xmath . Therefore the two poles are located at @xmath
and at @xmath .

We turn now to the Yukawa coupling constants at low energy. From the 8
scalar degrees of freedom which are present in this model, 3 are
Goldstone bosons (they are treated in detail in Section 3.4 ) and 4
possess masses of order @xmath , which is the upper limit of the
validity range of the model. For energies lower than @xmath only one
neutral scalar particle, with mass @xmath , is present. In a good
approximation this particle can be described by the field @xmath . Its
Yukawa interaction at the scale @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we express the Yukawa coupling at zero momentum. From the inverse of
the propagator, Eq. ( 5.66 ), we obtain the appropriate scaling factor
in order to get the conventional normalization of @xmath at the scale
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Replacing Eq. ( 5.76 ) in Eq. ( 5.75 ) we get the same interaction we
found in Section 4.3 , Eqs. ( 4.40 ) and Eq. ( 4.41 ), modified for the
case of 2 quark flavors. We see in this way that at energies much lower
than @xmath this model cannot be distinguished from the one which has
only one auxiliary Higgs doublet from the beginning. In the last case
the condition @xmath must hold, see Section 4.3 .

#### 5.4.5 Composite Higgs boson masses: Summary

We calculated the masses of the composite Higgs bosons when both
auxiliary fields condense considering separately the cases of having
@xmath equal or different from zero. There are qualitative differences
between these two cases. For @xmath the Lagrangian possesses a PQ
symmetry and the theory contains an axion. A further qualitative
difference is related to quadratic divergences in the two-point
functions. For @xmath there are quadratic divergences in these
amplitudes and as a consequence the theory predicts bound states with
masses of order @xmath , the upper limit of the validity range of the
model. In the case of having @xmath the gap equations cancel all these
divergences and all poles lie well below @xmath . In the two cases there
are, as expected, 3 Goldstone bosons related to the broken electroweak
symmetry generators. For @xmath the theory predicts also an axion, 2
neutral @xmath -even Higgs bosons with masses @xmath , @xmath and a
charged Higgs boson with a mass @xmath . If @xmath one expects one
neutral @xmath -even Higgs bosons with mass @xmath . The other poles in
this case are of order @xmath and cannot be interpreted a Higgs
particles.

We see that both for the case of having @xmath and for @xmath the number
of parameters at low energies is two. Once one fixes them, e.g. by the
experimental values of the quark masses, the model is completely
specified. For the case @xmath one would like to understand why the
number of parameters is only two and not three. The technical reason is
that in order to satisfy the first derivative conditions simultaneously,
the relation Eq. ( 5.38 ) must hold. This supplies an extra constraint.

Finally it must be said that the case @xmath is experimentally ruled out
because an “electroweak” axion has not been found.

## Chapter 6 Three Generations of Quarks

So far we have studied models which either have only one composite Higgs
doublet (Section 4.3 ), or we considered just the third family of quarks
(Chapter 5 ). In order to construct a model with three quark generations
with dynamical EW and @xmath symmetry breaking which leads to a quark
mass spectrum, to family transitions, and to a @xmath phase which are in
accord with observations, a more general four-fermion self-interaction
is needed. We investigate such a self-interaction term in this Chapter.

In order to get a realistic CKM matrix which is @xmath -violating, one
could start with a four-quark interaction term which violates the @xmath
symmetry explicitly. In that case one obtain naturally a non-trivial
phase (and mixing angles) in the CKM matrix. We are interested, however,
in a different possibility. We put the @xmath symmetry on the same
footing as the EW symmetry, that is, we consider it as a spontaneously
broken symmetry. That would give a dynamical explanation to this
phenomenon (see Chapter 2 ).

The generalization of Eq. ( 5.1 ) to the case where all quarks interact
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The notation used in this equation was introduced in Chapter 4 . The
Lagrangian @xmath includes four-fermion terms which mix quark fields of
different quark families.

Because we demand the Lagrangian to be @xmath -invariant, all the
coupling constants @xmath in @xmath are considered to be real. In this
case the number of parameters of Eq. ( 6.1 ) is 171. ¹ ¹ 1 After
requiring hermiticity of the Lagrangian there are 45 independent
couplings @xmath , 81 couplings @xmath , and further 45 couplings @xmath
. Where we do not count the cutoff @xmath which is also a parameter of
the model.

We now rewrite the interaction term, Eq. ( 6.1 ), in terms of auxiliary
fields which have the quantum numbers of the SM Higgs doublet field, as
we explained in Chapter 4 . We do not consider completely arbitrary
couplings @xmath . For simplicity we restrict ourselves to the subset
for which the theory can be described by means of only two auxiliary
fields, @xmath and @xmath . In terms of these auxiliary fields the
four-fermion term @xmath is replaced by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The relations between the real coupling constants in the two
formulations of the model are given in Eqs. ( 4.6 ). In consequence we
restrict ourselves to a model with 36, essentially the four @xmath
Yukawa matrices, parameters (plus the cutoff scale @xmath ).

We are now confronted with the following problem. We want to find the
values of the parameters of the model such that the vacuum of the theory
breaks the EW symmetry in the observed way. Besides, the generated CKM
matrix and the quark masses must correspond to their measured values.
However, the relation between the 36 parameters of our model and the
quantities to be reproduced is rather complicated. In order to find an
analytical solution we introduce in the next Section a self-consistent
approach to the problem.

### 6.1 Self-consistent Approach

For the purpose of finding local minima of the effective potential we
proceed in a similar way as we did in Chapter 5 for a simpler
Lagrangian. Due to gauge invariance it is possible to consider the
dependence of the effective potential on the auxiliary fields, @xmath
and @xmath just through the four variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . We examine the three conditions written in Eq. ( 5.10 )
which are sufficient in order to have a local minimum which respects the
electromagnetic @xmath symmetry, i.e. with @xmath . These conditions
consist in having a) vanishing first derivatives of the effective
potential with respect to the variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
b) a positive first derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath , and c)
a positive definite @xmath Hessian matrix related to the variables
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

We use a self-consistent method in order to find the portion of the
parameter space for which the model generates realistic CKM matrix
elements and quark masses. First, we assume that the minimum of the
effective potential (denoted by non-primed symbols) is given by a field
configuration with non-trivial values of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (
@xmath ) and with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

VEVs of this form are necessary in order to have a theory with
spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking and unbroken @xmath symmetry.

Inserting the Higgs VEVs in the Yukawa interactions, Eq. ( 6.3 ), one
gets the quark mass term:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quark mass matrices for the up- and down-type quarks in the last
equation are in general non-diagonal. In order to diagonalize them we
perform the following chiral rotations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the primed fields denote the fermion fields in the mass basis and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are basis transformation matrices. The
CKM matrix is given by @xmath . In the new basis the quark mass
matrices, which are now diagonal and real are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the Yukawa couplings in the mass basis @xmath , @xmath are defined
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We emphasize that the Higgs VEVs in Eq. ( 6.8 ) are still not
determined.

Using the last definitions, the relations between the composite fields
@xmath and their constituent quark fields are given by:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.10)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath . Besides, the interaction term @xmath is given in this basis
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

Combining Eqs. ( 6.8 ) and ( 6.9 ) and using the fact that the matrices
@xmath and @xmath are real, it is possible to write the Yukawa couplings
in the weak basis, @xmath , @xmath , as a function of the Higgs VEVs,
the quark masses, and the basis transformation matrices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have in this way transformed the original problem into one which can
be solved in a self-consistent way: We must find values of @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , to which we associate the Yukawa couplings given
in Eqs. ( 6.12 ), such that the resulting effective potential has its
minimum at the same values @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (besides @xmath ).
For this purpose we can vary the basis transformation matrices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These are arbitrary unitary matrices which
must obey the condition @xmath .

### 6.2 Derivatives of the Effective Potential

In this Section we calculate the first and second derivatives of the
effective potential related to the Lagrangian Eq. ( 6.1 ). These
expressions are needed in order to apply the minimum conditions given in
Eq. ( 5.10 ).

The effective potential was calculated in Chapter 4 . We are considering
the special case in which the Lagrangian @xmath given in Eq. ( 6.1 ) can
be rewritten with the help of only two auxiliary fields. The function to
be minimized is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath matrix @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the last equations and in the following ones a sum over repeated
indices is understood.

We only consider derivatives of @xmath at the hyperplane given by @xmath
. At each point of the hyperplane it is possible to diagonalize the
matrix @xmath . This is equivalent to the diagonalization of the quark
mass matrices that can be done performing the chiral transformations
introduced in Eqs. ( 6.7 ). The change of fermion basis modifies the
matrix @xmath of the fermion determinant in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the r.h.s. of the last expression is a diagonal matrix. The
determinant @xmath does not change after the substitution Eq. ( 6.14 ).

We put the matrix @xmath in diagonal form because it simplifies the
calculation of the derivatives of the effective potential. In
particular, the matrix @xmath at the minimum of @xmath corresponds to a
diagonal matrix formed by the squared quark masses

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 6.7 ) and ( 6.9 ) the matrix @xmath can be written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.16)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 6.2.1 First Derivatives of the Effective Potential

Having expressed the effective potential in a more convenient form, we
calculate its first derivatives. First we consider the derivatives with
respect to the variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The following
relation will be useful:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.17)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath . The fact that at the evaluation point the matrix
@xmath is diagonal and that the first derivatives of its matrix elements
with respect to the variables @xmath are well defined (that is not true
for @xmath , see below) leads to the previous relation. From Eqs. ( 6.13
) and ( 6.17 ) we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.18)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath . Only the diagonal elements of @xmath are
relevant to these first derivatives of @xmath . Writing the matrix
@xmath in block form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

we need to concentrate only on

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivatives of the diagonal elements of @xmath with respect to
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath block-diagonal matrix given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to have spontaneous CP violation both @xmath and @xmath must be
non-zero at the minimum. Thus we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the last condition does not depend on @xmath or @xmath
explicitly. Now we consider the first derivative of @xmath with respect
to the variable @xmath . The derivatives of the diagonal elements of
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the following notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar way we obtain the first derivative condition related to the
variable @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we consider the dependence of the effective potential on @xmath .
The matrix @xmath at a given point @xmath can be written as a sum of the
matrix @xmath evaluated at the point @xmath in its diagonal basis, and
terms proportional to @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The determinant of @xmath contains only even powers of @xmath . This is
because all terms have the same number of factors @xmath coming from the
submatrix @xmath and from the submatrix @xmath . Thus, the effective
potential written as a function of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the determinant @xmath is a sixth degree polynomial of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first derivative of the effective potential with respect to @xmath
at the point @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined in Eq. ( 6.35 ). There are two types of terms which
contribute to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

namely, terms which are a product of only diagonal elements of the
matrix @xmath , and terms with one factor from the submatrix @xmath ,
one factor from @xmath , and further 4 diagonal factors. These two type
of terms are given by the first and second contribution on the r.h.s. of
Eq. ( 6.37 ) respectively. The sum in the second term is over all the
entries of the matrix @xmath . Inserting @xmath into Eq. ( 6.36 ) and
performing the momentum integral, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we finally make use of the first derivative condition related to
@xmath (Eq. ( 6.30 )) we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.40)
  -- -- -- --------

The relevant results of this Subsection are given in Eqs. ( 6.25 ), (
6.28 ), ( 6.30 ) and ( 6.40 ).

#### 6.2.2 Analysis of the First Derivatives

Before we calculate the second derivatives of @xmath , we analyze the
minimum conditions involving the first derivatives. One can easily find
a set of parameters which obey the minimum conditions associated with
the variables @xmath and @xmath , Eqs. ( 6.28 ) and ( 6.30 ). It
suffices to choose suitable Higgs mass parameters on the l.h.s. of these
equations. As in the previous cases which we have studied, fine-tuning
is needed in each equation in order to get @xmath . The other two
conditions, Eqs. ( 6.25 ) and ( 6.40 ), demand a self-consistent
treatment.

Let us start with the first derivative condition related to @xmath . Eq.
( 6.25 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are real coefficients
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Direct expressions for these coefficients are given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.43)
  -- -- -- --------

Making use of the cyclicity of the trace, the last expressions simplify
to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath vanishes, Eq. ( 6.41 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain a solution for @xmath different from @xmath the
coefficient @xmath must not vanish. Remember that we formulate the
problem in a self-consistent way. We obtain the required quark masses
and the CKM matrix only if the solution for @xmath of Eq. ( 6.45 ) is
given by @xmath . The self-consistent solution of Eq. ( 6.45 ) is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows from Eq. ( 6.45 ) that if @xmath then @xmath must be of the
same order than @xmath which has a suppression factor @xmath . A
fine-tuning is then necessary also for this equation. In consequence the
three first derivative conditions related to the variables @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath must be fine-tuned.

Finally we rewrite the vacuum alignment condition. Using the solution
for @xmath found in Eq. ( 6.46 ), and Eqs. ( 6.40 ), ( 6.42 ), the first
derivative condition related to @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.2.3 Second Derivatives of the Effective Potential

We calculate the Hessian matrix associated with the effective potential
and the variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in order to check the
minimum condition c) of Eq. ( 5.10 ). We need to calculate the following
derivatives:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.48)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath . For the second term of the r.h.s. the following relation
is useful

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we again used the fact that the matrix @xmath is diagonal at the
point @xmath . Inserting this equation into Eq. ( 6.48 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given in Eq. ( 6.39 ). The first derivatives of the matrix
@xmath needed in Eq. ( 6.50 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides, the second derivatives of the diagonal elements of @xmath ,
relevant for Eq. ( 6.50 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the last expressions and the first derivative conditions we found
in Subsection 6.2.1 we finally get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , and @xmath .

#### 6.2.4 Summary

Here we summarize the procedure which allows to find the parameter
subspace of the coupling constants @xmath of the Lagrangian given in Eq.
( 6.1 ) for which the model predicts the correct CKM matrix and quark
masses. We restrict our analysis to the case in which the four-fermion
Lagrangian can be rewritten using only two auxiliary Higgs fields.

First we choose the four unitary matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath with the only restriction of having a realistic CKM matrix @xmath
. For this it is necessary to determine the value of 32 real parameters,
9 from each unitary matrix minus the 4 physical parameters of the CKM
matrix. We also have to choose the values of the VEVs @xmath and @xmath
. However, it is possible to fix the values of @xmath and @xmath without
losing generality. This is because other values of the VEVs @xmath and
@xmath correspond just to rescalings of the auxiliary fields @xmath .
Using the basis transformation matrices we chose and the quark masses,
we calculate the values of the parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
using Eqs. ( 6.44 ). Next we do the first check: The value of @xmath
must be different from zero. This is necessary in order to have a
non-trivial value of @xmath and hence spontaneous @xmath symmetry
breaking. If this is the case, the value of @xmath is given by Eq. (
6.46 ). Because @xmath is a function with period @xmath , the last
equation leads to two possible values for @xmath , which are, however,
equivalent. After that, using Eqs. ( 6.12 ) and ( 6.9 ), we find the
values of the Yukawa matrices in the weak and mass bases. Replacing
these matrices in Eqs. ( 6.28 ) and ( 6.30 ) we get the appropriate
values of the auxiliary field mass parameters @xmath and @xmath . At
this point we make two further checks related to the conservation of the
electromagnetic symmetry and the second derivatives of the effective
potential. The first of these restrictions is given in Eq. ( 6.47 ) and
the second corresponds to having a positive definite Hessian matrix
which is given in Eq. ( 6.53 ). Finally, if the chosen parameters pass
all checks the four-fermion parameters @xmath can by obtained from Eqs.
( 5.4 ). If not, the chosen parameters do not generate a realistic
model.

### 6.3 Quark Mass Expansion

In order to obtain approximate expressions for the quantities calculated
in the previous Subsection, in particular for @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , we perform an expansion in the quark mass ratios. We profit
from the fact that the top quark is much heavier than the other quarks.

In this expansion only some entries of the basis transformation matrices
are relevant. We introduce the following notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 3-dimensional vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath fulfill,
as a consequence of the unitarity of the transformation matrices, the
following relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

First we consider the coefficients @xmath and @xmath given by Eqs. (
6.44 ). The contributions to @xmath and @xmath can be grouped, depending
on the factors @xmath , in the following way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the leading terms are of order @xmath . If they are not suppressed
by basis transformation matrix elements, the following approximations
are valid

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

We give now an approximated expression for @xmath (Eq. ( 6.46 )).
Because we are considering the coefficient @xmath to be of order @xmath
, we can neglect the contribution of @xmath in the denominator of Eq. (
6.46 ). In this way we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We repeat that the last expression is valid only if the numerator and
the denominator of this ratio are of order 1, and if @xmath .

Let us now consider the first derivative of the effective potential with
respect to @xmath evaluated at the minimum of the effective potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

First we examine the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 6.58 ). For
@xmath much bigger than the quark masses we can make the following
approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 6.33 ), ( 6.9 ), and ( 6.12 ), and the cyclicity of the
trace, we obtain for the second term of Eq. ( 6.58 ) the following
expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the factor @xmath depends only on the quark masses and on the
basis transformation matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the basis transformation matrices do not suppress the
factor @xmath , we can consider its absolute value to be of order @xmath
. In this case we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sign of the contributions is equal to the sign of the factor
@xmath . We estimate now the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 6.58 ).
For that, we need an approximate expression for @xmath . The leading
contribution to @xmath is proportional to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used Eqs. ( 6.55 ). The last result is only valid if @xmath .
Using it, we obtain for the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 6.58 ) the
following approximate expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the Schwarz inequality Eq. ( 6.63 ) is always negative, while the
sign of the second contribution to @xmath , given in Eq. ( 6.61 ), is
equal to the sign of the factor @xmath . The ratio between their
absolute values is @xmath . In order to have a ratio smaller than 1
(smaller first term), and thus, if @xmath is positive, alignment, the
leading contribution to @xmath must be suppressed, i.e. @xmath .
Besides, if we suppress the contribution to @xmath proportional to
@xmath , we also suppress the whole term with @xmath in the sum for
@xmath in Eq. ( 6.44 ), and the term proportional to @xmath coming from
@xmath in this sum. Thus, the leading contribution to @xmath are of the
order of the terms proportional to @xmath , @xmath .

#### 6.3.1 Example

In order to be more specific we give an example in which the
transformation matrices @xmath and @xmath are both real. (The two
transformation matrices for the left-handed fields cannot be
simultaneously real because the CKM matrix is complex. In a similar way,
the transformation matrices for the right-handed fields cannot be both
real because @xmath must be different from zero, see Eq. ( 6.44 ).) As
we did in Eq. ( 6.54 ) for the up-sector, we introduce a convenient
notation for the relevant matrix elements of the down-type
transformation matrices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath we obtain from Eq. ( 6.57 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last approximation is valid only if @xmath . On the other, hand
imposing the constraint @xmath , we get a restriction on the left
transformation matrix elements: The three vectors @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath must be parallel to each other. Using Eq. ( 6.65 ) and @xmath we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and also @xmath , @xmath . Therefore the approximation we did in Eq. (
6.65 ) is valid if @xmath . Besides, the factors @xmath and @xmath are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.67)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and the angle @xmath is given by @xmath .
Choosing @xmath and @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With this choice of parameters we obtain @xmath and @xmath (see Eq. (
6.58 )). It is necessary to check also the second derivative condition.
Calculating the Hessian, Eq. ( 6.53 ) up to order @xmath , one finds
that two eigenvalues of this matrix are real and one is equal to zero.
In order to obtain the third eigenvalue more precisely and to see
whether it is positive, a more detailed evaluation of the Hessian is
needed. We verified this numerically for some specific cases.

We give approximate, non-fine-tuned expressions for the coupling
constants @xmath of Eq. ( 6.1 ). For our example, using Eqs. ( 6.12 )
and ( 4.6 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corrections to Eqs. ( 6.71 ) are by a factor @xmath smaller for each
of the three types of coupling constants @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

### 6.4 Masses of the Composite Higgs Bosons

We calculate in this Section the neutral and charged two-point proper
vertices associated with the Lagrangian given in Eq. ( 6.1 ) which
involves the three quark families. As before we restrict ourselves to
the case when the Lagrangian can be rewritten using only two auxiliary
fields which condense and break the EW symmetry in the correct way. The
situation is analogous to the one of Section 5.4 where only one family
of quarks was considered. The values of the flowing momentum, for which
an eigenvalue of the proper vertex matrix becomes zero, correspond to
the composite Higgs masses we are looking for.

For the calculation we use the neutral and charged auxiliary field bases
which we defined in Subsection 5.4.2 . In this Subsection we also found
the auxiliary field mass terms in the new bases. We need also the Yukawa
terms in these bases. From Eq. ( 6.11 ) we obtain the following Yukawa
couplings for the neutral auxiliary fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dots represent analogous terms for the down sector. In the
charged sector we find for the fields @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the left and right projectors. @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath are @xmath matrices in flavor space. @xmath is the
CKM matrix, the matrices @xmath with @xmath are the diagonal quark mass
matrices of the up and down sector, and the matrices @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

With these interaction terms and the mass terms of the auxiliary fields
which are given in Subsection 5.4.2 we calculate the two-point proper
vertices. In the calculation we also use the fine-tuned first derivative
conditions found in Subsection 6.2.1 . For the neutral sector the
relevant diagrams are shown in Fig. 6.1 . The related proper vertices
are given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.76)
  -- -- -- --------

where the minus sign in the last term corresponds to @xmath and the plus
sign to @xmath . The matrices @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further neutral proper vertices are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.82)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.84)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where in Eqs. ( 6.82 )-( 6.85 ) @xmath stands for @xmath for @xmath and
for @xmath for @xmath .

In the charged sector the three relevant two-point proper vertices, with
associated diagrams shown in Fig. 6.2 , are given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.86)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.87)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

vanishes at @xmath .

In all the two-point proper vertices the quadratic divergences cancel.
As expected, the neutral and charged Goldstone bosons correspond to
eigenvectors of the proper vertex matrix at @xmath with vanishing
eigenvalues. Besides these three Goldstone bosons there are three
neutral and one charged Higgs particles. The masses of these particles
are roughly @xmath . We find that one neutral mass is @xmath and the
rest of the Higgs masses are much smaller.

## Chapter 7 Compositeness Condition and Renormalization Group Analysis

If the scale associated with the new four-fermion interactions is much
higher than the scale of EW symmetry breaking, i.e. @xmath , it is
possible to make a (perturbative) renormalization group (RG) analysis of
the theory. This analysis leads to much better predictions for the
top-quark and Higgs-boson masses than the crude NJL approach because it
includes effects of the gauge boson interactions which become important
at the EW scale. In this Chapter we first review the compositeness
condition and the related RG analysis for the one-Higgs doublet case.
After that we consider the case of having two composite Higgs doublets
which is relevant for our model. Finally we mention the possibility of
including Majorana neutrinos.

In Chapter 4 we rewrote the four-fermion interaction @xmath in terms of
auxiliary fields with the quantum numbers of the Higgs boson. We saw
that for a range of values of the coupling constants @xmath it is
possible to rewrite the theory with the help of only one (auxiliary)
Higgs doublet. The condensation of this field provides all quarks with
masses. In the following analysis, however, we neglect fermion masses
other than @xmath . In the unitarity gauge the Lagrangian of the theory
(without including gauge bosons) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the fermionic kinetic term and the coupling
constant @xmath of the four-fermion interaction is given by @xmath (see
Eq. ( 3.2 )). The Lagrangian @xmath is defined at the scale @xmath ,
with all field components related to higher scales being integrated out.

The Lagrangian given in Eq. ( 7.1 ) is very similar to the one of the SM
(neglecting gauge bosons and fermion masses other than @xmath ). The
only difference is that in our case the running parameters are
constrained at the scale @xmath : The field @xmath has neither a kinetic
term nor a @xmath self-interaction term at this scale. This is known as
the “compositeness condition”.

However, when integrating out high momentum degrees of freedom of the
fields, the @xmath kinetic and self-interaction terms are generated. At
energies @xmath , @xmath becomes a dynamical field. As we see in Chapter
4 , this field describes a scalar particle with mass of about @xmath .
The Lagrangian at energies lower than @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are running couplings. The
@xmath - and @xmath -fields possess also wave-function normalization
constants @xmath and @xmath , respectively. They are equal to one in our
approximation (gauge couplings being turned off and @xmath ).

The compositeness condition is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

at @xmath . Besides we have at this scale

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By calculating the Higgs two- and four-1PI point functions (see Eq. (
4.35 )) we obtain the running couplings as a function of the scale
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The running parameter @xmath receives a quadratic contribution from the
fermion loop. This contribution makes @xmath negative if @xmath ,
leading to EWSB. We recover in this way the critical coupling @xmath
found in Chapter 3 .

Before we make the crucial step of abstracting the compositeness
condition for the Higgs boson given in Eq. ( 7.3 ) to boundary
conditions in a perturbative RG analysis, it is convenient to change the
normalizations of the fields. The RG equations are normally written
using different field normalizations as in Eq. ( 7.2 ). In the
conventional normalization the fermionic and bosonic kinetic terms are
normalized as in the free theory. We redefine the fields in order to
apply the RG equations written in the conventional normalization:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lagrangian is now given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the overbar stands for the parameters in the conventional
normalization:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The compositeness condition Eq. ( 7.3 ) is now given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as @xmath .

Now we demand Eqs. ( 7.9 ) and ( 7.10 ) to be the boundary conditions
for the perturbative RG equations of the full theory. The one-loop
@xmath functions of the SM (neglecting light quark masses and mixing
angles) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , are the gauge running coupling
constants. The coefficients @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the original works [ 4 , 66 ] , the RG equation related to the
variable @xmath was not used in order to find its low energy value
@xmath . Instead of that, motivated by the results obtained with the NJL
approach to the model, it was assumed that at @xmath @xmath takes the
necessary negative value in order to break the EW symmetry and to lead
to the observed gauge boson masses, i.e. @xmath . We follow the same
reasoning here.

First we consider the RG equation for @xmath , Eq. ( 7.11 ), with the
boundary condition @xmath as @xmath . Solving this equation yields the
running coupling @xmath and hence a prediction for the top-quark mass.
This is given by @xmath , with @xmath . If @xmath is much bigger than
the gauge couplings we can approximate Eq. ( 7.11 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation shows that starting at a scale @xmath with a big value of
@xmath , this parameter decreases rapidly when evolving towards the
infrared. For numerical computations a large but finite value of @xmath
is chosen at the compositeness scale @xmath . Because of Eq. ( 7.15 ),
the Landau pole is assumed to be located very near to this point.

Once @xmath gets of the order of the gauge couplings the strong coupling
@xmath becomes also important. Taking it into account we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this equation we see that the SM infrared attractive fixed point [
67 , 68 ] is approximately given by the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution of the RG equations are attracted to this point. Its
location is modified once one considers all gauge couplings and their
evolution equations. The fixed point makes the low-energy prediction for
@xmath stable against variations of the scale @xmath . Solving the full
one-loop RG equations for @xmath numerically, one obtains predictions
for the top-quark mass [ 4 ] . These are shown in Table 7.1 for
different values of the scale of new physics @xmath .

Now we turn to the evolution of @xmath . This leads to a prediction for
the Higgs-boson mass which is given by @xmath . For big values of @xmath
and @xmath it is possible to neglect gauge couplings in Eqs. ( 7.11 )
and ( 7.13 ). From these two equations we obtain the following evolution
equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . This indicates the presence of an infrared attractive
fixed point located at @xmath (besides an ultraviolet attractive fixed
point located at @xmath ). As for the running coupling @xmath , this
ultraviolet fixed point makes the low-energy prediction for @xmath , and
therefore for @xmath , stable against variations of @xmath and against
variations of the initial value (at @xmath ) of the ratio @xmath , as
long as the trajectories correspond to the infrared fixed point.
Numerical results for the Higgs-boson mass are shown in Table 7.1 .

We make now some comments about the validity of the approach. The RG
equations which we use are obtained perturbatively and thus valid only
for small values of the coupling constants. On the other hand our
boundary conditions, Eqs. ( 7.9 ) and ( 7.10 ), demand values of the
coupling constants far away from this regime. This in principle
invalidates the whole analysis. However, using the perturbative RG
equations we see that only for a small “running time” the coupling
constants are not in the perturbative regime. In addition, the
predictions of the model are robust due to the presence of infrared
attractive fixed points. Lattice simulations also in general confirm the
results of the one-loop RG analysis for the case when the trajectories
correspond to these fixed points [ 69 ] . Due to these considerations it
is believed [ 6 ] that the non-perturbative effects are small and that
the whole approach is reliable.

Unfortunately the predictions of the model are phenomenologically not
acceptable. In order to get the right value for the top mass the energy
related to the appearance of new physics @xmath should be (by
extrapolating Table 7.1 ) much bigger than the Planck scale.

Next we consider models including a second Higgs doublet. The RG
equations related to these models allow to obtain a top mass @xmath and
lead to predictions for the Higgs-boson masses which are
phenomenologically acceptable. The following analysis corresponds to a
perturbative RG treatment of the model we studied in Chapter 6 . The
original four-fermion interaction given in Eq. ( 6.1 ) can, for a range
of values of the coupling constants @xmath , be rewritten with help of
two auxiliary Higgs doublets as shown in Eq. ( 6.2 ). In analogy to Eq.
( 7.2 ), in this case the low-energy Lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, neglecting Yukawa interactions related to the first and second
quark generation, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Higgs potential @xmath is given by (see Section 2.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The compositeness condition for the two Higgs doublet model is given by
the generalization of Eq. ( 7.3 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

at @xmath . Besides, at this scale the Higgs mass parameters and Yukawa
couplings are finite.

As far as we know the compositeness conditions have not been studied in
a RG group analysis of the general two Higgs doublet model given in Eq.
( 7.19 ). Only a special case, the two Higgs doublet type II model has
been studied [ 66 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ] . The fact that in the type II
model acceptable top-quark and Higgs masses can be obtained, strongly
support that in the general case which correspond to the model studied
in Chapter 6 this is also the case. The Lagrangian of the two Higgs
doublet type II model is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the Higgs mass parameters. The
fields @xmath , @xmath are linear combinations of the fields @xmath ,
@xmath . The Yukawa interaction is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field @xmath couples only to the quark field @xmath , while the
field @xmath couples only to the quark field @xmath , leading to FCNC
suppression.

At the scale @xmath the Lagrangian of the theory almost respects the PQ
symmetry (see Section 5.3.2 ). Only the term proportional to @xmath
explicitly violates it. In a mass independent renormalization scheme the
RG equations for the dimensionless parameters do not depend on @xmath
and therefore these parameters evolve as if the PQ symmetry were exact.
In this way some parameters of the Higgs potential are zero ( @xmath )
for all energies ¹ ¹ 1 Note that the previous argument relies strongly
on the applicability of the one-loop RG equations at all energies.
@xmath , simplifying the analysis.

An important point arises by the definition of the compositeness
condition as a boundary condition for the RG analysis. In the
conventional normalization the conditions for the Yukawa couplings are
@xmath , @xmath as @xmath . As we mentioned before, in the numerical
calculations large but finite values are chosen for the diverging
couplings at the compositeness scale @xmath . It happens, however, that
low-energy predictions, in particular the top mass, are very sensitive
to the ratio @xmath . For example for ² ² 2 For arguments supporting
this choice see [ 5 ] . @xmath , values for @xmath which are about 10%
lower than the ones of the one Higgs doublet analysis (Table 7.1 ) are
obtained [ 66 ] . These top mass predictions are still too high in order
to be phenomenologically acceptable. Nevertheless, allowing other values
for the ratio @xmath a realistic top mass can be obtained [ 70 , 71 , 73
] , see also [ 5 ] . For example choosing a Higgs VEV ratio @xmath ,
@xmath , or @xmath , a top mass @xmath is found (with different values
of the scale @xmath for each Higgs VEV ratio) [ 73 ] . In this
calculation the boundary conditions at the scale @xmath are given by
@xmath and @xmath . The Yukawa couplings in the conventional
normalization are related to the Higgs wave-function normalization
constants by the relations @xmath and @xmath . Thus both Yukawa
couplings become non-perturbative but not exactly at the same point ³ ³
3 Due to the fact that @xmath is not zero, doubts about the composite
nature of the Higgs doublet @xmath can arise [ 5 ] . However it is
difficult to give definitive statements about that, because at this
scale the perturbative treatment is not fully reliable. . Predictions ⁴
⁴ 4 Corrections due to heavy Higgs boson threshold effects were not
taken into account. [ 66 ] for the masses of the 5 physical Higgs
particles for @xmath and the parameter @xmath (see [ 66 ] ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another possibility investigated in the literature consists in including
Majorana neutrinos [ 74 , 75 ] . The essential idea of these models is
the following. One assumes a four-fermion interaction that involves not
only quarks but also leptons, and large Majorana mass terms for the
right-handed neutrinos. For critical four-fermion couplings,
condensation of neutrino bilinears (and also of top-quark bilinears)
occurs. In this way Dirac neutrino mass terms of the order of the EW
scale are dynamically generated. Then by means of the see-saw mechanism
small physical neutrino Majorana masses are obtained. The compositeness
condition has been studied in models of this type considering one and
two Higgs doublets [ 74 , 75 ] . The RG equations are modified in
comparison to the ones we considered before, due to the presence of the
large Dirac neutrino mass terms (and hence large neutrino Yukawa
couplings), and due to the inclusion of the dimension 5 Majorana
neutrino operator. The value of the top mass is obtained in models
having one or two Higgs doublets. In the one Higgs case the value of the
Higgs mass is predicted to lay between @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath
and for values of the see-saw scale between @xmath and @xmath .

## Chapter 8 Summary and Conclusions

We studied in this thesis top-condensation models of electroweak
symmetry breaking. In these models a four-fermion interaction term
involving SM fermions is postulated at some high energy scale which we
called @xmath . The strong, attractive four-fermion interaction induces
the formation of color-singlet fermion-antifermion bound states, in
particular in spin-zero states which correspond to composite Higgs
bosons, and their condensation. These condensates transform
non-trivially under @xmath transformations and therefore break the EW
symmetry. As a consequence gauge bosons and fermions acquire masses. The
major goals of this type of models are to explain the origin of the EW
scale, to dynamically generate the gauge boson and fermion masses, and,
as we investigated in this thesis, to generate quark mixing angles and
the @xmath violating phase of the CKM matrix. Specifically, we started
with a @xmath -invariant Lagrangian, and we showed that in our model the
@xmath -violating phase of the CKM matrix was generated through complex
VEVs of the composite Higgs fields.

In order to study top-condensation models the NJL approach is widely
adopted in the literature. In this thesis we applied this method first
to models involving only quarks of the third generation, and then to the
physically relevant model with three quark generations.

Two possible scenarios concerning the origin of the four-fermion
interaction term can be considered. In the traditional one, one starts
with a non-abelian gauge theory at very high energies @xmath which
becomes strongly-coupled at scales @xmath . For energies below @xmath
the new interaction is effectively described by operators constructed
with the fields corresponding to the light ( @xmath ) degrees of freedom
of the theory. The new interaction must violate the flavor symmetry,
i.e. must be non-universal, in order to generate the observed fermion
mass pattern. Topcolor models [ 26 ] are examples of a theory of this
type.

At low energies the most important non-renormalizable operators are the
ones having the lowest mass dimension. Therefore dimension-six
four-fermion operators were considered. Besides, only four-fermion
operators made of (pseudo)scalar fermion bilinears were taken into
account (they lead to (pseudo)scalar composite fields), ignoring the
ones made of (axial)vector fermion bilinears. Note that the distinction
between (pseudo)scalar and (axial)vector bilinears is ambiguous due to
Fierz identities.

In the second scenario the four-fermion interaction term acquires a more
fundamental status. It is assumed that the SM with the Higgs sector
being replaced by a general dimension-six four-fermion interaction is a
(non-perturbatively) renormalizable theory [ 30 ] . This is the case if
one or more non-Gaussian ultraviolet stable fixed points are established
beyond the point-like approximation [ 30 ] .

In this thesis the four-fermion interaction term was used as a starting
point. Therefore, besides the four-fermion and the SM gauge couplings,
the scale @xmath at which the whole Lagrangian was defined, is also a
parameter of the theory. If @xmath is much bigger than the electroweak
scale, complementary to the NJL approach a perturbative RG analysis can
be made. This method, which incorporates the SM gauge interactions,
provides reliable values for the top-quark and Higgs-boson masses. In
this approach the information that composite Higgs doublets appear at
the scale @xmath is encoded in the compositeness condition. This
condition is used as a boundary condition at the scale @xmath in the RG
analysis.

In the two-Higgs doublet type II model the RG analysis leads to
phenomenologically acceptable Higgs masses, with values of about @xmath
and higher (see end of Chapter 7 ). In addition the correct mass of top
quark is obtained if the ratio of the Yukawa couplings at the scale
@xmath is taken different from 1. These results strongly support that
for the general two-Higgs doublet model the compositeness condition in a
RG analysis also leads to phenomenologically acceptable mass values. If
the @xmath -violating phase of the CKM matrix is spontaneously generated
by the condensation of two-Higgs doublet fields, then this necessary
happens within the general two-Higgs doublet model.

To have a very high scale @xmath is, however, not very attractive
because the theory suffers from fine-tuning in exactly the same way as
the SM. Another important point is the one related to the distinction
between fundamental and composite Higgs particles. If the compositeness
scale @xmath is very high, the composite nature of these particles
cannot be directly verified by experiments in the near future.

A more interesting possibility is to have a scale @xmath not very much
higher than the EW scale, @xmath . In this case no fine-tuning problem
appears. Besides, the generation of the scale @xmath could be explained
from dimensional transmutation. This would solve the hierarchy problem.
A perturbative RG analysis cannot be justified in this case. Topcolor
assisted technicolor [ 27 ] , and top-quark see-saw [ 28 , 29 ] are
examples of theories of this type. In these theories the NJL approach is
widely used.

We found that if the dimension-six four-fermion Lagrangian includes only
quarks of the third family, then spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking
does not occur. This model possesses three four-fermion coupling
constants. We considered the case where the EW symmetry is spontaneously
broken, giving both the top and bottom quarks their respective masses.
We distinguished between two possibilities. For @xmath the Lagrangian
has a Peccei-Quinn symmetry and therefore the theory predicts an axion.
An axion related to the EW scale is, however, ruled out. For @xmath the
spectrum of the theory includes only one scalar Higgs particle with mass
about @xmath . It corresponds to a one-Higgs doublet model and not to a
two-Higgs doublet model as one could naively assume. In this model there
are modes which are associated with masses of order @xmath , which is,
however, the upper limit of the validity range of the model. Therefore
these modes cannot be interpreted as particles.

Finally we summarize the results obtained in a model with a
dimension-six four-quark interaction term involving the three quark
generations. All four-fermion couplings were considered to be real in
order to have a @xmath -invariant Lagrangian. We restricted our analysis
to the case where the theory can be rewritten in terms of two auxiliary
Higgs fields. In this case the number of independent four-quark coupling
constants is 36. We found by means of a self-consistent approach a range
for the four-quark couplings where spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking
occurs together with EWSB. Specifically, complex VEVs of the two
composite Higgs doublets lead to a realistic @xmath -violating CKM
matrix. Besides, masses for all quarks and weak gauge bosons are
generated. We also showed that the vacuum respects the electromagnetic
@xmath symmetry.

The model predicts five physical spin-zero bound states: three neutral
composite Higgs bosons and one charged boson and its charge conjugated
state. The masses of the composite Higgs bosons were also calculated
leading in part to very low (non-acceptable) values. Using the
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio method, we obtained for one neutral state a mass
value of about @xmath . However, the masses of the other states obtained
with this approximation turn out to be unacceptably low. This is not
surprising because this approximation which is the method of choice for
investigating the ground state of the model is not reliable for
calculating the Higgs masses, because the effect of SM gauge
interactions is not and the effect of Higgs self-interactions is only
partly (i.e. only the part induced by fermion loops in the @xmath
approximation) taken into account. If @xmath is very high the RG
analysis, which incorporates these interactions, provides a more
reliable prediction for these masses. As we saw an analysis of this type
leads to acceptable Higgs boson masses. In models with @xmath being not
too much higher than the EW scale, theories like topcolor assisted
technicolor provide a mechanism for increasing the value of the
composite Higgs boson masses [ 27 ] .

Another aspect of our model is related to flavor-changing neutral
currents (FCNCs). We saw that Higgs mediated FCNCs are necessarily
present if the @xmath -violating CKM phase is spontaneously generated.
On the other hand FCNCs are strongly constrained especially in the
down-quark sector. It is possible, however, to construct a model having
non-diagonal Yukawa matrices only in the up-sector. An open question is
whether a model with FCNC connected only to the top quark (or better,
only between the top and charm quarks) can be consistent. More
importantly, the question how FCNCs are suppressed in top-condensation
models remains open.

## Appendix A Surface Terms in the Spherical Cutoff Regularization

In this Appendix we show, using as example the minimal scheme treated in
Chapter 3 , how surface terms affect the position of the poles in some
correlation functions. In particular we see that the mass of the
composite Higgs boson is ambiguous, while the Goldstone bosons remain
massless, as they should.
A Feynman integral defined with a spherical cutoff as regulator, is in
general not invariant under a shift of the integration variables.
Convergent or logarithmically divergent integrals are invariant under
this operation, while linearly or more than linearly divergent integrals
are not. In this case additional surface terms appear [ 46 , 47 ] . For
linearly and quadratically divergent integrals the following surface
terms appear

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We now calculate the poles of the correlation functions (calculated in
Section 3.3 ), considering this time the surface terms. In the scalar
channel the loop integral @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.17 ) is in general
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the value of @xmath in the loop, see Fig. A.1 , is not determined
by the theory. For a regulator which allows a shift in the integration
variable @xmath there is no ambiguity in the definition of @xmath , but
in the case of a spherical cutoff regulator the integral @xmath depends
on @xmath . Using Eq. ( A.2 ) we obtain a new expression for the scalar
four-point function (assuming that all the momentum loops in Fig. 3.3
have the same @xmath -prescription)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Because @xmath is always bigger than @xmath the pole in (
A.4 ) is never at @xmath . The position of the pole is now given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The mass of the composite boson is therefore always smaller than @xmath
if one takes surface terms into account.
Now we turn to the other channels, which are associated with the
Goldstone bosons. The pseudoscalar amplitude is given now by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One sees that the position of the pole does not change. Finally in the
charged channel we find that the position of the pole also remains at
@xmath . After summing the geometric series we obtain (see Fig. 3.3 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integral @xmath is now given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we introduced a Feynman parameter @xmath . Replacing @xmath in Eq.
( A.9 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In conclusion, taking the surface terms ( A.1 ) and ( A.2 ) into account
does not alter the position of the poles at @xmath in the pseudoscalar
and charged amplitudes. However, in the scalar amplitude the position of
the pole changes.