Identified mid-rapidity particle spectra of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
from 200 GeV p+p and d+Au collisions are reported. The d+Au collisions
were divided into 3 centralities. This data were taken in 2003 run from
the Solenoidal Tracker at RHIC (STAR) experiment. A time-of-flight
detector based on multi-gap resistive plate chamber (MRPC) technology is
used for particle identification. This is the first time that MRPC
detector was installed to take data as a time-of-flight detector in the
collider experiment.

The calibration method was set up in the STAR experiment for the first
time, which will be described in the analysis chapter in detail and has
been applied to the experimental data successfully. The intrinsic timing
resolution 85 ps was achieved after the calibration. In 2003 run, the
pion/kaon can be separated up to transverse momentum ( @xmath ) 1.6
GeV/c while proton can be identified up to 3.0 GeV/c. Thus the
identified particle spectra can be extended to intermediate @xmath in
STAR. This proved that MRPC as a time-of-flight detector works in the
heavy ion collider experiment.

We observe that the spectra of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
considerably harder in d+Au than those in p+p collisions. In @xmath GeV
d+Au collisions, the nuclear modification factor @xmath of protons rise
faster than those of pions and kaons. The @xmath of proton is larger
than 1 at intermediate @xmath while the proton production follows binary
scaling at the same @xmath range in 200 GeV Au+Au collisions. These
results further prove that the suppression observed in Au+Au collisions
at intermediate and high @xmath is due to final state interactions in a
dense and dissipative medium produced during the collision and not due
to the initial state wave function of the Au nucleus. Since the initial
state in d+Au collisions is similar to that in Au+Au collisions, and,
it’s believed that the quark-gluon plasma doesn’t exist in d+Au
collisions, these results from d+Au collisions are very important for us
to judge whether the quark-gluon plasma exists in Au+Au collisions or
not and to understand the property of the dense matter created in Au+Au
collisions. Besides, the particle-species dependence of the Cronin
effect is observed to be significantly smaller than that at lower
energies. The ratio of the nuclear modification factor ( @xmath )
between @xmath and charged hadrons ( @xmath ) in the transverse momentum
range @xmath GeV/c is measured to be @xmath (stat) @xmath (syst) in
minimum-bias collisions and shows little centrality dependence. The
yield ratio of @xmath in minimum-bias d+Au collisions is found to be a
factor of 2 lower than that in Au+Au collisions, indicating that the
relative baryon enhancement observed in heavy ion collisions at RHIC is
due to the final state effects in Au+Au collisions.

The mechanism for Cronin effect is also discussed in this thesis by
comparison with the recombination model [ 92 ] and with the initial
multiple parton scattering model [ 30 ] , which will be described in the
discussion chapter in detail. Usually the Cronin effect has been
explained to be the initial state effect only [ 30 ] . However, from the
comparisons, we conclude that the Cronin effect in @xmath GeV d+Au
collisions is not initial state effect only, and that final state effect
plays an important role.
