We present the results of a search for new particles decaying to tau
pairs using the data corresponding to an integrated luminosity of 195 pb
@xmath collected from March 2002 to September 2003 with the CDF detector
at the Tevatron. Hypothetical particles, such as @xmath and MSSM Higgs
bosons can potentially produce the tau pair final state. We discuss the
method of tau identification, and show the signal acceptance versus new
particle mass. The low-mass region, dominated by @xmath , is used as a
control region. In the high-mass region, we expect @xmath events from
known background sources, and observe @xmath events in the data sample.
Thus no significant excess is observed, and we set upper limits on the
cross section times branching ratio as a function of the masses of heavy
scalar and vector particles.

\phd \campus

New Brunswick \program Physics and Astronomy \director Professor John
Conway \approvals 5 \copyrightpage \submissionmonth May \submissionyear
2005 \figurespage \tablespage

\beforepreface \acknowledgements

I would like to thank all of the CDF collaborators and the Fermilab
staffs for making CDF an excellent experiment. High energy physics is
amazing, which I learned by being a part of the CDF collaboration,
learning how the experiment runs, and systematically analysing the data.

I thank my advisor John Conway for bringing me to CDF, recommending this
interesting thesis topic, his clear goals on this search, genuinely
valuable guidance on physics, constant encouragement, elegant
presentations on statistics, good humor on my English, and coming often
to CDF. He patiently read through the drafts of this thesis and helped
to make it a more complete work. His sharp physics insight and nice
presentation style will certainly benefit my career in years to come.

It is my pleasure to thank everybody directly involved in this analysis:
Anton Anastassov my mentor at CDF and Amit Lath my advisor at Rutgers
for their inspiring inputs and generous help during all of these years,
Dongwook Jang my fellow graduate student and good friend for sharing the
techniques, and the collaborators in the Tau group for their important
supports. I also thank John Zhou and Aron Soha for the very useful
techniques, and Pieter Jacques and John Doroshenko for keeping the great
hex farm running.

I am grateful to the conveners of the Tau group Fedor Ratnikov and
Teruki Kamon, the convener of the Lepton plus Track group Alexei
Safonov, the conveners of the VEGY group Kaori Maeshima, Rocio Vilar,
and Chris Hays, and the conveners of the Exotics group Stephan Lammel
and Beate Heinemann. They gave me numerous opportunities to present my
work and offered valuable advices that came up during the discussions.

I thank Teruki Kamon, Müge Karagöz Ünel, and Ronan McNulty for being
great godparents of the paper on this thesis topic.

For my colleagues at Rutgers: the weekly group meeting has been one of
the most important parts of my education. For my professors Tom Devlin,
Sunil Somalwar, Terry Watts, and Steve Worm, I am grateful for their
great advices based on deep understanding and wide experience on physics
analysis. For my fellow graduate students: Paul DiTuro, Sourabh Dube and
Jared Yamaoka, I thank them for showing me the great opportunities and
challenges in their Higgs and SUSY searches and for the fun time. For my
office mate Pete McNamara, I thank him for demonstrating me a mature
understanding of statistics, offering nice suggestions on an
astrophysics term paper, and recommending fun movies. For John Zhou, it
has been my good luck to work with him. He greatly improved my English
in this thesis, provided many useful comments and suggestions on my
analysis, and shared the cheerful time to learn his SUSY search.

I appreciate the members of my thesis committee over the years: Amit
Lath, Ronald Gilman, John Bronzan, Jolie Cizewski, Ron Ransome, and
Chris Tully, for their overview of my progress and for the many useful
comments and suggestions that have improved my presentation and the
thesis.

I thank Nancy DeHaan, Kathy DiMeo, Jennifer Fernandez–Villa, Phyllis
Ginsberg, Carol Picciolo and Marie Tamas for their administrative
efforts.

I also thank Tom Devlin for his recommendation on phenomenology books
and experience on accelerators. And I thank Vincent Wu my good friend at
Fermilab Beam Division for teaching me the concepts of accelerators.

For the theorists at Fermilab, their lectures and papers are very
inspiring and helpful sources, and I thank Marcela Carena, Alejandro
Daleo, Bogdan Dobrescu, Stephen Mrenna and Tim Tait for their very
useful suggestions.

A special thank goes to Ming-Tsung Ho my good friend at Rutgers for
patiently showing me the power of explicitly writing down the equations
step-by-step. Another special thank goes to Willis Sakumoto my colleague
at CDF for the relaxed discussions on how to calculate cross sections
during lunch times.

I thank my family for their constant support and encouragement. I thank
my wife Meihua Zhu for her unconditional love and support and for
bringing much happiness into my life.

\afterpreface
