## 1 Introduction

Superconductor is a substance that below a certain temperature (critical
temperature @xmath ) conducts charge current without resistance and also
repels the magnetic field. Superconductivity was discovered by
Kammerlingh Onnes in a mercury wire at temperatures less than @xmath in
1911 [ 1 ] . In 1957, Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer (BCS), using the
concept of Cooper pairs, proposed a microscopic theory for
superconductivity [ 2 ] . Cooper had shown earlier that the ground state
of a metal, at sufficient low temperatures, will be stable when its
electrons are collected as the pairs [ 3 ] . BCS theory suggests that
Cooper pairs at low temperatures condense into the same quantum state
defined by a macroscopic wave function and can travel together without
dissipation. Also, the pair amplitude of this wave function as an order
parameter in the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory of superconductivity,
defines the transition between normal and superconducting states [ 4 ] .
In the limit of @xmath , the GL order parameter , is directly
proportional to the BCS energy gap, @xmath , which is the amount of
energy for breaking a Cooper pair. This energy gap carries the
information about the pairing symmetry of the electrons.

There are different types of superconductivity. According to the spin
states of two electrons in the Cooper pair, superconductor is either
spin-singlet or spin-triplet. Since electrons are fermion, the total
wave function of a cooper pair should be antisymmetric with respect to
electrons: @xmath where @xmath , @xmath are spatial coordinates and
spins, respectively. For the antisymmetric spin-singlet state, the
orbital part of the wave function should be symmetric under the
interchange of the electrons and the orbital momentum should be even (
@xmath , @xmath wave, @xmath , @xmath wave and @xmath , @xmath wave).
The superconductors with simplest spin-singlet state, @xmath , are known
as conventional superconductors. All the other type of superconductors
including the spin-singlet and spin-triplet with @xmath , are
unconventional superconductors. A @xmath wave superconductor, has an
isotropic order parameter @xmath in the momentum space, where @xmath is
a unit vector pointed on the Fermi surface. Earlier superconductors
which had been found in the elements like mercury, are conventional
superconductors. Unconventional superconducting compounds which have
anisotropic order parameter can be defined using the relation @xmath
with summation over the Fermi surface. For the symmetric spin-triplet
state, the orbital part of the wave function is antisymmetric and the
orbital momentum takes the odd numbers ( @xmath , @xmath wave, @xmath ,
@xmath wave and @xmath , @xmath wave). Here, the terms @xmath wave,
@xmath wave and etc have been used from the terminology of the Hydrogen
atom. The pairing state of a spin-triplet superconductor in the spin
space is represented by a three dimensional vector @xmath , called gap
vector. The gap vector determines the order parameter matrix, @xmath ,
in which @xmath s are Pauli matrices.
Three complex components of gap vector ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) over
the Fermi surface are corresponding to three possible spin directions as
follow: @xmath . There are many experimental and theoretical works in
the case of spin-triplet superconductors from which some important
properties of spin-triplet superconductors are listed below:
1) The spin-triplet superconductors are generally low @xmath
superconductors, as compared with the high @xmath superconductivity in
@xmath wave superconductors [ 5 , 6 , 7 ] .
2) The relation between critical temperature and energy gap at zero
temperature is different from that of the BCS relation for a @xmath wave
superconductor @xmath [ 8 , 9 ] .
3) In structures with spin-triplet superconductivity a spin supercurrent
can flow generally, while in the case of the spin-singlet
superconductivity, the spin current may exist only in the proximity
system of the superconductor and a ferromagnet. This means that in the
spin-triplet superconductors not only the charge but also the spin of
electrons can become superfluid [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] .
4) Ferromagnetic superconductivity is another interesting phenomenon of
spin-triplet state. It had been observed that all conventional
superconductors were non-magnetic materials and it was concluded that
superconductivity and ferromagnetism are incompatible phases. While,
ferromagnetic superconductivity has been observed recently, in some of
the triplet superconductors like: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath [ 13 , 14 ]
.
5) Nonunitary gap vector is another fingerprint of the spin-triplet
superconductivity. In the nonunitary spin-triplet state, Cooper pairs
may carry a finite averaged intrinsic spin momentum. This nonunitary
state is a candidate for the @xmath phase of superconductivity in the
@xmath compound (Fig. 3 ). This phase has been observed at the low
temperatures and low magnetic fields [ 15 , 16 ] .
6) In addition to the temperature and magnetic field, pressure
influences the phase transition of triplet superconductors, particularly
for the ferromagnetic superconductors [ 17 , 18 ] .
7) Another property of some of triplet superconductors in the similarity
of their structures with some of the important high @xmath
superconductors. For example, the @xmath spin-triplet superconductor is
isostructural to the spin-singlet high-temperature superconductor @xmath
Here, @xmath and @xmath atoms are counterpart of @xmath and @xmath
atoms, respectively. Consequently, investigation of this triplet
superconductor helps to understand the singlet case [ 5 ] .
We have to introduce some of unconventional superconducting compounds,
particularly those which will be investigated in the following chapters
of this work. The uranium compound @xmath will be studied in chapter ( 4
) and ( 6 ). Then, @xmath and @xmath compounds will be investigated in
chapters ( 4 ) and ( 5 ), respectively.

The first discovered triplet order parameter, @xmath wave pairing
symmetry, has been observed in the Helium superfluid. Also, @xmath wave
order parameter has been considered as a candidate for the
superconducting state in @xmath by some authors [ 19 , 20 ] . A famous
form of @xmath wave pairing symmetry in momentum space is @xmath in
which, @xmath is a unit vector [ 6 ] . Another important category of
triplet superconductors is @xmath wave superconductivity, proposed for
the pairing symmetry in heavy-fermion compound @xmath in [ 21 , 22 ] and
the compound @xmath in [ 5 , 23 ] . The different phases of @xmath wave
superconductivity have different order parameter symmetries in momentum
space. For instance, the @xmath wave axial state symmetry is @xmath [ 24
] and the planar state has the form @xmath , where, @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are the unit vectors [ 15 ] . In this work, a nonunitary @xmath
wave gap vector in the @xmath phase of superconductivity (low
temperature and low magnetic field) in @xmath compound has been
considered. For this nonunitary bipolar state, a gap vector of the form
@xmath has been proposed in the momentum space in [ 15 ] . A recently
proposed spin-triplet state is the“ @xmath wave” pairing symmetry which,
has been considered for the superconductivity in @xmath compound in [ 8
] . Of course, two different phases of “ @xmath wave” have been observed
for superconductivity in the @xmath [ 25 , 26 ] . Here, @xmath phase is
high magnetic field, high temperature phase but @xmath phase is low
field, low temperature phase [ 27 ] . The first model to explain the
properties of the @xmath -phase of @xmath is: @xmath , where, @xmath is
a unit vector. The function @xmath @xmath describes the dependence of
the gap vector @xmath on the temperature @xmath [ 8 ] . The second model
to describe the gap vector of the @xmath -phase of @xmath is: @xmath [ 8
] . One of the most important types of unconventional superconductivity
has been observed in the high @xmath superconductor in the ceramic of
copper oxide by Bednorz and Müller [ 28 ] . This spin-singlet
superconductor has a @xmath wave pairing symmetry, @xmath , as @xmath or
@xmath in momentum space. This discovery was a real revolution in the
field of superconductivity.

Conventional and unconventional superconductors are usually
differentiated by several properties such as anisotropicity of the order
parameter in the momentum space, heat capacity and heat conductance,
density of states, junction behavior and particularly nodes in the
momentum space. Node is a direction in the momentum space where no order
parameter and superconductivity is effective on the scattering
electrons.

One of the most interesting concepts in the field of superconductivity
is, superconducting weak link. The weak link experiments are classified
in the categories of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , in which two
superconducting bulks have been separated by a nonsuperconducting
interface or point-contact. Here, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
denote superconductor, insulator, normal metal and point-contact
respectively. The weakness of the link means that the superconducting
order parameters are the same as the disconnected massive
superconducting bulks. The first configuration had been investigated by
Josephson, in which a thin insulator is located between the two
superconducting bulks. In the second case, a normal layer has been
sandwiched by two superconducting bulks. The third experiment is devoted
to the geometry consisting two superconducting bulks which are separated
by an impenetrable interface (strong insulator) in which a contact has
been prepared for the mixing of two superconducting states. Josephson
effect, @xmath , has been investigated in 1962 by Josephson [ 29 ] . He
predicted an electrical current flowing between two superconductors
while they are separated by an insulator. This insulator layer is very
thin and electrons can pass through it, even with the energies less than
height of potential barrier of insulator. The flow of current between
the superconductors in the absence of an applied voltage is called a
Josephson current (there is a phase difference instead of the applied
voltage) and the motion of electrons across the barrier is called
Josephson tunneling. This tunneling phenomenon, Josephson effect, can be
used in the electronic devices such as superconducting quantum
interference device ( SQUID ), for detecting the very small magnetic
flux (even a flux quantum). The Josephson effect can be influenced by
the external magnetic fields through the external phase difference.
Consequently, the Josephson junction can be applied to measure the
extremely weak magnetic fields, in SQUID . The current which flows,
(quantum mechanically tunnels through the potential barrier of the
interface, has a form @xmath in which, @xmath is the macroscopic phase
difference between two superconductors and the critical current @xmath
depends on the geometry of system (junction). The Josephson effect is a
weak link of two massive banks of superconductor, @xmath and @xmath with
different phases @xmath and @xmath which are separated by an insulator.
The system allows electron to exchange between the two sides of the
interface and then establishes the phase coherence in the system as a
hole. The Josephson junction can be considered as the mixer between the
superconducting quantum macroscopic states. The result of mixing is the
supercurrent which flows from one of the banks to the other and it
depends on the phase difference @xmath across the weak link. The
function @xmath depends on the geometry of the system. In the simplest
case which had been studied by Josephson, the current has a sinusoidal
dependence on the phase but there are many different kinds of the weak
links in which the current phase diagrams are not sinusoidal. One of the
most famous problems in this category is problem of Kulik-Omelyanchouk (
@xmath junction) which has been investigated in [ 30 ] . They have used
the Eilenberger equation [ 31 ] and using the Green function they have
obtained the current-phase diagrams analytically. The current phase
relation depends not only on the manner of coupling but also on the
properties of the supercondcuting bulks. Two coupled unconventional
supercondcuting massive bulks have totaly different current-phase
relation from the conventional superconductivity which was studied by
Josephson and later by Kulik and Omelyanchouk. For instance @xmath weak
link which is a special type of @xmath system, in which @xmath denotes
the @xmath wave and high @xmath superconducting bulks and @xmath is the
contact, has some new results. The spontaneous current parallel to the
junction interface, mid-gap states resulting from the sign change of the
order parameter, and the changing period of current @xmath to @xmath are
different and new results of weak link between unconventional
superconducting bulks. In addition, it is observed that the Josephson
junction depends not only on the external Josephson phase difference
resulting form the external magnetic flux but also on the misorientation
angle between two superconducting crystals. In this work, because of
similarity between our problem and problem of Kulik-Omelyanchouk, we use
the generalized form of their formalism.

This thesis consists of three parts. At first, we are to investigate
coherent current states in the superconducting weak link which has been
subjected to the Josephson phase difference @xmath and subjected to the
external transport supercurrent state (parallel to the junction
interface) in the banks. Earlier it had been observed that at @xmath
close to @xmath the mixing of current states produces two vortices in
the vicinity of the point-contact between superconducting bulks [ 32 ] .
In this part we study the effect of transparency coefficient (potential
barrier) of the point-contact in an impenetrable interface and effect of
temperature on the vortices obtained in the paper [ 32 ] .
The second part of this dissertation is devoted to the weak link between
unitary triplet superconductors. These superconductors have @xmath wave
and @xmath wave pairing symmetry. The former has been proposed for
@xmath and @xmath compounds and the later case is considered in @xmath
complex. The spin-current in the junction between these unitary triplet
superconductors is an important part of this work. The interesting case
which is observed in the second part of the thesis, is the polarization
of the spin transport using the junction between unitary triplet
superconducting bulks. The third and last part of the thesis discusses
the case of weak link between non-unitary triplet superconductors. The
idea behind the first part of the thesis is suitability of this
structure (vortex-like currents) for the investigation of the quantum
macroscopic phenomena. For the real system the finite transparency
coefficient (finite reflection) which we have investigated is more
suitable than ideal transparent point-contact which had been considered
in [ 32 ] . The second part of the thesis discusses the case of the
junction between unitary triplet @xmath wave and @xmath wave
superconductors. First of all we know that the triplet superconductors
also the high @xmath superconductors are created by a different
mechanism of pairing than the phonon-electron interaction. Secondly, the
molecular structure of the Ruthenate compound @xmath is the same as that
of the high @xmath Cupperate superconductors which are important
superconductors and we are interested to understand their properties.
Also, the spin polarized transport has a valuable motivation for
physicist in the field of spintornics because, the sensitivity and
accuracy of the polarized spin-current systems can be used in the
measurement technology. The second part of this work can be used to
develop the theory of spin-polarized transport systems. The spin
transport in the absence of the charge transport is an interesting case
to investigate. The third part of the work has been devoted to
non-unitary weak links which has intrinsic spin and angular momentum of
systems.

The method for investigation of these weak link experiments is the
quasiclassical method of Green function. This method had been used by
Kulik and Omelyanchouk in paper [ 30 ] . They have studied junction
through the point-contact between two static conventional
superconducting bulks, but, here we have applied this formalism for the
case of conventional superconducting bulks with the external transport
current in the banks. Also, we have generalized the Kulik-Omelyanchouk
formalism for the case of triplet supercondcuting bulks. We have
calculated the analytical Green’s function and then we have used that to
obtain the current density. The current-phase diagrams are plotted and
in some cases the two dimensional profile of the current has been
plotted in the space.

Arrangement of the rest of this thesis is as follows. In Chapter ( 2 ),
we review of the concepts which we use in the rest of the thesis. The
quasiclassical approach which is widely used in the field of solid state
physics and specially for the case of superconducting systems, will be
reviewed. The Kulik-Omelyanchouk problem, that is the ballistic point
contact between two superconducting massive bulks will be studied and
their results will be reproduced. The effect of transparency coefficient
for a point contact with finite reflection in the impenetrable interface
between two bulks ( related to our problem in the chapter ( 3 )) will be
investigated and some analytical relations for this system will be
obtained. The Josephson junction between two unitary superconductors
will also be studied in chapter ( 2 ). We will generalize this approach
in the Chapters ( 4 ), ( 5 ) and ( 6 ).
A Josephson effect in the ballistic point contact with transport current
on the banks, taking into account the reflection of electrons from the
contact, will be investigated in Chapter ( 3 ). The contact is subject
to the phase difference @xmath and the transport current tangential to
the boundary of the contact. As it was shown in [ 32 ] , in the contact
with direct conductivity at @xmath and near the orifice the tangential
current flows in the opposite direction to the transport current, and
there are two vortices. It is found that by decreasing the transparency,
the vortex-like current will be destroyed. On the other hand, as the
temperature is increased the vortices are restored. They continue to
exist for transparencies as low as @xmath in the limit of @xmath . This
anomalous temperature behavior of the vortices is an interesting result
which have been obtained.
In Chapter ( 4 ), we have studied the spin and charge current in the
ballistic Josephson junction in the model of an ideal transparent
interface between two misorientated @xmath -wave superconductors
subjected to a phase difference @xmath . Our analysis has shown that the
misorientation and different models of the gap vectors influence the
spin current. The misorientation changes strongly the critical values of
both the spin current and charge current. It has been shown that the
spin current is the result of the misorientation between the gap
vectors. Furthermore, it is observed that the different models of the
gap vectors and geometries can be applied to the polarization of the
spin transport. In addition, it is observed that in certain values of
the phase difference @xmath , the charge-current vanishes while the
spin-current flows, despite the fact that although the carriers of spin
and charge are the same (electrons).
A stationary Josephson junction as a weak link between @xmath triplet
superconductors will be investigated in Chapter ( 5 ). Recently, the “
@xmath wave” form of pairing symmetry has been proposed for the
superconductivity in @xmath compound [ 25 ] . The quasiclassical
Eilenberger equations are analytically solved for this system. The spin
and charge current-phase diagrams are plotted and the effect of
misorientation between crystals on the spin current, and spontaneous and
Josephson currents is studied. It is found that such experimental
investigations of the current-phase diagrams can be used to test the
pairing symmetry in the above-mentioned superconductors. Also, it is
shown that this apparatus can be applied as a polarizer for the spin
current.
In Chapter ( 6 ), a stationary Josephson effect in a weak link between
misorientated nonunitary triplet superconductors is studied. The
non-self-consistent quasiclassical Eilenberger equation for this system
has been solved analytically and the current-phase diagrams are plotted
for the junction between two nonunitary bipolar @xmath wave
superconducting banks. A spontaneous current parallel to the interface
between superconductors has been observed. Also, the effect of
misorientation between crystals on the Josephson and spontaneous
currents is studied. Such experimental investigations of the
current-phase diagrams can be used to test the pairing symmetry in the
above-mentioned superconductors. In Chapter ( 7 ), the thesis will be
finished with some conclusions.

## 2 Superconducting weak links

When two superconducting bulks are connected to each other by an
insulator from which the electrons can tunnel, we have a weak link. The
weakness of the link means that the superconducting order parameters
have their value in the bulks and they are the same as the disconnected
massive superconducting reservoirs. The Josephson effect arises in a
weak link of two separated (by insulator) superconducting bulks with
different phases. The electrons can be exchanged between two
superconducting bulks and the system (two bulks and contact) tends to be
the phase coherent. Mixing the superconducting states through the
contact or link causes the supercurrent from one of the banks to the
other bank. The current is present because of the phase difference
between the bulks and this phenomenon can be observed in the absence of
any voltage. The phase difference between the bulks which plays a
central role in the weak link phenomena can be the result of the
external magnetic field which is surrounded by the junction and bulks.
The Josephson phase is a kind of the Aharonov-Bohm phase [ 33 ] . This
phase is related to the magnetic flux which flows from the system as
@xmath , where, @xmath is the quantum of flux and @xmath is the vector
potential. The current in the junction which is a supercurrent and is
called Josephson current can be calculated from @xmath , in which, the
@xmath is the energy of the junction. In the next sections we review
some of these weak link experiments analytically. The quasiclassical
Eilenberger equations have been used to investigate these weak link
systems in this thesis. This method will be explained in Sec. 2.1 . In
Sec. 2.2 as an application of the quasiclassical Eilenberger equation,
we solve the problem of a conventional superconducting bulk without any
contact. These results are exactly the same of results of the standard
BCS formalism which can be exerted directly on the uniform bulk system.
Sec. 2.2 is devoted to the Kulik-Omelyanchouk problem and at the end of
this section we have generalized this method to a system of a contact
with finite transparency, which is the Zaitsev problem [ 34 ] . This
problem is as same as our problem in Chapter(3). In Sec. 2.3 we have a
review in the case of the junction between unitary @xmath wave
superconductors which had been done in paper [ 6 ] .

### 2.1 Quasiclassical approach

The normal metals and superconductors can be investigated using the
Green functions [ 35 ] . It has been shown by Eilenberger that Gorkov
equations for the Green function can be transformed to transport-like
equations for a quasiclassical Green function [ 31 ] . These are called
Eilenberger equations. Two conditions for applicability of the
quasiclassical approach are that the characteristic length scales should
be much larger than the Fermi wavelength and energies must be much lower
than the Fermi energy @xmath , hereafter @xmath and @xmath for
simplicity. The Green functions which will be used in our work, are
Matsubara Green functions written in Nambu space. They are @xmath
matrices in a direct-product space of particle-hole and spin spaces. The
general energy integrated Green function in @xmath -space is of the form
@xmath . Here @xmath are the discrete Matsubara energies @xmath . The
odd integer value of @xmath is the result of Fermion behavior of
electrons [ 36 ] . Finally, the Eilenberger equation a ballistic case
(there is no scattering) is as follows:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where, @xmath is the Fermi velocity and @xmath in which @xmath are Pauli
matrices. This is a first-order differential equation for the Matsubara
propagator @xmath along classical trajectories of quasiparticles. The
Eilenberger equation is not enough to make the solution unique and so, a
separate normalization condition has to be introduced [ 31 ] . With a
suitable choice of condition satisfied by physical solutions of
Eilenberger equation, normalization is written as @xmath . To give a
closed system of Eilenberger equations and normalization conditions it
should be supplemented by some self-consistency equations for the
self-energy @xmath which will be introduced later in suitable forms.
Finally, the Matsubara propagator @xmath which satisfies the Eilenberger
equation, normalization condition, continuity across the interfaces and
self-consistency condition can be written in the form [ 37 ] :

  -- -- -- -----
           (2)
  -- -- -- -----

where, the matrix structure of the off-diagonal self energy @xmath in
the Nambu space is

  -- -- -- -----
           (3)
  -- -- -- -----

The @xmath refers to the spin-singlet but the @xmath has been considered
for the case of spin-triplet superconductivity. Fundamentally, the gap
(order parameter) has to be determined numerically from the
self-consistency equation, while in some cases, we use a
non-self-consistent model for the gap which is much more suitable for an
analytical calculation. The solution of Eq. ( 1 ) allows us to calculate
the current densities. The expression for current is:

  -- -- -- -----
           (4)
  -- -- -- -----

where, @xmath stands for averaging over the directions of an electron
momentum on the Fermi surface and @xmath is the electron density of
states at the Fermi level of energy. For the case of the @xmath wave
superconductors our Green matrix changes to a matrix as follows:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

and for the case of the order parameter we have:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

The selfconsistent equation for the spin-singlet case is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the electron-phonon constant of interaction and @xmath
is the averaging over directions of @xmath . The other important
physical variable which can be derived form this Green function is the
density of states. It is related to the diagonal term of the Green
matrix as follows:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

There are many applications of quasiclassical method and in this chapter
some of them will be reviewed.

### 2.2 Superconducting bulks

The simplest case of superconducting system which can be investigated by
Eilenberger equation is a single bulk of superconductors without any
contact or interaction with other world. In this system all of
superconductivity properties are uniform and spatially constant. Because
of the uniform properties the gradient term in Eilenberger equation ( 1
) is zero,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

and the bulk solutions are:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

respectively. In conclusion of Eq. ( 8 ), the density of states for
@xmath is as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

while for @xmath is @xmath . This expression has been obtained before
from the BCS theory directly and using the particle-hole analysis of a
bulk of superconductor. Also, the self-consistent equation for this
system is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is the same to the BCS self consistent equation. This latter had
been obtained from the second quantization and quantum field theory
method. This simple self-consistent equation only can be solved
numerically, but near the @xmath and @xmath it has been solved
analytically. Close to the zero temperature the gap function varies in
terms of temperature as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and near the @xmath the gap dependence on the temperature is as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, for the case of the gap function at the @xmath we have @xmath .
So, the current density for this system can be calculated as follows:

  -- -- -- ------
           (14)
  -- -- -- ------

As it is clear from the above expression, the current density for the
homogenous superconducting bulks is zero.

### 2.3 Kulik-Omelyanchouk problem: superconducting weak link through a
point contact

We consider the Josephson @xmath weak link as a microbridge between thin
superconducting films of thickness @xmath (look at Fig. 1 ). The length
@xmath and width @xmath of the microbridge, are assumed to be less than
the coherence length @xmath . On the other hand, we assume that @xmath
and @xmath are much larger than the Fermi wavelength @xmath and use the
quasiclassical approach. The point-contact is an ideal transparent area
for the electrons and there is not any reflection for the electron. We
choose the @xmath -axis along the interface and the @xmath -axis
perpendicular to the boundary; @xmath is the boundary plane (Fig. 1 ).

If the film thickness @xmath then in the main approximation in terms of
the parameter @xmath the superconducting current depends on the
coordinates in the plane of @xmath . The open form of the Eilenberger
equation for the case of spin-singlet superconducting systems is as
follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
     @xmath      (16)
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath on the Fermi surface, @xmath and @xmath label the left and
right hand superconducting bulks, respectively. Using the quasiclassical
approximation, we select the solution the for this problem as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath and @xmath By substituting in the Eilenberger equation ( 1
), we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In the main approximation on the small parameter @xmath , the
self-consistency can been ignored and the model, in which the order
parameter is constant in the two half-spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in which @xmath is the phase difference between superconductors, can be
used. Solutions of Eqs. ( 1 ) should satisfy the continuity of solutions
across the contact @xmath and specular reflection condition for @xmath .
In addition, far from the contact, solutions should coincide with the
bulk solutions. Consequently, we find the diagonal term of Green
functions which will be used in calculation of the current density, as
follows [ 38 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

Because of integration over the fermi surface ( 4 ) the antisymmetric
and imaginary part of Green function remains. It is as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

and also

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we have done the angular integration and we have substituted
@xmath and @xmath in the above-mentioned relation. Consequently the
current density has an expression as follows [ 30 , 38 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, in the case of the low temperatures @xmath we have @xmath [ 30 ]
while for @xmath we obtain @xmath [ 39 ] , in which, @xmath is the
Sharvin resistance of the junction in the normal state [ 40 ] and @xmath
is the effective square of the contact. This means that near the
critical temperature current-phase relation is sinusoidal like Josephson
prediction, while in the low temperatures the current-phase relation is
non-sinusoidal and we have some unusual jumps at @xmath . Now, we want
to investigate the effect of transparency coefficient and reflection of
point-contact on the current density which has been studied before by
Zaitsev [ 34 ] . Using the Zaitsev quasiclassical boundary conditions
for the case of Matsubara Green function we have obtained:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is transparency coefficient which is related to the
interface physical properties as the potential barrier against our
tunneling phenomenon. The transparency coefficient usually depends on
the direction of scattering electron velocity, but here for simplicity
we use the constant transparency coefficient formalism. The current
density exactly at the contact is as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

Obviously, for the low value of transparency coefficient which is called
tunneling limit, @xmath , the current has linear dependence on the
transparency and it is a sinusoidal function of phase and we have @xmath
So, at the tunneling limit and @xmath , the current is: @xmath These two
former expressions for current are linear functions of transparency
coefficient and sinusoidal functions of phase @xmath Also in the limit
of @xmath , the current has the form of : @xmath . This means that at
high temperatures the current is linear function of transparency and has
a sinusoidal dependence on the phase. The nonsinusoidal dependence of
phase will be happened for both the low temperature and high value of
transparency coefficient. Consequently, nonlinearity and nonsinusoidal
current-phase relation are coupled with each other. For the density of
states using the quasiclassical formalism we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the limit of @xmath we obtain the density of states of the problem of
Kulik-Omelyanchouk, @xmath , and in the limit of @xmath we have a
disconnected system and the density of states for the system tends to
the density of states of the bulk, @xmath as we expect from the BCS
theory [ 35 ] .

### 2.4 Charge transport in the weak link between unitary and triplet
supercondcutors

In this section we theoretically study the stationary Josephson effect
in a small ballistic junction between two spin-triplet superconducting
bulks with different orientations of the crystallographic axes. We
consider a model of a ballistic point contact as an orifice with a
diameter @xmath in an impenetrable for electrons partition between two
superconducting half spaces. We assume that the thickness of interface,
@xmath , is much larger than the Fermi wavelength and use the
quasiclassical approach. In order to calculate the charge current in
point contact we use Eilenberger equations ( 1 ) and the normalization
condition @xmath . For the case of the unitary and pure spin-triplet
superconductivity, the Green function matrix ( 2 ) is written in the
form [ 6 , 37 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

Matrix structure of the off-diagonal self energy @xmath in Nambu space
is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

Also, we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Below we consider a unitary states, for which @xmath Solutions of Eq. (
1 ) must satisfy the conditions for Green functions and vector @xmath in
the bulks of superconductors far from the orifice:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the external phase difference. Eq. ( 1 ) has to be
supplemented by the continuity of solutions at the contact plane (
@xmath ) and conditions of reflection at the interface between
superconductors, remainder part of the interface ( @xmath ). Below we
assume that this interface is smooth and electron scattering is
negligible. The solution of Eq. ( 1 ) should be used to calculate the
current density. We consider a simple model of the constant order
parameter up to the surface.

We assume that the order parameter does not depend on the coordinates
and in each half-space equals to its value far from the point contact
which is called superconducting massive bulk. For this
non-self-consistent model the current-phase dependence of a Josephson
junction can be calculated analytically. In a ballistic case, the system
of @xmath equations for functions @xmath and @xmath can be decomposed on
independent blocks of equations. The set of equations which enables us
to find the Green functions are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath on the Fermi surface and @xmath . The Eqs. ( 36
)-( 39 ) can be solved by integrating over the ballistic trajectories of
electron in the right and left half-spaces. The general solution
satisfying the boundary conditions at infinity is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the time of the flight along the trajectory, @xmath
@xmath and @xmath Index @xmath numbers left @xmath and right @xmath
half-spaces. By matching the solutions ( 40 - 43 ) at the orifice plane
@xmath , we find constants @xmath and @xmath . Exactly at the orifice
plane we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Consequently, the function @xmath which determines the current density
at the contact is as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using the @xmath one can calculate the current density at the orifice
plane @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

Misorientation of the crystals produces a spontaneous current along the
interface [ 41 , 42 ] generally, as can be calculated by projecting
vector @xmath at the corresponding direction. To illustrate the results
obtained by computing the formula ( 48 ), we can plot the current-phase
diagrams for the different models of the pairing symmetry and for two
different geometries. These geometries are corresponding to the
different orientations of the crystals in the right and left sides of
the interface (Fig. 2 ). In the right hand side of the interface, the
@xmath plane has been rotated around the @xmath axis and the @xmath axis
has been rotated around the @xmath axis by @xmath in geometries (i) and
(ii), respectively. Also for the further calculations we need to a
certain model of the gap vector @xmath which is called order parameter
vector.

There are three models which have been successful to explain properties
of the three phases of triplet superconductivity in @xmath compound
(Fig. 3 ). For the high-temperature and low field phase, A-phase, of
superconductivity in @xmath the order parameter (gap vector) has an
equatorial line node and two longitudinal line nodes [ 6 , 15 , 16 ] .
This state which is known as the polar state, is as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

The gap vector dependence in momentum space for the low-temperature and
low field phase, B-phase, or the axial state is as follows [ 6 , 15 , 16
] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here, the longitudinal line nodes are closed and there is a pair of
point nodes. The coordinate axes @xmath and @xmath are chosen along the
crystallographic axes @xmath and @xmath as the left of Fig. 2 . The
function @xmath describes the dependence of the order parameter @xmath
on the temperature @xmath . Other candidate to describe the orbital
states implying the weak effective spin-orbital coupling in the @xmath
phase of superconductivity in @xmath compound, is the unitary planar
state [ 6 , 15 , 16 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using these forms of the triplet order parameters, we can plot the
Josephson current-phase relation @xmath calculated from Eq. 49 for a
particular value of misorientation angle @xmath under the rotation of
@xmath -plane, the geometry (i), and rotation around the normal axis
@xmath or geometry (ii). For simplicity we use the spherical model of
the Fermi surface. The different gap vectors have different
current-phase diagrams and such a different behavior can be a criterion
for distinguish between the different phases. In some cases, the
Josephson current formally does not equal to zero at @xmath This state
corresponds to a spontaneous phase difference, which depends on the
misorientation angle @xmath . The tangential components of current,
@xmath and @xmath , as the functions of @xmath are not zero when the
Josephson current is zero. This spontaneous tangential current is due to
the specific ”proximity effect” similar to spontaneous current in
contacts between ” @xmath -wave” superconductors [ 42 , 43 ] . The total
current is determined by the Green function, which depends on the order
parameters in both superconductors. As a result of this, for nonzero
misorientation angles the current parallel to the surface can be
generated. It can be shown that the current-phase relations are totally
different for different models of the gap vector. Because the order
parameter phase depends on the momentum direction on the Fermi surface,
the misorientation of the superconductors leads to spontaneous phase
difference that corresponds to the zero Josephson current and to the
minimum of the weak link energy. This phase difference depends on the
misorientation angle and can possess any values. It is observed that, in
the ” @xmath wave” superconductors the spontaneous current can be
generated in a direction parallel to the plane of contact. Generally
speaking this current is not equal to zero in the absence of the
Josephson current. Finally, study of current-phase diagrams of Josephson
junction for different misorientations can be used to distinguish or
demonstrate the different phases and different triplet gap vectors of
superconductivity @xmath .

## 3 Coherent mixing of Josephson and transport supercurrents

### 3.1 Introduction

The investigations of Josephson effect manifestations in different
systems are continuing due to it’s importance both for basic science and
industry. A point contact between two massive superconductors (S-c-S
junction) is one of the possible Josephson weak links. A microscopic
theory of the stationary Josephson effect in ballistic point contacts
between conventional superconductors was developed in [ 30 ] . Later,
this theory was generalized for a pinhole model in @xmath [ 44 , 45 ] ,
for point contacts between ” @xmath -wave” [ 42 , 46 ] , and triplet
superconductors [ 6 ] . The Josephson effect is the phase sensitive
instrument for the analysis of an order parameter in novel
(unconventional) superconductors, where current-phase dependencies
@xmath may differ essentially from those in conventional superconductors
[ 42 , 46 ] . In some cases the model with total transparency of the
point contact does not quite adequately correspond to the experiment,
and the electron reflection should be taken into account. The influence
of electron reflection on the Josephson current in ballistic point
contacts was first considered by Zaitsev [ 34 ] . He had shown that
reflection from the contact not only changes the critical value of
current, but also the current-phase dependence @xmath at low temperature
which has been predicted in [ 30 ] . The current-phase dependence for
small values of transparency, @xmath , is transformed to the @xmath ,
similar to the planar tunnel junction. The effect of transparency for
point contact between unconventional (d-wave) superconductors is studied
in the papers [ 47 , 48 , 49 , 43 ] . The non-locality of Josephson
current in point contacts was investigated in [ 50 ] . The authors of [
50 ] concentrated on the influence of magnetic field on the zero voltage
supercurrent through the junction. They found an periodic behavior in
terms of magnetic flux and demonstrated that this anomalous behavior is
a result of a non-locality supercurrent in the junction. This
observation was explained theoretically in [ 51 ] . In this chapter we
want to investigate theoretically the influence of electron reflection
on dc Josephson effect in a ballistic point contact with transport
current in the right and left banks which are separated by an interface
(look at Fig. 4 ). In Ref. [ 32 ] for an ideal transparent point-contact
in the impenetrable interface, it has been observed that at the phase
differences close to the @xmath two antisymmetric vortex-like currents
appear (see Fig. 8 ). we want to study the effect of finite transparency
(reflection) of the point-contact in the interface, on these vortex-like
currents near the contact and at the phase difference @xmath . We show
that at low temperatures even a small reflection on the contact destroys
the mentioned vortex-like current states, which can be restored by
increasing of the temperature. In our system which will be investigated
in this chapter, a point-contact between two massive superconductors
(S-c-S junction) is considered as a possible Josephson weak links. For
such systems it is convenient to use Kulik-Omelyanchouk method [ 30 ]
for the ballistic point-contact. The microscopic theory of the
stationary Josephson effect in the ballistic point contacts between
conventional superconductors was developed in [ 30 ] . Later, this
theory was generalized for point-contacts between ” @xmath -wave” high-
@xmath supercondcutors in Ref. [ 42 ] . The Josephson effect is a phase
sensitive instrument for the analysis of an order parameter in novel
(unconventional) superconductors, where current-phase dependencies
@xmath may differ essentially from those in conventional superconductors
[ 42 , 6 ] . In some cases the model with ideal transparent
point-contact does not correspond to the experiment totally, and the
electron reflection should be taken into account. The influence of
electron reflection on the Josephson current in ballistic point contacts
was first considered by Zaitsev [ 34 ] . He had shown that reflection
from the contact not only changes the critical value of current, but
also the current-phase dependence @xmath at low temperature which has
been predicted in [ 30 ] . The current-phase dependence for small values
of transparency, @xmath , is transformed to the @xmath , similar to the
planar tunnel junction. In addition, the non-locality of Josephson
current in point contacts was investigated in Ref. [ 50 ] . The authors
of Ref. [ 50 ] concentrated on the influence of magnetic field on the
zero voltage supercurrent through the junction. They found an periodic
behavior in terms of magnetic flux and demonstrated that this anomalous
behavior is a result of a non-locality supercurrent in the junction.
This observation was explained theoretically in [ 51 , 52 , 53 ] .
Recently an influence of transport supercurrent, which flows in the
contacted banks and is parallel to the interface, to the Josephson
effect in point contacts has been analyzed theoretically [ 32 ] . It was
found that a non-local mixing of two superconducting currents results in
the appearance of two vortex-like current states in vicinity of the
contact, when the external phase difference is @xmath . The Josephson
current through superconducting weak link is a result of quantum
interference between order parameters with phase difference @xmath .
Obviously, the finite reflection @xmath of electrons from the Josephson
junction suppresses this interference and it must influence the
vortex-like current states, which are predicted in [ 32 ] . In this
chapter, we study the effect of finite transparency on the current-phase
dependence and distribution of the superconducting current near the
ballistic point contact in the presence of homogeneous current states
far from the contact. We show that at low temperatures @xmath the
electron reflection destroys the mentioned vortex-like current states
even for a very small value of reflection coefficient @xmath On the
other hand we have found that, as the temperature increases the vortices
are restored and they exist for transparency as low as @xmath in the
limit of @xmath . The arrangement of the rest of this chapter is as
follows. In Sec.( 3.2 ) we describe the model of the point contact,
quasiclassical equations for Green functions and boundary conditions.
The analytical formulas for the Green functions are derived for a
ballistic point contact with arbitrary transparency. In Sec.( 3.3 ) we
apply them to analyze a current state in the ballistic point contact.
The influence of the transport current on the Josephson current and vice
versa at the contact plane is considered. In Sec.( 3.4 ) we present the
numerical results for the distribution of the current in the vicinity of
the contact.

### 3.2 Model and equations

We consider the Josephson weak link as a microbridge between thin
superconducting films of thickness @xmath . The length @xmath and width
@xmath of the microbridge, are assumed to be less than the coherence
length @xmath . On the other hand, we assume that @xmath and @xmath are
much larger than the Fermi wavelength @xmath and use the quasiclassical
approach. There is a potential barrier in the contact, resulting in a
finite probability for the electron that is to be reflected back. In the
banks of superconductors a homogeneous current with a superconducting
velocity @xmath flows parallel to the partition. We choose the @xmath
-axis along @xmath and the @xmath -axis perpendicular to the boundary;
@xmath is the boundary plane (see Fig. 4 ). If the film thickness @xmath
then in the main approximation in terms of the parameter @xmath the
superconducting current depends on the coordinates in the plane of the
film @xmath only. The superconducting current in the quasiclassical
approximation

  -- -- -- ------
           (53)
  -- -- -- ------

is defined by the energy integrated Green matrix for the case of singlet
superconductors which is following:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

and for the case of the order parameter we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

This Green matrix in the ballistic case satisfies the Eilenberger
equations as follows [ 31 , 54 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
     @xmath      (57)
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath on the Fermi surface, @xmath and @xmath label the left and
right hand superconducting bulks, respectively. Using the quasiclassical
approximation, we select the solution the for this problem as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (59)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (60)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath and @xmath Here @xmath is the density of states at the
Fermi level, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the electron velocity and
momentum on the Fermi surface, @xmath are the Matsubara frequencies,
@xmath is an integer number, @xmath is the superfluid velocity and
@xmath is the temperature. Eqs. ( 3.2 ) should be supplemented by the
equation for the superconducting order parameter @xmath

  -- -- -- ------
           (62)
  -- -- -- ------

where @xmath is the constant of pairing interaction and @xmath is the
averaging over directions of @xmath . After substitute in the
Eilenberger equation ( 1 ), we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

As it was shown in [ 30 ] in the zero approximation in terms of the
small parameter @xmath for a self-consistent solution of the problem it
is not necessary to consider Eq. ( 62 ). The model, in which the order
parameter is constant in the two half-spaces @xmath sgn @xmath ( @xmath
is the phase difference between superconductors), can be used.

In the same approximation the velocity @xmath does not depend on the
coordinates. The Eq. ( 62 ) enables us to calculate a spatial
distribution of the order parameter @xmath in the next order
approximation in terms of the parameter @xmath Solutions of Eqs. ( 1 )
should satisfy Zaitsev’s boundary conditions ( [ 34 ] ) across the
contact @xmath and specular reflection condition for @xmath . In
addition, far from the contact, solutions should coincide with the bulk
solutions. The Zaitsev boundary conditions [ 34 ] have been considered
in [ 54 ] , but some improvements are necessary for using these boundary
conditions. These improvements have been done in [ 55 ] . The Zaitsev
boundary conditions at the contact can be written as [ 34 , 54 , 55 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -- -- ------
           (68)
  -- -- -- ------

  -- -- -- ------
           (69)
  -- -- -- ------

with @xmath being the reflection of @xmath with respect to the boundary
and @xmath is the transparency coefficient of point contact. Indexes
@xmath and @xmath denote that the Green function are taken at the left
@xmath or right @xmath hand from the barrier. Similar relations also
hold for @xmath and @xmath . The first boundary condition implies that
the antisymmetric part of Green function is continuous, this is a form
of charge conservation, because the antisymmetric part of Green function
is related to the current directly. But the second boundary condition
means discontinuity in symmetric part of Green function. This
discontinuity is the result of potential barrier as the interface. In
general, @xmath could be be momentum dependent. For simplicity in our
calculations we assumed that @xmath is independent of the Fermi velocity
direction.

### 3.3 Current-phase dependencies for Josephson and tangential currents

Making use of the solution of Eilenberger equations ( 1 ), we obtain the
following expression for the current density ( 53 ) at the slit [ 56 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath , @xmath is the unit vector and @xmath . In the case,
@xmath , the current ( 70 ) has both @xmath and @xmath components.

The tangential current @xmath depends on the order parameters phase
difference @xmath and is not equal to the transport current @xmath on
the banks, in other words the total current is not equal to the vector
sum of Josephson and transport currents. For the case @xmath , at the
contact the tangential current is zero and the normal component, i.e.
the Josephson current is as found for the finite transparent contact in
[ 34 ] . Detaching explicitly the Josephson current @xmath and the
spatially homogeneous (transport) current @xmath that is produced by the
superfluid velocity @xmath , we can write the current as the sum of
three terms: @xmath , @xmath , and the ”interference” current @xmath .
Also we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

The ”interference” current takes place in the vicinity of the contact,
where both coherent currents @xmath and @xmath exist (see also the next
subsection). At first we consider the current density ( 70 ) for
temperatures close to the critical temperature ( @xmath ). From Eqs. (
70 ) at the contact and for the temperatures close to the critical
temperature we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath and numerator and denominator of the Green function
fraction has been multiplied by the expression @xmath , to escape of the
complexity problems. It is well-known that for the temperatures close to
the critical temperature, @xmath . Consequently, we use the Taylor
expansion in terms of the small parameter @xmath . So at the contact we
have:

  -- -- -- ------
           (73)
  -- -- -- ------

we obtain [ 56 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is the unit vector in the @xmath
direction. This consideration shows how the current is affected by the
interplay of Josephson and transport currents. At the contact the
”interference” current @xmath is anti-parallel to @xmath and if the
phase difference @xmath , @xmath . When there is no phase difference (at
@xmath , we obtain @xmath . So at transparency values @xmath up to
@xmath the total tangential current at the contact flows in the opposite
direction to the transport current. Thus, for such @xmath in the
vicinity of the contact, two vortices should exist. At arbitrary
temperatures @xmath the current-phase relations can be analyzed
numerically. In our calculations we define the parameter, @xmath , in
which @xmath and @xmath . The value of @xmath can be in the range @xmath
and it’s critical value @xmath , corresponds to the critical current in
the homogeneous current state [ 57 ] . At @xmath , @xmath and the gap
@xmath does not depend on @xmath . In Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 , we plot the
Josephson and tangential currents at the contact as functions of @xmath
at temperatures far from the critical (namely, @xmath ) and for @xmath
and for different values of transparency @xmath . Far from @xmath , the
tangential current is not disturbed by the contact, it tends to its
value on the bank. The Josephson current-phase relation is the same as
when the transport current is absent. However, when @xmath tends to
@xmath , for the highly transparent contact @xmath the tangential
current becomes anti-parallel to the bulk current. But for @xmath the
”interference” current is strongly suppressed and the tangential current
flows parallel to the bulk current. In Fig. 7 , we plot @xmath at @xmath
for different temperatures. These plots show that by increasing the
temperature a counter-flow @xmath exists in a wider interval of
transparency @xmath and @xmath This numerical result coincides with
analytical results ( 75 , 76 ).

### 3.4 Spatial distribution of the current near the contact

In this subsection we consider the spatial distribution of the current
near the orifice. The superconducting current ( 53 ) can be written as

  -- -- -- ------
           (77)
  -- -- -- ------

where, @xmath . We should note that although the current ( 77 ) depends
only on the coordinates in the film plane, the integration over velocity
directions @xmath is carried out over all of the Fermi sphere as in a
bulk sample. This method of calculation is correct only for specular
reflection from the film surfaces when there is no back scattering after
electron interaction with them. At a point, @xmath , all ballistic
trajectories can be categorized as transit and non-transit trajectories
(see,Fig. 4 ). For the transit trajectories ”1” (their reflected
counterparts marked by ”3” in Fig. 4 ) a projection @xmath of the vector
@xmath to the film plane belongs to the angle at which the slit is seen
from the point @xmath @xmath and for non-transit(marked by ”2” in Fig. 4
) @xmath . For transit trajectories the Green functions satisfy boundary
conditions on both banks and at the contact. The non-transit
trajectories should satisfy the specular reflection condition [or
Zaitsev’s boundary conditions ( 66 )-( 67 ) for @xmath at @xmath ]. Then
for the current at @xmath we obtain an analytical formula [ 56 ] :

  -- -- -- ------
           (78)
  -- -- -- ------

where, @xmath . To illustrate how the current flows near the contact, we
plot the Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 , for @xmath and temperatures much smaller
than critical ( @xmath ), and for different values of transparency. At
such value of the phase @xmath there is no Josephson current and at the
large @xmath the current is disturbed in such a way that there are two
anti-symmetric vortices close to the orifice (see Fig. 8 ). For the such
temperature at @xmath the vortices are absent in Fig. 9 .

Near the critical temperature @xmath the vortex-like currents are
restored for @xmath (see Fig. 10 ). Far from the orifice (at the
distances @xmath ) the Josephson current is spread out and the current
is equal to its value at infinity. Considering the current distributions
and current-phase diagrams, we observed that:
1). For fixed values of temperature and superfluid velocity, by
decreasing the transparency the vortex-like current disappears at @xmath
@xmath
2). For intermediate values of transparency @xmath @xmath by increasing
the temperature the vortex-like currents, which were destroyed by the
effect of electron reflection at the contact, may be restored.
It is clear that both Josephson and ”interference” currents are the
result of the quantum interference between two coherent states. By
decreasing the transparency the interference effect will be weaker and
these two currents will decrease, while the transport current will
remain constant. On the other hand, the presence of vortices depends on
the result of competition between transport and ”interference” current.

Thus, by decreasing the transparency the tunneling and consequently the
”interference” current will decrease and vortices may be destroyed ( 75
, 76 ). Similar to the case @xmath in [ 32 ] , at high values of
transparency, the ”interference” current can dominate the transport
current and tangential current can be anti-parallel to the transport
current, thus the vortices appear. But for low transparency the
tangential current will be parallel to the transport current and the
vortices disappear.
The second point is an anomalous temperature behavior of the effect. The
vortices are the result of the coherent current mixing. One could expect
that by increasing the temperature the vortices would disappear whereas,
for intermediate values of transparency, by increasing the temperature
the vortices will be restored. As considered in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 for
the transparency @xmath the vortices at low temperature are absent but
at high temperature they are present. In the plots for tangential
current versus transparency, Fig. 7 we can observe this phenomenon
(appearance of the counter-flow near the contact at high temperatures).
Usually superconducting currents are monotonic and descendant functions
of temperature. Josephson and transport currents have this property, but
about the tangential current @xmath , the situation is totally
different. At high values of transparency the @xmath has similar
behavior to the two other currents, but at low and intermediate values
of transparency at @xmath it has a non-monotonic dependence on the
temperature and this is the origin of the anomalous temperature behavior
of vortices. As the temperature increases, the tangential current first
increases and then decreases. In Fig. 11 we plotted the tangential
current ( ”interference”+ transport current) versus the temperature for
different values of transparency. We observed that for intermediate
values of transparency @xmath , at low temperatures and @xmath the
tangential current has anomalous dependence on the temperature. The
reason for this dependence is that the ”interference” current flows in
the opposite direction to the transport current. This current is
suppressed by the reflection, but with increasing of the temperature it
decreases slowly than the transport current. As a consequence of that
with increasing of @xmath the tangential current can change its sign and
vortices appear. We found that for low values of transparency @xmath the
”interference” current cannot dominate the transport current and in
addition the tangential current has the same direction as the transport
current for any temperature @xmath

## 4 Weak link between unitary @xmath-wave superconductors

### 4.1 Introduction

In this chapter the spin current in the Josephson junction as a
weak-link (interface) between misorientated triplet superconductors will
be investigated theoretically for the models of the order parameter in
@xmath . Green functions of the system will be obtained from the
quasiclassical Eilenberger equations. The analytical results for the
charge and spin currents will be illustrated by numerical calculations
for the certain misorientation angles of gap vector of superconductors.
Triplet superconductivity has become one of the most interesting topics
of condensed matter physics [ 5 , 7 ] , particularly in view of the
recently discovered ferromagnetic superconductivity [ 13 , 14 ] . The
mechanism of pairing, physics of interaction and gap structure in this
type of superconductors have been the subject of many experimental and
theoretical works [ 58 , 59 ] . The Cooper pairing in the triplet
superconductors has been investigated, for example, using the thermal
conductivity in papers [ 60 , 61 ] and Knight shift experiments in
papers [ 62 , 63 ] . Also, the Josephson effect in the point contact
between triplet superconductors has been studied in paper [ 6 ] . These
weak-link structures have been used to demonstrate the order parameter
symmetry in Ref. [ 64 ] . Eventually, the @xmath -wave symmetry of order
parameter has been proposed for @xmath and @xmath compounds. In
addition, the spin polarized transport through the systems consisting of
superconductors, normal metals, ferromagnetic layers and other
structures as one of the modern topics of mesoscopic physics, has
attracted much attention recently [ 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 ] . In this
chapter, the ballistic Josephson weak-link as the interface between two
bulk of @xmath -wave superconductors with different orientations of the
crystallographic axes has been investigated. It is shown that the
current-phase dependencies are totally different from the current-phase
dependencies of the junction between conventional ( @xmath -wave)
superconductors [ 30 ] and high @xmath ( @xmath -wave) superconductors [
48 ] . It is found that for the certain values of the misorientation,
the spin-current in the both directions, tangential and perpendicular to
the interface, may exist and it has totally unusual dependence on the
external phase difference. The effect of misorientation on the spin
current is investigated. It is observed that the misorientation between
gap vectors is the origin of the spin current. As the important result
of this chapter, it is obtained that, at some of certain values of phase
difference, at which the charge current is zero, the spin current has
the finite value. Another result of this chapter is the capability of
this proposed experiment for polarization of the spin transport using
the junction between @xmath -wave superconductors. Eventually, one of
the states and geometries of our system can be used as a switch which is
able to divide the spin and charge currents into two parts: parallel and
perpendicular to the interface.
The arrangement of the rest of this chapter is as follows. In Sec.( 4.2
) we describe our configuration, which is investigated. For a
non-self-consistent model of the order parameter, the quasiclassiacl
Eilenberger equations [ 31 ] are solved and suitable Green functions are
obtained analytically. In Sec.( 4.3 ) the obtained formulas for the
Green functions are used for calculation the charge and spin current
densities at the interface. An analysis of numerical results will be
done in Sec.( 4.4 ).

### 4.2 Basic Equations

We consider a model of a flat interface @xmath between two misorientated
@xmath wave superconducting half-spaces (Fig. 12 ) as a ballistic
Josephson junction. In the quasiclassical ballistic approach, in order
to calculate the charge and spin current, we use “transport-like”
equations [ 31 ] for the energy integrated Green functions @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the normalization condition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are discrete Matsubara energies @xmath , @xmath is the
temperature and @xmath is the Fermi velocity and @xmath in which @xmath
are Pauli matrices.

The Matsubara propagator @xmath can be written in the standard form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, the matrix structure of the off-diagonal self energy @xmath in
the Nambu space is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

In this chapter, the unitary states, for which @xmath is investigated.
Also, the unitary states vectors @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are the real vectors in the left and right sides of the
junction. The gap (order parameter) vector @xmath has to be determined
from the self-consistency equation, near the Fermi surface:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , is a potential of pairing interaction, @xmath stands for
averaging over the directions of an electron momentum on the Fermi
surface @xmath and @xmath is the electron density of states at the Fermi
level of energy.

Solutions to Eqs. ( 79 ) and ( 84 ) must satisfy the conditions for
Green functions and vector @xmath in the bulks of the superconductors
far from the interface as follow:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (85)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the external phase difference between the order
parameters of the bulks. Eqs. ( 79 ) and ( 84 ) have to be supplemented
by the continuity conditions at the interface between superconductors.
For all quasiparticle trajectories, the Green functions satisfy the
boundary conditions both in the right and left bulks as well as at the
interface.
The set of equations ( 79 ) and ( 84 ) can be solved only numerically.
For unconventional superconductors such solution requires the
information of the function @xmath . This information, as that of the
nature of unconventional superconductivity in novel compounds, in most
cases is unknown. Usually, the spatial variation of the order parameter
and its dependence on the momentum direction can be separated in the
form of @xmath . It has been shown that the absolute value of a
self-consistent order parameter and @xmath are suppressed near the
interface and at the distances of the order of the coherence length,
while its dependence on the direction in the momentum space ( @xmath )
remains unaltered [ 41 ] . Consequently, this suppression doesn’t
influence the Josephson effect drastically. This suppression of the
order parameter keeps the current-phase dependence unchanged but, it
changes the amplitude value of the current. For example, it has been
verified in Ref. [ 48 ] for the junction between unconventional @xmath
-wave, in Ref. [ 41 ] for the case of “ @xmath -wave” superconductors
and in Refs. [ 69 , 70 ] for pinholes in @xmath that, there is a good
qualitative agreement between self-consistent and non-self-consistent
results. Also, it has been observed that the results of the
non-self-consistent investigation of ferromagnet-d-wave proximity
structure in Ref. [ 71 ] are coincident with the experimental results of
the paper [ 72 ] and the results of the non-self-consistent model in
paper [ 45 ] are similar to the superfluid weak-link experiment [ 73 ] .
In the paper [ 71 ] , they have investigated the proximity effect
between a ferromagnet and a high @xmath superconductor.

They have solved the Eilenberger equation and using the obtained Green
function investigated the Andreev bound states. The density of states in
this system has been studied and the spatial oscillations have been
observed in this nonselfconsistent paper. The results of this paper had
been observed before in an experimental report in paper [ 72 ] . In
addition, there are many published papers [ 69 , 70 , 71 ] and [ 74 , 75
, 76 , 77 ] in which, such approximation has been used for different
systems containing unconventional superconductors and important
analytical results have been obtained. In Refs. [ 69 , 70 , 71 ]
Eilenberger equation has been solved and Bogoliobov- Degennes equation
has been considered in papers [ 74 , 75 , 76 , 77 ]
non-self-consistently. Consequently, despite the fact that this
estimation cannot be applied directly for a quantitative analyze of the
real experiment, only a qualitative comparison of calculated and
experimental current-phase relations is possible. In our calculations, a
simple model of the constant order parameter up to the interface is
considered and the pair breaking and the scattering on the interface are
ignored. We believe that under these strong assumptions our results
describe the real situation qualitatively. In the framework of such
model, the analytical expressions for the charge and spin current can be
obtained for an arbitrary form of the order parameter. Also, we have
done our calculations for the small misorientations @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . As the results of paper [ 48 ] , for the small misorientations,
selfconsistent and nonselfconsistent calculations have the same results
approximately. Consequently, authors of paper [ 48 ] concluded that the
nonselfconsistent formalism can be used for the junction between
unconventional superconducting bulks with small misorientations.

### 4.3 Analytical Green functions

The solution of Eqs. ( 79 ) and ( 84 ) allows us to calculate the charge
and spin current densities. The expression for the charge current is:

  -- -- -- ------
           (87)
  -- -- -- ------

and for the spin current we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath . We assume that the order parameter does not depend on
coordinates and in each half-space it equals to its value ( 112 ) far
from the interface in the left or right bulks. For such a model, the
current-phase dependence of a Josephson junction can be calculated
analytically. It enables us to analyze the main features of
current-phase dependence for the different models of the order parameter
of “ @xmath -wave” superconductivity. The Eilenberger equations ( 79 )
for Green functions @xmath , which are supplemented by the condition of
continuity of solutions across the interface, at @xmath , and the
boundary conditions at the bulks, should be solved for a
non-self-consistent model of the order parameter analytically. In a
ballistic case the system of equations for functions @xmath and @xmath
can be decomposed on independent blocks of equations. The set of
equations which enables us to find the Green function @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
     @xmath      (90)
     @xmath      (91)
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath The Eqs. ( 89 )-( 92 ) can be solved by integrating over
ballistic trajectories of electrons in the right and left half-spaces.
The general solution satisfying the boundary conditions ( 109 ) at
infinity is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (93)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (95)
     @xmath   @xmath               (96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is time of flight along the trajectory, @xmath and @xmath
By matching the solutions ( 93 - 96 ) at the interface @xmath , we find
constants @xmath and @xmath Indices @xmath label the left and right
half-spaces respectively. The function @xmath which is a diagonal term
of Green matrix and determines the current density at the interface,
@xmath , is as follows: Two diagonal terms of Green matrix which
determine the current densities at the interface, @xmath , are
following.

For the relative term to the charge current we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

and for the case of spin current we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -- -- -------
           (101)
  -- -- -- -------

Also, @xmath label the left and right half-spaces respectively.

We consider a rotation @xmath only in the right superconductor (see,
Fig. 12 ), (i.e., @xmath @xmath is the unit vector in the momentum
space). The crystallographic @xmath -axis in the left half-space is
selected parallel to the partition between the superconductors (along
@xmath -axis in Fig. 2 ). To illustrate the results obtained by
computing the formula ( 97 , 98 ), we plot the current-phase diagrams
for the different models of the “ @xmath -wave” pairing symmetry ( 102 ,
103 ) and for two different geometries. These two geometries are
corresponding to the different orientations of the crystals in the right
and left sides of the interface (see, Fig. 12 ):
(i) The basal @xmath -plane in the right side has been rotated around
the @xmath -axis by @xmath ; @xmath .
(ii) The @xmath -axis in the right side has been rotated around the axis
perpendicular to the interface ( @xmath -axis in Fig. 12 ) by @xmath ;
@xmath .
Further calculations require a certain model of the gap vector (vector
of order parameter) @xmath .

### 4.4 Numerical results

In this chapter, two most possible forms of the @xmath -wave order
parameter vector in @xmath are considered. The first model which is
successful to explain the properties of the @xmath -phase of @xmath is
the axial state. This sate describes the strong spin-orbital coupling
with vector d directed along the c axis of the lattice and it is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coordinate axes @xmath here and below are chosen along the
crystallographic axes @xmath in the left side of Fig. 12 . The function
@xmath @xmath in Eq. ( 102 ) and below describes the dependence of the
order parameter @xmath on the temperature @xmath (our numerical
calculations have been done at the temperatures close to the @xmath ).
The second model of the order parameter which describes the weak
spin-orbital coupling in @xmath states, is the unitary planar state. The
planar model of gap vector is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using these two models of order parameters ( 102 , 103 ) and solutions
to the Eilenberger equations ( 97 ) and ( 98 ), we have calculated the
spin current and charge current densities at the interface numerically.

These numerical results are listed below:
1) The spin current can be present, only when misorientation between gap
vectors exists. Because in our Green function ( 98 ), the spin current
is proportional to the “cross product” between the left and right gap
vectors. For instance, the spin current for the case of the axial state
( 102 ) and geometry (i) is zero, because both of the gap vectors are in
the same direction ( @xmath ). (Geometry (i) is a rotation as much as
@xmath , around the @xmath axis).
2) In Fig. 13 it is shown that for the planar state and geometry (i), it
is possible to observe the current of @xmath in the direction
perpendicular to the interface, but in Figs. 14 , 15 and 16 , it is
demonstrated that, for the axial state and geometry (ii), only the
current of @xmath can be observed.

Consequently, this kind of junction can be applied as a polarizer or
filter for the spin currents.
However, for the planar state and geometry (ii), all terms of the spin
current ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) can be observed (see Eq. 98 ).
3) In Figs. 14 - 20 (planar states), it is shown that the value of the
phase differences in which the currents are in the maxima, minima and
zero values, are not very sensitive to the misorientation angle @xmath ,
while the amplitude of maxima and minima, are strongly dependent on the
value of misorientation @xmath .
4) In the Figs. 13 , 14 and Fig. 17 , 18 , while the charge currents are
the odd functions of @xmath with respect to the line of @xmath , the
spin currents are even functions of the phase difference; @xmath and for
the spin current @xmath . On the contrary, in the Figs. 15 and 16 , the
charge and spin currents are even and odd functions of @xmath with
respect to the line of @xmath , respectively; @xmath and @xmath .
5) In Fig. 13 , the perpendicular component of the spin and charge
current in terms of the external phase difference @xmath for the case of
the planar state ( 103 ), geometry (i) and for two different
misorientations are plotted. The solid line is the charge current-phase
dependence [ 6 ] . Also, at the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the charge
current (Josephson current) is zero while the spin current has the
finite value.
6) The perpendicular component of the charge (Josephson current) and
spin current for the case of the axial state ( 102 ) and geometry (ii)
are plotted in Fig. 14 , and the tangential components of them, are
plotted in Figs. 15 , 16 . The charge current-phase diagrams have been
obtained before in paper [ 6 ] and they are totally different from the
case of conventional superconductors in the paper [ 30 ] .

At the phase values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , in which the charge
current is exactly zero, the spin current has the finite values and may
select its maximum value. In Figs. 13 , 14 and specially Fig. 20 , for a
small value of misorientation we have a very long but narrow peak in the
spin current phase diagram, close to the @xmath .
7) Both the planar state with geometry (i) and the axial state with
geometry (ii) can be applied as the filter for polarization of the spin
transport (see Figs 13 - 16 ), the former transports only the @xmath but
the latter case flows the @xmath (see . 98 ). In addition, the planar
states with geometry (ii) can be used as a switch for the spin and
charge current into two directions: parallel and perpendicular to the
interface. In this case, the spin and charge currents select only one of
the directions parallel or perpendicular to the interface. Namely, it is
impossible to observe the tangential and perpendicular components of the
currents at the same time for planar state with geometry (ii)(Figs. 17 -
20 ).

## 5 Weak link between @xmath supercondcuting banks

### 5.1 Introduction

The “ @xmath wave” form of pairing symmetry has been considered for the
superconductivity in @xmath compound, recently. In this chapter, a
stationary Josephson junction as a weak-link between @xmath triplet
superconductors is theoretically investigated. The Eilenberger equation
is solved for two distinct models of the order parameter ( @xmath and
@xmath phases). The spin and charge current-phase diagrams are plotted
and the effect of misorientation between crystals on the Josephson,
spontaneous and spin current is studied. It is obtained that such
experimental investigations of the current-phase diagrams can be used to
test the pairing symmetry in the above-mentioned superconductors. In
this chapter, it is shown that this apparatus can be applied as a
polarizer for the spin current. Furthermore, it is observed that at some
certain values of the phase differences in which the charge current is
zero, the spin current exists while carriers of both of charge and spin
are the same (electrons).
The pairing symmetry of the recently discovered superconductor compound
@xmath is an interesting topic of research in the field of
superconductivity [ 8 , 25 , 78 ] . Superconductivity in this compound
has been discovered in papers [ 79 , 80 , 81 ] and two different phases
( @xmath and @xmath ) have been considered for this kind of
superconductor in papers [ 25 , 26 ] . Although people at first have
considered the spin-singlet “ @xmath wave” pairing symmetry to this
superconductor [ 25 ] but later it has been specified that the
spin-triplet is the real pairing symmetry of @xmath complex [ 8 , 82 ] .
Authors of paper [ 82 ] , using the knight shift in NMR measurement
estimated the spin-triplet pairing symmetry for the superconductivity in
@xmath . Consequently, the “ @xmath wave” proposed for the pairing
symmetry of the superconductivity in @xmath compound, recently [ 8 ] .
In this chapter, the self-consistent equation for the gap vectors (BCS
gap equation) have been solved for the finite temperature numerically
and for the temperatures close to the zero and the critical temperature
analytically. For this compound and using the “ @xmath wave” symmetry
for the order parameter vector (gap function), the value of the order
parameter at the zero temperature has been obtained for both @xmath and
@xmath -phases, in terms of the critical temperature of this type of
superconductivity ( @xmath ). In addition, the gap dependence on the
temperature close to the zero and critical temperatures have been
obtained. Authors of paper [ 8 ] have investigated the critical magnetic
field and the temperature dependence of critical field, specific heat
and heat conduction.
Also, the Josephson effect in the point contact between triplet
superconductors has been studied in paper [ 6 ] . In this chapter, the
effect of misorientation on the charge transport has been studied and a
spontaneous current tangential to the interface between the @xmath wave
superconductors has been observed. Additionally, the spin-current in the
weak-link between the @xmath wave superconductors has been investigated
in the paper [ 83 ] . The authors of paper [ 83 ] , have proposed this
kind of weak-link device as the filter for polarization of the
spin-current. These weak-link structures have been used to demonstrate
the order parameter symmetry in paper [ 64 ] .

In this chapter, the ballistic Josephson weak-link via an interface
between two bulk of “ @xmath wave” superconductors with different
orientations of the crystallographic axes is investigated. It is shown
that the spin and charge current-phase diagrams are totally different
from the current-phase diagrams of the junction between conventional (
@xmath -wave) superconductors [ 30 ] , high @xmath ( @xmath -wave)
superconductors [ 48 ] and from the spin-current phase diagrams in the
weak-link between the @xmath -wave superconductors [ 83 ] . In this
weak-link structure between the “ @xmath wave” superconductors, the
spontaneous current parallel to the interface as the characteristic of
unconventional superconductivity can be present. The effect of
misorientation on the spontaneous, Josephson and spin currents for the
different models of the paring symmetry ( @xmath and @xmath phases in
Fig. 21 ) are investigated. It is possible to find the value of the
phase difference in which the Josephson current is zero but the
spontaneous current tangential to the interface, which is produced by
the interface, exists. In some of configurations and at the zero phase
difference, the Josephson current is not zero and it has a finite value,
this finite value corresponds to a spontaneous phase difference which is
related to the misorientation between the gap vectors.
Finally, It is observed that at the some certain values of the phase
differences @xmath in which the charge current is zero the spin current
exists and vise versa. In addition, in this configuration in which the
gap vectors are selected along the @xmath direction and the unit vector
perpendicular to the interface is @xmath direction, only the spin
current of the @xmath can be present and the other terms of the spin
current are absent totally.

Consequently, this structure can be used as a filter for polarization of
the spin transport. Furthermore, our analytical and numerical
calculations have shown that the misorientation is the origin of the
spin current and in the absence of the misorientation spin current is
absent while the charge current flows.
In Sec.( 5.2 ) the obtained formulas for the Green functions will be
discussed and an analysis of numerical results will be done.

### 5.2 Discussions

In this chapter again we consider a model of a flat interface @xmath
between two misorientated “ @xmath wave” superconducting half-spaces
(Fig. 12 ) as a ballistic Josephson junction.

As same as the previous chapter, in our calculations, a simple model of
the constant order parameter up to the interface is considered and the
pair breaking and the scattering on the interface are ignored. The
solution of Eqs. ( 1 ) and ( 84 ) allows us to calculate the charge and
spin current densities. Again, we assume that the order parameter does
not depend on coordinates and in each half-space it equals to its value
( 112 ) far from the interface in the left or right bulks. For such a
model, the current-phase dependence of a Josephson junction can be
calculated analytically. It enables us to analyze the main features of
current-phase dependence for the different models of the order parameter
of “ @xmath wave” superconductivity.

To illustrate the results obtained by computing the formula ( 97 ), we
plot the current-phase diagrams for the different models of the “ @xmath
wave” pairing symmetry ( 104 , 105 ) and for two different geometries.
These geometries are corresponding to the different orientations of the
crystals in the right and left sides of the interface (Fig. 12 ):
(i) The basal @xmath -plane in the right side has been rotated around
the @xmath -axis by @xmath ; @xmath .
(ii) The @xmath -axis in the right side has been rotated around the
@xmath -axis by @xmath ( @xmath -axis in Fig. 12 ); @xmath .
Further calculations require a certain model of the gap vector (vector
of order parameter) @xmath .

In this chapter, two forms of the “ @xmath wave” unitary gap vector in
@xmath are considered. The first model to explain the properties of the
@xmath -phase of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coordinate axes @xmath here and below are chosen along the
crystallographic axes @xmath in the left side of Fig. 12 . The function
@xmath @xmath in

Eq. ( 104 ) and below describes the dependence of the gap vector @xmath
on the temperature @xmath . The second model to describe the gap vector
of the @xmath -phase of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our numerical calculations are done at the low temperatures, @xmath ,
and we have used the formulas @xmath for the @xmath phase and @xmath for
the @xmath phase, from the paper [ 8 ] , for temperature dependence of
the gap functions @xmath at the low temperatures ( @xmath ). Also, in
the mentioned paper [ 8 ] the value of @xmath in terms of the critical
temperatures has been calculated for both @xmath and @xmath phases. They
are @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath phases, respectively.

Using these two models of order parameters ( 104 , 105 ) and solution to
the Eilenberger equations ( 97 , 98 ), we have calculated the current
density at the interface numerically. These numerical results are listed
below [ 84 ] :
1) In Fig. 22 , the perpendicular component of current (perpendicular to
the interface) which is called Josephson current is plotted for both
@xmath and @xmath phases, geometry (i), misorientations @xmath and
@xmath . It is observed that the critical values of current for @xmath
phase is greater than @xmath phase. Also, in spite of junction between
the conventional superconductors and planar Josephson junction, at the
@xmath , the current is not zero. The current is zero at the phase
difference value @xmath , which depends on the misorientation between
the gap vectors. In Fig. 22 , the value of the spontaneous phase
difference @xmath is close to the misorientation @xmath
2) In Fig. 23 , Josephson current is plotted for both @xmath and @xmath
phases, geometry (ii) and different misorientations. Again, the maximum
value of the current for the @xmath phase is greater than @xmath phase.
Increasing the misorientation between the gap vectors, the maximum value
of current decreases. It is demonstrated that at the phase difference
values @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the Josephson current is zero while,
both of spontaneous and spin currents are not zero and have the finite
value. Increasing the misorientation between the gap vectors decreases
the derivative of the current with respect to the phase difference (
@xmath ) close to the @xmath .
3) In Figs. 24 , 25 , the tangential components of charge current (
@xmath and @xmath components) in terms of the phase difference @xmath
are plotted.

It is seen that at the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in which the Josephson
current is zero the parallel spontaneous currents have the finite
values. Although the perpendicular component of charge current (see Fig.
23 ) is an odd function of the phase difference with respect to the line
of @xmath but the parallel charge currents are even functions at the
phase differences close to @xmath (see Fig. 24 and Fig. 25 ).
4) In Fig. 26 , the Josephson current in terms of the phase difference
is plotted for the case of @xmath wave, and @xmath and @xmath phases of
“ @xmath wave”. The @xmath wave pairing symmetry as the first candidate
for the superconducting state in @xmath is as follows [ 19 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is observed that the maximum value of Josephson current ( @xmath ) of
junction between the @xmath wave superconductors, is greater than the
@xmath phase of “ @xmath wave” and the Josephson current of second is
greater than its @xmath phase counterpart. Also, the place of the zero
of the current is at the spontaneous phase difference which is close to
the misorientation @xmath (look at the Fig. 32 ).
5) In Figs. 27 , 28 , the tangential spin ( @xmath ) currents in terms
of the phase difference is plotted for different misorientations and
geometry (ii). By increasing the misorientation the maximum value of
spin current increases. In spite of the charge current for this state,
the spin current at the phase differences @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is
exactly zero (compare Figs. 24 and 25 with Figs. 27 and 28 ).
6) In Figs. 29 , 30 , the perpendicular component of charge and spin
current ( @xmath and @xmath ) are plotted for different misorientations
and @xmath and @xmath phases respectively. An interesting case in our
observations is the finite value of the perpendicular spin current at
the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath at which the perpendicular charge current
( @xmath ) is zero (see Figs. 29 and 30 ).
7) In Fig. 31 , the perpendicular component of the spin current is
plotted for @xmath wave, @xmath and @xmath phases of “ @xmath wave”
pairing symmetries and for a specified value of misorientation @xmath .
In both Figs. 26 and 31 the maximum value of current of junction between
the @xmath wave is greater than @xmath phase and @xmath phase has the
maximum value greater than junction between the @xmath phase. This
different character of the current-phase diagrams enables us to
distinguish between the three states.

Also, It is observed that at the phase differences @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , the spin current has the finite value and may have its maximum
value. This is a counterpart of Fig. 23 , in that figure the charge
currents are zero at the mentioned value of the phase difference but the
spin current has the finite value.
Furthermore, our analytical and numerical calculations have shown that
the origin of the spin current is misorientation between the gap vectors
(cross product in Eq. 98 ). Thus the spin current in the weak link
between geometry (i) misorientated crystals is zero. Because the
geometry (i) is a rotation by @xmath around the @xmath axis and both of
the left and right gap vectors are in the same direction and cross
product between them is zero.

Also, it is shown that in this structure ( @xmath direction is
perpendicular to the interface, gap vectors @xmath axis are selected in
the @xmath direction and rotation is done around the @xmath direction)
only the current of the @xmath flows and other terms of the spin current
are totally absent. So, this kind of weak-link experiment can be used as
the filter for polarization of spin transport. Since the spin is a
vector, the spin current is a tensor and we have the current of spin
@xmath in the three @xmath , @xmath and @xmath directions.

## 6 Weak link between nonunitary triplet superconductors

### 6.1 Introduction

A stationary Josephson effect in a weak-link between misorientated
nonunitary triplet superconductors is investigated theoretically. The
non-self-consistent quasiclassical Eilenberger equation for this system
has been solved analytically. As an application of this analytical
calculation, the current-phase diagrams are plotted for the junction
between two nonunitary bipolar @xmath wave superconducting banks. A
spontaneous current parallel to the interface between superconductors
has been observed. Also, the effect of misorientation between crystals
on the Josephson and spontaneous currents is studied. Such experimental
investigations of the current-phase diagrams can be used to test the
pairing symmetry in the above-mentioned superconductors.

In the recent years, the triplet superconductivity has become one of the
modern subjects for researchers in the field of superconductivity [ 5 ,
7 , 85 ] . Particularly, the nonunitary spin triplet state in which,
Cooper pairs may carry a finite averaged intrinsic spin momentum, has
attracted much attention in the last decade [ 15 , 86 ] . A triplet
state in the momentum inverse space @xmath can be described by the order
parameter @xmath in a 2 @xmath 2 matrix form in which @xmath s are 2
@xmath 2 Pauli matrices. The three dimensional complex vector @xmath
demonstrates the triplet pairing state exactly. In the nonunitary state,
the product @xmath is not a multiple of unit matrix. Thus in a
non-unitary state time reversal symmetry necessarily is broken
spontaneously and spontaneous moment @xmath appears at each point @xmath
. In this case the macroscopic averaged moment @xmath integrated on the
Fermi surface non-vanishes. The variable @xmath is related to the net
spin average of state @xmath by @xmath , it is clear that the total spin
average over the Fermi surface can be nonzero. As an application, the
nonunitary bipolar state of @xmath wave pairing symmetry has been
considered for the @xmath phase of superconductivity in the @xmath
compound which has been created in the low temperatures @xmath and low
values of @xmath [ 15 , 16 ] . In this chapter, we want to investigate
the weak link between two nonunitary superconducting bulks. This type of
weak link structure can be used to demonstrate and to test the pairing
symmetry in the superconducting phase [ 64 ] . Consequently, we
generalize the formalism of paper [ 6 ] for the case of weak link
between nonunitary triplet superconducting bulks. In the paper [ 6 ] ,
the Josephson effect in the point contact between unitary @xmath wave
triplet superconductors has been studied. Also, the effect of
misorientation on the charge transport has been investigated and a
spontaneous current tangential to the interface between the @xmath wave
superconductors, has been observed.
In this chapter, the ballistic Josephson weak-link via an interface
between two bulks of nonunitary bipolar @xmath wave superconductivity
with different orientations of the crystallographic axes is
investigated. It is shown that the current-phase diagrams are totally
different from the current-phase diagrams of the junction between
conventional ( @xmath -wave) superconductors [ 30 ] , high @xmath (
@xmath -wave) superconductors [ 48 ] and unitary triplet ( axial and
planar) @xmath wave superconductors [ 6 ] . This different characters
can be used to distinct between nonunitary bipolar @xmath wave
superconductivity from the other types of superconductivity, roughly
speaking. In this weak-link structure between the nonunitary @xmath wave
superconductors, the spontaneous current parallel to the interface as a
fingerprint of unconventional superconductivity and spontaneous time
reversal symmetry breaking, has been observed. The effect of
misorientation on the spontaneous and Josephson currents is
investigated. It is possible to find the value of the phase difference
in which the Josephson current is zero but the spontaneous current
tangential to the interface, which is produced by the interface, is
present. In some configurations and at the zero phase difference, the
Josephson current is not zero generally and it has a finite value. This
finite value corresponds to a spontaneous phase difference which is
related to the misorientation between the gap vectors.
The arrangement of the rest of this chapter is as follows. In Sec.( 6.2
) we describe our configuration, which has been investigated. For a
non-self-consistent model of the order parameter, the quasiclassiacl
Eilenberger equations [ 31 ] are solved and suitable Green functions
have been obtained analytically. In Sec.( 6.3 ) the obtained formulas
for the Green functions have been used for calculation the current
densities at the interface and an analysis of numerical results will be
done.

### 6.2 Quasiclassical equations

We consider a model of a flat interface @xmath between two misoriented
nonunitary @xmath wave superconducting half-spaces (Fig. 12 ) as a
ballistic Josephson junction. In order to calculate the current, we use
quaisclassical Eilenberger equations [ 31 ] for Green functions ( 2 )
The Matsubara propagator @xmath here, like the unitary triplet
superconductor case, can be written in the form:

  -- -- -- -------
           (107)
  -- -- -- -------

where, the matrix structure of the off-diagonal self energy @xmath in
the Nambu space is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this chapter, the nonunitary states, for which @xmath is
investigated. Fundamentally, the gap vector (order parameter) @xmath has
to be determined numerically from the self-consistency equation [ 85 ] ,
while in this chapter, we use a non-self-consistent model for the gap
vector which is much more suitable for the analytical calculations.
Solutions to Eq. ( 1 ) must satisfy the conditions for Green functions
and gap vector @xmath in the bulks of the superconductors far from the
interface as follow:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

where,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

and,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the external phase difference between the order
parameters of the bulks and @xmath label the left and right half spaces
respectively. It is clear that, poles of Green function in the energy
space, are in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

consequently,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which @xmath is the energy place of poles. Eq. ( 1 ) have to be
supplemented by the continuity conditions at the interface between
superconductors. For all quasiparticle trajectories, the Green functions
satisfy the boundary conditions both in the right and left bulks as well
as at the interface.
The system of equations ( 1 ) and the self-consistency equation [ 85 ]
can be solved only numerically.

For unconventional superconductors such solution requires the
information of the interaction between the electrons in the Cooper pairs
and nature of unconventional superconductivity in novel compounds which,
in most cases are unknown. Also, It has been shown that the absolute
value of a self-consistent order parameter is suppressed near the
interface and at the distances of the order of the coherence length,
while its dependence on the direction in the momentum space almost
remains unaltered [ 41 ] . This suppression of the order parameter which
keeps the current-phase dependence unchanged but changes the amplitude
value of the current, doesn’t influence the Josephson effect
drastically. For example, it has been verified in paper [ 48 ] for the
junction between unconventional @xmath -wave, in paper [ 41 ] for the
case of unitary “ @xmath -wave” superconductors and in paper [ 70 ] for
pinholes in @xmath that, there is a good qualitative agreement between
self-consistent and non-self-consistent results. Also, it has been
observed that results of the non-self-consistent model in [ 45 ] are
similar to the experiment [ 73 ] . Consequently, despite the fact that
this estimation cannot be applied directly for a quantitative analyze of
the real experiment, only a qualitative comparison of calculated and
experimental current-phase relations is possible. In our calculations, a
simple model of the constant order parameter up to the interface is
considered and the pair breaking and the scattering on the interface are
ignored. We believe that under these strong assumptions our results
describe the real situation qualitatively. In the framework of such
model, the analytical expressions for the current can be obtained for a
certain form of the order parameter.

### 6.3 Analytical and numerical results

The solution of Eq. ( 1 ) allows us to calculate the current densities.
The expression for current is:

  -- -- -- -------
           (116)
  -- -- -- -------

where, @xmath stands for averaging over the directions of an electron
momentum on the Fermi surface @xmath and @xmath is the electron density
of states at the Fermi level of energy.

We assume that the order parameter is constant in space and in each
half-space it equals to its value ( 112 ) far form the interface in the
left or right bulks. For such a model, the current-phase dependence of a
Josephson junction can be calculated analytically. It enables us to
analyze the main features of current-phase dependence for a certain
model of the order parameter of nonunitary @xmath wave superconductivity
(bipolar). The Eilenberger equations ( 1 ) for Green functions @xmath ,
which are supplemented by the condition of continuity of solutions
across the interface, @xmath , and the boundary conditions at the bulks,
are solved for a non-self-consistent model of the order parameter
analytically. In a ballistic case the system of equations for functions
@xmath and @xmath can be decomposed on independent blocks of equations.
The set of equations which enables us to find the Green function @xmath
is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
     @xmath      (118)
     @xmath      (119)
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath The Eqs. ( 117 )-( 119 ) can be solved by integrating over
ballistic trajectories of electrons in the right and left half-spaces.
The general solution satisfying the boundary conditions ( 109 ) at
infinity is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is time of flight along the trajectory, @xmath and @xmath
By matching the solutions ( 121 - 124 ) at the interface @xmath , we
find constants @xmath and @xmath Indices @xmath label the left and right
half-spaces respectively. The function @xmath which is a diagonal term
of Green matrix and determines the current density at the interface,
@xmath , is as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath We consider a rotation @xmath only in the right
superconductor (see, Fig. 12 ), i.e., @xmath @xmath is the unit vector
in the momentum space.

The crystallographic @xmath -axis in the left half-space is selected
parallel to the partition between the superconductors (along @xmath
-axis in Fig. 12 ). To illustrate the results obtained by computing the
formula ( 125 ), we plot the current-phase diagrams for two different
geometries. These geometries are corresponding to the different
orientations of the crystals in the right and left sides of the
interface (Fig. 12 ):
(i) The basal @xmath -plane in the right side has been rotated around
the @xmath -axis by @xmath ; @xmath .
(ii) The @xmath -axis in the right side has been rotated around the
@xmath -axis by @xmath ; @xmath .
Further calculations require a certain model of the gap vector (order
parameter) @xmath .
In this chapter, the nonunitary @xmath wave gap vector in the @xmath
phase (low temperature @xmath and low field @xmath ) of
superconductivity in @xmath compound has been considered. This
nonunitary bipolar state which explains the weak spin-orbit coupling in
@xmath is [ 15 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coordinate axes @xmath are selected along the crystallographic axes
@xmath in the left side of Fig. 12 . The function @xmath @xmath
describes the dependence of the gap vector on the temperature @xmath
(our numerical calculations are done at the low value of temperature
@xmath ). Using this model of the order parameter ( 126 ) and solution
to the Eilenberger equations ( 125 ), we have calculated the current
density at the interface numerically. These numerical results are listed
below [ 87 ] :
1) The nonunitary property of Green’s matrix diagonal term consists of
two part. The explicit part which is in the @xmath mathematical
expression in Eq. ( 125 ) and the implicit part in the @xmath and @xmath
terms. These @xmath and @xmath terms are different from their unitary
counterparts. In the mathematical expression for @xmath the nonunitary
mathematical terms @xmath are presented. The explicit part will be
present only in the presence of misorientation between gap vectors,
@xmath , but the implicit part will be present always. So, in the
absence of misorientation @xmath , although the implicit part of
nonunitary exists but the explicit part is absent.

This means that, in the absence of misorientation current-phase diagrams
for planar unitary and nonunitary bipolar systems are the same but the
maximum values is different slightly.
2) A component of current parallel to the interface @xmath for geometry
(i) is zero as same as the unitary case [ 6 ] while the other parallel
component @xmath has a finite value (see Fig. 34 ). This later case is a
difference between unitary and nonunitary cases. Because in the junction
between unitary @xmath wave superconducting bulks all parallel
components of the current ( @xmath and @xmath ) for geometry (i) are
absent [ 6 ] .
3) In Figs. 32 , 33 , the Josephson current @xmath is plotted for
certain nonunitary model of @xmath wave and different geometries. Figs.
32 , 33 are plotted for the geometry (i) and geometry (ii) respectively.
They are completely unusual and totally different from their unitary
counterparts which have been obtained in [ 6 ] .
4) In Fig. 32 for geometry (i), it is observed that by increasing the
misorientation, some small oscillations, as the result of non-unitary
property of the order parameter, appear in the current-phase diagrams.
Also, the Josphson current at the zero external phase difference @xmath
is not zero but it has a finite value. The Josephson current will be
zero at the some finite values of the phase difference.
5) In Fig. 33 for geometry (ii), it is observed that by increasing the
misorientation the new zeros in current-phase diagrams appear and the
maximum value of current will be changed non-monotonically.

In spite of the Fig 32 for geometry (i), the Josephson current at the
phase differences @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is zero exactly.
6) The current-phase diagram for geometry (i) and @xmath component (Fig.
34 ) is totally unusual. By increasing the misorientation, the maximum
value of current increases. The components of current parallel to the
interface for geometry (ii) are plotted in Fig. 35 and Fig 36 . All of
terms at the phase differences @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are zero. The
maximum value of the current-phase diagrams is not a monotonic function
of the misorientation.

## 7 Conclusions

At first, in the Chapter @xmath of this thesis, we have studied the
stationary Josephson effect in the ballistic point contact with
transport current on the banks in the model @xmath taking into account
the reflection of electrons from the contact. The contact is subject to
the phase difference @xmath and the transport current tangential to the
boundary of the contact. As it was shown in [ 32 ] , in the ideal
transparent point-contact at @xmath and near the orifice the tangential
current flows in the opposite direction to the transport current, and
there are two anti-symmetric vortex-like structures. It is observed
that, by decreasing the transparency @xmath the vortex-like current is
destroyed. The critical value of @xmath depends on the temperature
@xmath and @xmath @xmath , so that we can never find a vortex for
transparency values lower than @xmath . This anomalous temperature
behavior of the vortices is the result of non-monotonic dependence of
the interference current on the temperature.
Then, we have studied the spin current in the ballistic Josephson
junction in the model of an ideal transparent interface between two
misorientated @xmath -wave superconductors which are subject to a phase
difference @xmath , in Chapter ( 4 ). Our analysis has shown that the
misorientation and different models of triplet gap vectors influence the
spin current [ 83 ] . This has been shown for the charge current in the
paper [ 6 ] . Misorientation between the left and right gap vectors
changes strongly the critical values of both of the spin current and
charge current. It has been obtained that the spin current is the result
of the misorientation between the gap vectors. Furthermore, as an
interesting and new result, it is observed that the different models of
the gap vectors and geometries can be applied for the polarization of
the spin transport. Another result of these calculations is the state in
which the currents select one of the two possible directions
(perpendicular and parallel to the interface) to flow. This property can
be used as a switch to control the direction of the charge and spin
current. Finally, it is observed that at some certain values of the
phase difference @xmath , the charge-current vanishes while the
spin-current flows, although the carriers of both spin and charge are
the same (electrons). The spatial variation of the phase of the order
parameter plays a role as the origin of the charge current and,
similarly, due to a spatial difference of the gap vectors in two
half-spaces causes spin currents. This is because there is a
position-dependent phase difference between “spin up” and “spin down”
Cooper pairs and, although the total charge current vanishes, there can
be a net transfer of the spin. Therefore, in our system, there is a
discontinuous jump between the gap vectors and, consequently the spin
currents should generally be present. For instance, if spin-up states
and spin-down states have a velocity in the opposite directions, the
charge currents cancel each other whereas the spin current is being
transported. Mathematically speaking, @xmath , so it is possible to find
the state in which one of these current terms is zero and the other term
has a finite value [ 68 ] . In addition, the spin imbalance which is the
result of the different density of states for “spin-up” and “spin-down”
can be other reason of spin current [ 67 ] . In conclusion, the spin
current in the absence of the charge current can be observed.
Also, the weak link between two misorientated @xmath superconducting
bulks has been investigated in Chapter ( 5 ) of this thesis. We have
considered the transportation of the spin and charge in the ballistic
Josephson junction between two @xmath crystals with “ @xmath wave”
pairing symmetry which are subject to a phase difference @xmath . In
this case as same as the case of @xmath wave junctions in Chapter ( 4 ),
the different misorientations and different models of the gap vectors
influence the spin and charge currents and it is shown that the
misorientation of the superconductors leads to a spontaneous phase
difference that corresponds to the zero Josephson current. This phase
difference depends on the misorientation angle. A spontaneous charge
current tangential to the interface which is not equal to zero in the
absence of the Josephson current is observed in this junction. It has
been obtained that the spin current is the result of the misorientation
between the gap vectors which is the characteristic of unitary triplet
superconductors. Again in this case as same as the case of @xmath wave
superconductors, it is observed that the certain model of the gap
vectors and geometries can be applied to polarize of the spin transport.
Finally, it is observed that at some certain values of the phase
difference @xmath , the charge-current vanishes while the spin-current
flows. The reason for this case is the above-mentioned discussion for
@xmath wave. The spin and charge currents can be used to recognize the
@xmath phase and @xmath phase of “ @xmath wave” and the pure @xmath wave
pairing symmetry and can be used to determine the pairing symmetry.
Particularly, this proposed experiment can be used to demonstrate the “
@xmath wave” pairing symmetry for which many doubts and challenges
exist.
Finally, in Chapter ( 7 ), we have theoretically studied the charge
currents in the ballistic Josephson junction in the model of an ideal
transparent interface between two misoriented @xmath crystals with
nonunitary bipolar @xmath wave superconducting bulks which are subject
to a phase difference @xmath . Our analysis has shown that
misorientation between the gap vectors create a current parallel to the
interface and the different misorientations between gap vectors
influence the spontaneous parallel and normal Josephson currents. These
have been shown for the currents in the point contact between two bulks
of unitary axial and planar @xmath -wave superconductor in [ 6 ]
separately. Also, It is shown that the misorientation of the
superconductors leads to a spontaneous phase difference that corresponds
to the zero Josephson current and to the minimum of the weak link energy
in the presence of the finite spontaneous current. This phase difference
depends on the misorientation angle. Again in this case, the tangential
spontaneous charge current is not equal to zero in the absence of the
Josephson current. The difference between junction behavior of unitary
planar and nonunitary bipolar superconductivity can be used to distinct
between them. This experiment can be used to test the pairing symmetry
and recognize the different phases of @xmath which has two unitary and a
nonunitary triplet pairing symmetry.
