###### Contents

-    1 An introduction to non(anti)commutative geometry and superstring
    theory
    -    1.1 A brief introduction to noncommutative and
        non(anti)commutative field theory
        -    1.1.1 The Moyal product
        -    1.1.2 The natural Moyal deformation of a field theory
        -    1.1.3 Other possible deformations: The free scalar field
            theory example
        -    1.1.4 The Kontsevich product
        -    1.1.5 Deforming superspace
        -    1.1.6 Non(anti)commutative superspace
        -    1.1.7 @xmath supersymmetry
    -    1.2 Non(anti)commutative field theory from the (super)string
        -    1.2.1 Noncommutative Yang-Mills theory from the open string
        -    1.2.2 Generalization to the superstring in RNS and GS
            formalisms
        -    1.2.3 Noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills from the @xmath
            string
        -    1.2.4 Non(anti)commutative field theories from the
            covariant superstring
    -    1.3 Generalization to non-constant backgrounds
-    2 Noncommutative deformation of integrable field theories
    -    2.1 A brief introduction to selected topics concerning
        two-dimensional classical integrable systems
        -    2.1.1 Infinite conserved currents and the bicomplex
            approach
        -    2.1.2 Reductions from selfdual Yang-Mills
        -    2.1.3 Properties of the S-matrix
        -    2.1.4 Solitons
    -    2.2 Deforming an integrable field theory: The sine-Gordon model
        (a first attempt)
        -    2.2.1 Noncommutative solitons
        -    2.2.2 Noncommutative deformation of integrable field
            theories
        -    2.2.3 The natural noncommutative generalization of the
            sine-Gordon model
        -    2.2.4 A noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon equation
            with an infinite number of conserved currents
        -    2.2.5 Solitons
        -    2.2.6 Reduction from noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills
        -    2.2.7 The action
        -    2.2.8 The relation to the noncommutative Thirring model
        -    2.2.9 (Bad) properties of the S-matrix
        -    2.2.10 Conclusions
    -    2.3 The noncommutative integrable sine-Gordon model
        -    2.3.1 Introduction
        -    2.3.2 A noncommutative integrable sigma model in @xmath
            dimensions
        -    2.3.3 Reduction to noncommutative sine-Gordon
        -    2.3.4 Relation with the previous noncommutative
            generalization of the sine-Gordon model
        -    2.3.5 Solitons
        -    2.3.6 (Nice) properties of the S-matrix
        -    2.3.7 Conclusions
-    3 Covariant superstring vertices and a possible nonconstant
    superspace deformation
    -    3.1 An introduction to the pure spinor superstring
        -    3.1.1 Motivation: Problems with RNS and GS formalisms
        -    3.1.2 Pure spinor superstring basics
        -    3.1.3 Type II superstring vertex operators
        -    3.1.4 Amplitudes
        -    3.1.5 What we can (cannot) do with this formalism, up to
            now
    -    3.2 An iterative procedure to compute the vertex operators
        -    3.2.1 Warm up: The open superstring case
        -    3.2.2 Linearized IIA/IIB supergravity equations
        -    3.2.3 Gauge transformations and gauge fixing
        -    3.2.4 Recursive equations and explicit solution (up to
            order @xmath )
        -    3.2.5 Gauge fixing for massive states
    -    3.3 An example: Linearly @xmath -dependent Ramond-Ramond field
        strength and possible Lie-algebraic superspace deformations
        -    3.3.1 Motivation: Nonconstant superspace deformations
        -    3.3.2 The ansatz for the RR field strength
        -    3.3.3 The vertex for linearly @xmath -dependent RR field
            strength
    -    3.4 Other applications
        -    3.4.1 Vertex operators with R-R gauge potentials
        -    3.4.2 Antifields and the kinetic terms for closed
            superstring field theory
-    4 Conclusions and outlook
-    A Conventions
    -    A.1 Superspace conventions in @xmath
    -    A.2 Superspace conventions in @xmath

Introduction

Quantum field theory, i.e. quantum mechanics with the basic observables
living at spacetime points, is the principle underlying our current
understanding of natural phenomena. The incredibly successful Standard
Model explains all the forces of nature, except gravity, in terms of
local symmetry principles.

At the energies we are currently able to test, gravity is well described
by general relativity. However, it is expected that at energies of the
order of the Planck mass @xmath GeV, a quantum description of gravity
will be necessary. The union of gravity with quantum field theory leads
to a nonrenormalizable theory. History of physics suggests that this
should be interpreted as a sign that new physics will appear at higher
energies, comparing for instance to the Fermi theory case.

A natural way to modify quantum mechanics to describe a “quantum
spacetime” is to generalize Heisenberg commutation relations to let the
space coordinates be noncommuting. In a field theory setting, in
principle one could include time in noncommutativity and consider a
quantum spacetime where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be realized in a functional formulation by deforming the
algebra of functions on spacetime, replacing the ordinary, commutative
product with a noncommutative one that, when applied to coordinates
themselves, gives @xmath . The simplest case, with a constant @xmath ,
is related to spacetime translation invariance. The corresponding
(Moyal) product can be uniquely identified by requiring that the
deformed algebra of functions remains associative.

When a field theory is deformed by replacing ordinary products with
Moyal products in the action, vertices in the Feynman rules are
multiplied by a phase factor with a dependence on the momenta, that
generically acts as a regulator. For this reason, spacetime
noncommutativity was first introduced with the hope that it might reduce
the degree of divergence of a given theory [ 1 ] . However, since the
contributions from a certain diagram also include the case where the
phase factor does not depend on loop momenta, but only on external
momenta, this does not work [ 2 ] .

At the moment, we only know one way to consistently cut off the
divergences appearing in a quantum field theory of gravity. This is
string theory [ 3 , 4 ] , where pointlike interactions are replaced by
splitting and joining of one-dimensional objects, so that the
interaction itself does not happen at a certain point in spacetime but
is described by a smooth two-dimensional surface.

String theory provides a consistent quantum theory of gravity. The
number of spacetime dimensions is fixed to ten, the theory is consistent
only in the presence of supersymmetry, relating bosonic and fermionic
degrees of freedom, and leads to gauge groups that include the Standard
Model one. String theories are unique in the sense that there are no
free parameters and no freedom in choosing gauge groups. There is more
than one possible string theory (actually five), but they happen to be
all related to each other by dualities. Therefore, a unique underlying
theory is expected to exist, from which the various string theories can
be obtained as limits in a certain space of parameters.

It is striking that the somehow natural proposal for a quantum spacetime
where Heseinberg commutation relations are generalized to include a
nontrivial coordinate algebra can be obtained from string theory. The
first works in this direction showed that noncommutative tori are
solutions to the problem of compactifying M(atrix) theory [ 5 ] .
Noncommutative field theories were shown to emerge as low energy limits
of open string dynamics in the presence of a constant Neveu-Schwarz
Neveu-Schwarz (NS-NS) background and D-branes (i.e. p-dimensional
manifolds where open string ends are attached) [ 6 , 7 ] . Since the
background selects preferred directions in spacetime, the resulting
effective theory breaks Lorentz invariance [ 8 ] . Therefore,
noncommutative field theory must not be thought of as a fundamental
theory, but as an effective description to be used when certain
backgrounds are present.

The discovery that noncommutative geometry is somehow embedded in string
theory induced a growing interest in the field. Various aspects of
noncommutative field theory, such as renormalization properties [ 9 , 10
] , solitons (see for instance the lectures [ 11 , 12 , 13 ] ) and
instantons [ 14 ] have been investigated. Furthermore, it was shown that
when time is involved in noncommutativity the resulting field theories
display awkward features, such as acausality [ 15 ] and nonunitarity [
16 ] , that spoil the consistency of the theory. However, it was also
shown that these ill-defined noncommutative field theories cannot be
obtained as a low energy limit of string theory [ 16 ] . String
corrections conspire to cancel out the inconsistencies [ 15 , 17 ] .

Applications that are not directly related to string theory have been
considered, for instance a model to describe the quantum Hall effect was
proposed in [ 18 ] , based on noncommutative Chern-Simons theory.
Moreover, a mechanism to drive inflation without an inflaton field was
studied in [ 19 ] , based on noncommutativity of spacetime. Particle
physics phenomenology based on a noncommutative version of the Standard
Model has been studied [ 20 ] and possible experimental tests have been
proposed [ 21 ] . In these applications also noncommutative deformations
that have not yet been shown to arise from string theory have been
considered [ 22 ] . A natural question would be at which energy one
expects to observe effects of noncommutativity. If one considers this as
an effective description in the presence of a background, the energy is
related to the background scale, and therefore cannot be determined a
priori.

As I said, string theory is consistent only in the presence of
supersymmetry. Supersymmetric theories are better described in
superspace formalism [ 23 , 24 , 25 ] , where spacetime is enlarged by
adding fermionic coordinates. Superspace geometry is not flat, torsion
is present. Since noncommutative geometry arises in a string theory
context and strings require supersymmetry, it is compelling to study the
possible deformations of supersymmetric theories. The natural way to do
that is to investigate the possible consistent deformations of
superspace. This I did in my first paper [ 26 ] , in collaboration with
D. Klemm and S. Penati. We found that consistent deformations of
superspace are possible in both Minkowski and Euclidean signatures in
four dimensions. In the Euclidean case more general structures are
allowed because of the different spinor reality conditions.

After the appearance of my paper [ 26 ] , deformed superspaces were
found to emerge in superstring theory [ 27 , 28 , 29 ] . However, to see
this effect, a particular formulation of superstring theory has to be
considered, where all the symmetries of the theory are manifest. This
superPoincaré covariant formulation, found in 2000 by Berkovits [ 30 ] ,
is still “work in progress”. However, it has already proven to be
superior in handling certain string backgrounds (Ramond-Ramond), that
lead to the superspace deformations I found, and to prove general
theorems regarding string amplitudes, like for instance a theorem
stating the “finiteness” of perturbative string theory [ 31 ] . I’ve
been studying this formalism for the superstring and contributed, in [
32 ] , written together with P.A. Grassi, by giving an iterative
procedure to simplify the computation of superstring vertex operators,
that are the main ingredient for the evaluation of superstring
amplitudes. Some applications of our analysis are also discussed in the
paper. For instance, the vertices associated to a R-R field stength with
a linear dependence on the bosonic coordinates have been computed. These
play a role in the study of superspace deformation with a Lie-algebraic
structure such that bosonic coordinates of superspace are obtained as
the anticommutator of the fermionic ones. This can be interpreted by
saying that spacetime has a fermionic substructure [ 33 ] .

Going back to noncommutative field theory, a puzzling aspect is that the
noncommutative generalization of a given ordinary theory is not unique.
A selection principle can be based on trying to preserve the nice
properties of a model in its noncommutative deformation. The symmetry
structure of a theory is its most important characteristic and actually
defines the theory when the field content is given. Therefore,
preserving the symmetry structure of a theory should be the first
criterium to consider when constructing its deformation. This is also
the guiding principle we used in studying deformations of supersymmetric
theories in [ 26 ] .

A very special case is given by systems endowed with an infinite number
of local conserved charges. These systems, known as integrable by
analogy to the case with a finite number of degrees of freedom, display
very special features. The presence of such a strong symmetry structure
underlying the system puts constraints on the dynamics, for instance
causing the S-matrix to be factorized and preventing particle production
processes to occur. Moreover, integrable systems usually display
localized classical solutions, known as solitons, that do not change
shape or velocity after collisions. Therefore, when constructing the
noncommutative generalization of an integrable system, one would like to
preserve both the symmetry structure underlying the system and the
consequences that this has in ordinary geometry. The two-dimensional
case is particularly problematic in noncommutative field theory, because
time must be necessarily involved in noncommutativity and thus it is
expected that acausality and nonunitarity will spoil the consistency of
the theory. One may hope that integrability can cure these
inconsistencies.

I studied the problem of constructing the generalization of
two-dimensional integrable systems by focusing on a very special
example, the sine-Gordon theory, describing the dynamics of a scalar
field governed by an oscillating potential. Integrability is a property
of the equations of motion and in most cases an action generating them
is not known. The sine-Gordon model is one of the cases where an action
is also known. Therefore it is possible to move on to a quantum
description of the model.

The project about the noncommutative sine-Gordon was started by M.T.
Grisaru and S. Penati in [ 34 ] , where they constructed a
noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon system by making use of a
bidifferential calculus approach, so that it was guaranteed that the
system possessed an infinite number of conserved currents. In the
resulting noncommutative model the dynamics of a single, scalar field is
described by two equations. The second equations has the form of a
conservation law and becomes trivial in the noncommutative limit. This
pattern is somehow unavoidable, since it is related to the necessary
extension of @xmath to @xmath in noncommutative geometry [ 35 ] .

Because of the unusual structure of the equations, in [ 34 ] an action
for the model was not found. This was the first goal of my paper [ 36 ]
, written in collaboration with M.T. Grisaru, L. Mazzanti and S. Penati.
There we found an action for the model and studied its tree-level
scattering amplitudes. We discovered that they are plagued by acausality
and that particle production occurs. Therefore this model had to be
discarded and a different one had to be constructed.

In [ 37 ] , in collaboration with O. Lechtenfeld, L. Mazzanti, S. Penati
and A.D. Popov, we proposed another model obtained by a two-step
reduction from selfdual Yang-Mills theory, that proved to possess a
well-defined, causal and factorized S-matrix. Moreover, soliton
solutions of this model were constructed.

The two different noncommutative versions of the sine-Gordon model I
studied differ in the generalization of the oscillating interaction
term. They can both be obtained by dimensional reduction from
noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills equations, with a different
parametrization of the gauge group. The second model is obtained by
reducing @xmath to its @xmath subgroup, which seems the most natural
choice and indeed leads to a successful integrable theory.

This thesis contains four chapters. In the first one, I will give an
introduction to Moyal deformation of bosonic spacetime. I will review
the main results in noncommutative field theory and in particular I will
discuss the problems arising when time is involved in noncommutativity.
I will summarize Kontsevich results about coordinate-dependent
noncommutativity. I will then move on to supersymmetric theories,
discuss the results I obtained in [ 26 ] concerning superspace
non(anti)commutative deformations in four dimensions and their relation
with following works. In the rest of the chapter I will review the
string theory results concerning the low energy description of D-brane
dynamics in terms of non(anti)commutative field theory. In particular I
will consider the bosonic, RNS, GS and @xmath strings in the presence of
constant NS-NS backgrounds, the covariant superstring compactified on a
Calabi-Yau three-fold in the presence of a R-R selfdual field strength
and the generalization to the uncompactified case. Finally, I will
discuss the generalization to nonconstant NS-NS backgrounds, leading to
Kontsevich deformations, and I will speculate about a possible similar
analysis of nonconstant R-R backgrounds.

In the second chapter, I will first give an introduction to selected
topics concerning two-dimensional integrable systems, such as their
derivation from zero curvature conditions for a bidifferential calculus,
the possibility of obtaining them as dimensional reductions from
selfdual Yang-Mills equations, the factorization of the S-matrix and the
presence of solitons solutions. I will only consider the sine-Gordon
model as an example. Then I will introduce the first attempt to
construct an integrable noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon model.
I will report my results in [ 36 ] , concerning the construction of an
action for the model and the computation of tree-level scattering
amplitudes, that proved to be nonfactorized and acausal. Finally, I will
discuss the results I obtained in [ 37 ] , regarding the construction of
a different noncommutative generalization of the sine-Gordon model that
proved to possess all the nice properties one expects from a
two-dimensional integrable theory, such as factorization of the
S-matrix.

In the third chapter, I will first review the pure spinor approach to
superstring theory. In particular, I will focus on the construction of
open and closed superstring vertex operators in this formalism. I will
then present the results I obtained in [ 32 ] , where I constructed an
iterative procedure to compute the vertices. I will then discuss an
application of this analysis, concerning the computation of the vertex
operators for nonconstant R-R field strengths, that are expected to be
related to coordinate-dependent superspace deformations. In particular,
I will show how to compute vertices for a R-R field strength that is
linear in the bosonic spacetime coordinates and is expected to be
associated to a Lie algebraic superspace deformation providing a
fermionic substructure for bosonic coordinates.

In the fourth chapter I will summarize my results and discuss open
problems and possible applications.

## Chapter 1 An introduction to non(anti)commutative geometry and
superstring theory

### 1.1 A brief introduction to noncommutative and non(anti)commutative
field theory

#### 1.1.1 The Moyal product

##### Weyl transform definition

Noncommutative geometry deals with manifolds whose coordinates do not
commute. This kind of manifold appeared in physics much before
noncommutative geometry itself was born as a branch of mathematics [ 38
] . A well-known example is quantum phase space. This is a manifold
described by @xmath operator coordinates @xmath ,…, @xmath , @xmath ,…,
@xmath , satisfying nontrivial commutation relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is expected that the geometric nature of spacetime will be modified
at very short distances. The physical idea underlying modern
noncommutative geometry is that a quantum spacetime will be uncovered
then, where the usual trivial commutation relations among coordinates
are no longer valid and noncommutativity emerges as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . In the limit @xmath ordinary commutative geometry must be
recovered. Coordinate algebra ( 1.3 ) gives rise to the spacetime
uncertainty relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In ( 1.3 ) the possibility is left open that time may be involved in
noncommutativity. In this case ( 1.3 ) would not be simply a
generalization of the quantum mechanical commutation relations ( 1.2 )
and it is somehow expected that it may clash with quantum mechanics. For
a while I will not worry about this, I will reconsider the case of
noncommuting time later on.

The connection between noncommutative geometry and quantum mechanics is
easily seen when the latter is discussed in the Weyl formalism. In this
formalism an explicit map between functions @xmath of the phase space
variables @xmath , @xmath and corresponding operators @xmath is
constructed, where @xmath , @xmath are noncommuting operators
corresponding to classical variables @xmath , @xmath .
I will briefly discuss this formalism, in the case of two variables
@xmath , @xmath , with corresponding operators satisfying @xmath with
constant @xmath . After this discussion the natural embedding of
noncommutative geometry in quantum mechanics will be clear to the reader
[ 13 ] .

On “phase space” described by coordinates @xmath let us consider a
function @xmath . Given its Fourier transform

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can define an operator @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Making use of Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula [ 39 ] we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The map @xmath defines the Weyl-Moyal correspondence between functions
on phase space and operators.

Now we would like to determine which function corresponds to the
operator @xmath . We know that in general @xmath , so we expect some
noncommutative deformation of the ordinary product to arise by the
Weyl-Moyal correspondence.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.9)
     @xmath      (1.10)
                 (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

By making the change of variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us define Moyal product between two functions @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our simple two-dimensional case it becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In momentum space we can obtain the following formula for the Fourier
transform of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this and ( 1.13 ) it is clear that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

So Moyal product ( 1.14 ) naturally emerges in the context of quantum
mechanics, when the latter is expressed in the Weyl-Moyal formalism. It
is the functional product corresponding to operator product between
quantum observables. Applying ( 1.14 ) to the special case @xmath ,
@xmath , we obtain the coordinate algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the quantum commutation relations we began with are reproduced
in the functional formalism as @xmath commutators.

##### Translation covariance and associativity as a definition

Moyal product ( 1.14 ) can also be obtained from a general discussion
concerning the algebraic requirement of associativity and the geometric
requirement of covariance with respect to translations. These two
properties uniquely determine Moyal product. Before I discuss this, I
will introduce the general ideas concerning a field called deformation
quantization and its connections with modern noncommutative geometry.

Ordinary geometry is based on the concept of point. This is not true
anymore for noncommutative geometry, since a noncommutative manifold is
completely defined in terms of the properties of the algebra of
functions on it [ 40 ] . In ordinary geometry many sets of points can be
completely described when the algebra @xmath of functions on them with
values in @xmath or @xmath is known. A finite dimensional vector space
@xmath is a familiar example of this, since the space of functions
@xmath (or @xmath ) is the dual space @xmath , which is isomorphic to
@xmath . In this case studying the algebra of functions on the manifold
or the manifold itself is the same thing.

We can consider the more general case of a @xmath algebra @xmath , i.e.
an algebra endowed with a norm and an involution. Every @xmath algebra
is isomorphic to the algebra @xmath of complex continuos functions on a
certain compact space @xmath . When @xmath is commutative we can go back
to the space @xmath , that can be described as a set of points in
ordinary geometry. When @xmath is noncommutative, instead, going back to
the space @xmath can be very complicated and in some cases impossible.
However, this is irrelevant for the purpose of studying a physical
theory, since all the needed information are encoded in @xmath .

A recipe to obtain a theory on noncommutative space from a given one on
ordinary space is the following. Consider the algebra of functions with
values in R (or C), deform its product to a new, noncommutative one,
that I will call @xmath , defined in terms of a parameter @xmath . In
the limit @xmath one must recover ordinary, commutative case. Now
rewrite the old theory replacing all ordinary products with @xmath
products, and think of the new theory as a deformation of the ordinary
one, defined on noncommutative space. This I will call the natural
deformation of a theory. It is not the only possible definition of a
noncommutative generalization of an ordinary theory and I will discuss
this point in more detail in section 1.1.3.

Given two functions @xmath , @xmath , I will denote their ordinary,
commutative product as @xmath . I will deform it in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a bilinear operator in the two functions @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath is the parameter governing noncommutativity. The example of
quantum phase space discussed before suggests a good candidate for the
bilinear operator @xmath . When the manifold we are considering is
endowed with a Poisson structure @xmath , we will choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

(The last equality is just to present a different notation. It will be
preferred since it is more suitable to superspace extension, where the
presence of fermionic indices makes different orderings inequivalent).

In the 70’s the deformation of Poisson manifolds was studied in a
completely different context. In the paper by Bayen et al. [ 41 ] a
different approach to quantization was proposed. Quantization had to be
understood as a deformation of the algebraic structure of functions and
not as a radical change in the nature of physical observables. Moyal
product @xmath was then introduced with the goal of reinterpreting
quantum mechanics in the context of algebraic deformations. In
particular, in [ 41 ] an analysis of the possible noncommutative but
associative products that can be obtained as a perturbative series in
the parameter @xmath was performed. The results obtained there are very
interesting when they are reread in the light of the new ideas of
noncommutative geometry.

Consider a manifold @xmath endowed with a Poisson structure @xmath ,
where a set of derivatives @xmath is defined such that @xmath . We will
also assume that this set of derivatives is torsion free and without
curvature. We define a generic product @xmath on @xmath by the smooth
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can show that the exponential function is the only possible choice
for @xmath leading to an associative product, i. e. satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

To show this one imposes ( 1.24 ), writing every @xmath product
explicitly as in ( 1.22 , 1.23 ). Order by order in @xmath one gets
constraints on the coefficients @xmath . The proof makes a strong use of
the assumptions on the derivative @xmath , since one needs to exchange
derivatives and to pass the Poisson tensor @xmath through derivatives
without getting extra terms from commutators. Finally one obtains that (
1.24 ) is satisfied if and only if @xmath and this uniquely identifies
the function @xmath with the exponential.

Summarizing, under the assumptions made for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
the unique associative @xmath product has the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

(modulo a constant overall factor and linear changes of variables). If
at least one of the three hypotesis is not satisfied ( @xmath constant
with respect to @xmath , @xmath without torsion and curvature), then
Moyal product is not associative anymore. This can be easily seen by
considering second and third order terms in @xmath .
Once the product @xmath is known, the commutation relations among
coordinates are determined by considering the special case of two
coordinates themselves as functions @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is
flat spacetime described by coordinates @xmath and ordinary derivatives,
we can take as a Poisson structure the one associated to a constant
antisymmetric matrix @xmath . In this case we obtain the coordinate
algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Usually in the definition of the commutator an @xmath is factorized so
that the matrix @xmath is hermitian. Moreover, the parameter @xmath is
sometimes absorbed into the definition of the matrix @xmath .

In flat spacetime the choice of a constant @xmath is deeply related to
translation invariance. In fact, if we want to deform a theory with this
symmetry, the only deformation of the coordinate algebra that preserves
it is the one associated to a constant symplectic matrix.

Consider the commutation relations @xmath that we would like to
implement in a certain theory originally defined in terms of commuting
coordinates @xmath . Suppose the original theory to be symmetric with
respect to the transformation @xmath . For the symmetry to be preserved
in the deformed theory the new coordinate algebra must be invariant with
respect to that trasformation. When we say invariant we mean that the
functional dependence on @xmath variable must not change under the
transformation, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the matrix @xmath only transforms punctually and does not
become a new matrix @xmath . The matrix @xmath is arbitrarily chosen,
defines the noncommutative manifold and must be same for all @xmath on
the manifold.

Again, let us consider the case of flat spacetime. We would like to
deform a Poincaré invariant theory. We will first consider translations
@xmath to see which conditions must be imposed on the matrix @xmath for
the deformed algebra not to break this symmetry.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

So @xmath must satisfy the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath must be a local function, it has to be constant. Therefore,
in flat spacetime the only nontrivial deformation preserving translation
invariance is the one with constant commutators.

Now we will consider Lorentz invariance [ 8 ] . Two different kinds of
Lorentz transformations can be considered, the ones where the observer
moves while the particle stands still (“observer” Lorentz
transformations) and the ones where the particle is boosted or rotated
and the observer is fixed (“particle” Lorentz transformations). In the
first case it is sufficient for the physics of the system not to change
that the matrix @xmath transforms covariantly. In the second case
instead the matrix @xmath must not transform, since the coordinate
algebra must remain unaltered while moving from @xmath to @xmath . Thus
in this case physics changes under the transformation and the symmetry
is broken.

Let us explicitly consider the “particle” Lorentz transformation @xmath
. It happens that

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.30)
  -- -- -- --------

We conclude that noncommutative theories in @xmath dimensions cannot
preserve “particle” Lorentz transformation, while “observer” Lorentz
transformation are not broken by the deformation. An exception to this
general rule is the two-dimensional case, where every antisymmetric
matrix is a number times the Ricci tensor @xmath , which is Lorentz
invariant.

In most papers concerning noncommutative field theory the following
choice is made

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Time is “isolated” with respect to spacial directions and Lorentz
symmetry is manifestly broken. As anticipated in the beginning of this
section, time-space noncommutativity is likely to cause a breakdown of
the usual framework of quantum mechanics. Actually, it has been shown
that time-space noncommutativity is responsible for unitarity [ 16 ] and
causality [ 15 ] problems in noncommutative field theory (see section
1.1.2). To avoid this, the restriction ( 1.31 ) is applied in most work
concerning noncommutative field theory.

Finally I would like to point out that the discussion about symmetries I
have presented here is based on the assumption that the symmetry group
is undeformed (i.e. it is a classical symmetry group and not a quantum
group). This means that parameters of symmetry transformations are
commuting. This is not the only possible way to proceed. There is a
branch of mathematics called Quantum Algebra that studies the
deformation of symmetry groups. An interesting example is the @xmath
-deformation of Minkowski space [ 42 ] , where parameter and coordinate
algebras have an identical structure. Since Minkowski spacetime can be
defined as the quotient between Poincaré and Lorentz groups, it may seem
natural to take also into consideration deformations of Minkowski space
that are accompanied by an analogous deformation in the translation
symmetry group.

I briefly summarize the results obtained, in the special case @xmath
(the extension to Minkowski signature is straightforward). The only
product @xmath defined as in ( 1.19 , 1.20 ) that is associative and
that preserves translation invariance is Moyal product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

that generates the coordinate algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have seen before, Moyal product is also naturally obtained in
quantum mechanics through the Weyl-Moyal correspondence defined between
quantum operators and functions on “phase-space”.

##### Properties of Moyal product

Here I will summarize some useful properties of Moyal product @xmath .
Associativity and covariance with respect to translations have been
already discussed.

1.  The @xmath product between exponential functions reflects from the
    functional point of view the well-known Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff
    formula

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.34)
         @xmath      (1.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  By making use of the previous formula we can obtain the
    representation of @xmath in momentum space

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.  Commutativity is recovered under integration

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

    since all the corrections in ( 1.32 ) with respect to the ordinary
    product are total derivatives, because of the antisymmetry of @xmath
    .

4.  A cyclicity property can be deduced from the previous relation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

5.  Finally, @xmath has the following behavior with respect to complex
    conjugation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    because of the antisymmetry of @xmath . Clearly @xmath is real when
    @xmath is real, but when both @xmath and @xmath are real, @xmath is
    generally complex.

#### 1.1.2 The natural Moyal deformation of a field theory

In this section I will discuss the main properties of noncommutative
field theories that are obtained from ordinary ones by replacing
ordinary products with Moyal @xmath products ( 1.32 ) in the action.
This is what I will call the natural deformation of a given field
theory. I will first discuss the simple case of scalar field theory with
@xmath interaction [ 9 ] . This is chosen for simplicity and most of the
features we will find in this case can be easily generalized to more
complicated situations. I will then move to gauge theories, to see how
gauge invariance is modified in noncommutative space. In this first two
subsections I will only take into consideration the restricted case (
1.31 ). In the last subsection I will instead discuss unitarity and
causality problems arising when time is involved in noncommutativity.

##### A simple example: The scalar @xmath theory

Let us consider the natural noncommutative deformation of a given
ordinary field theory, for instance the scalar theory with @xmath
interaction. We have already seen that we can obtain the deformed theory
by replacing ordinary products with @xmath products everywhere in the
action. We choose Moyal product because we want to preserve translation
invariance in the deformed theory and we want associativity. The action
for the noncommutative theory is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Property ( 1.37 ) implies that the quadratic part of the action does not
receive corrections from the star products. Only the interaction term is
modified, so the free theory is the same as the ordinary one. The
noncommutative theory is built on the same Fock space as the commutative
one, but it has different interactions. This feature is common to all
theories obtained as deformation of ordinary ones by implementing Moyal
product, since it just relies on property ( 1.37 ).

We can easily deduce Feynman rules from ( 1.36 ). Introducing the
Fourier components @xmath of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
     @xmath      (1.43)
     @xmath      (1.44)
                 (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We conclude that the only difference between the natural deformation of
a field theory and the field theory itself is a phase factor depending
on momenta and noncommutativity parameter @xmath , appearing in front of
every vertex in the Feynman rules. This procedure can be clearly
generalized to other field theories.

Now I’m going to discuss how this phases modify perturbation theory, in
particular ultraviolet behaviour and renormalization. Since the phases
appearing in front of vertices depend on the momenta, when we compute
the contribution coming from a certain diagram we have to distinguish
between two different situations. If the phase is only depending on
external momenta, it does not affect loop integrations and thus it does
not modify the degree of divergence. This case we will call planar.
Instead, when the phase factor depends on internal, loop momenta, it
generally modifies the ultraviolet behavior of the diagram. This case we
will call nonplanar. So a single diagram in the ordinary theory
decomposes in various planar and nonplanar contributions, depending on
the ordering of momenta in the vertices.

A nice feature of natural Moyal deformations of ordinary field theories
is that nonplanar graphs always display a better ultraviolet behavior
with respect to the corresponding planar ones, since the phase acts as a
regulator. So one can say that such deformation of a renormalizable
theory will also be renormalizable. It will display the same degree of
divergence in planar diagrams and a lower degree of divergence in
nonplanar ones [ 2 ] . A general discussion of renormalizability
properties of noncommutative field theory can be found in [ 10 ] .

Now I would like to discuss a typical feature of noncommutative field
theories called UV/IR mixing. To this purpose I will present the result
of the 1-loop computation for the renormalized two-point function @xmath
in the case of @xmath theory. I will not give any detail about the
computation. The interested reader should refer to [ 9 ] .

Let @xmath be the coupling constant of the theory, @xmath the
ultraviolet cutoff, @xmath the renormalized mass, @xmath the incoming
momentum. Moreover we will define @xmath , where @xmath is the
noncommutativity matrix characterizing the theory.
One finds that the renormalized @xmath in the limit @xmath takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we then take the limit @xmath we observe that an infrared divergence
appears when we take @xmath . If we instead take the limit @xmath first,
we discover that the cutoff does not appear explicitly anymore and the
two-point function diverges for @xmath . So we observe an interesting
connection between the UV and IR behaviors in the extra terms appearing
in the two-point function because of noncommutativity. This is known in
the literature as UV/IR mixing.

Finally, we will consider the limit @xmath . In this limit we expect to
obtain the standard result for the renormalized @xmath of ordinary
@xmath theory. We have already discussed the fact that a diagram in the
ordinary theory splits in planar and nonplanar parts in the
noncommutative theory. In ( 1.46 ) the subtraction made to obtain the
renormalized mass only took into consideration the divergences coming
from the planar graphs. The last two terms represent the contribution
coming from nonplanar diagrams. In the limit @xmath one may verify that
by adding to the planar contributions the nonplanar ones in the
computation of the renormalized mass, one obtains the well-known result
for ordinary @xmath .

##### Gauge theories

Up to now I have considered scalar theory for simplicity. Now I would
like to discuss Yang-Mills theories. In ordinary geometry these theories
are constructed by promoting a global invariance to a local one. In
general the gauge group is nonabelian.

First of all a remark is needed regarding the choice of the gauge group.
In noncommutative geometry described by Moyal product it is easy to show
that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are not closed any more and the same is
valid for the corresponding Lie algebras [ 35 ] . This is due to the
fact that a nontrivial trace part appears in the product of two
traceless matrices. So we will consider @xmath gauge theory as our
example ¹ ¹ 1 The cases @xmath , @xmath seem to allowed from the subtle
string theory discussion in [ 43 ] .

The ordinary gauge theory is described by an @xmath hermitian matrix of
vectors, @xmath . This transforms as follows under the local gauge
symmetry with parameter @xmath (also an @xmath matrix)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field strength @xmath and its transformation law are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pure gauge action is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the trace acts on gauge indices and the integral is taken over
spacetime variables. The invariance of ( 1.50 ) under ( 1.49 ) follows
from cyclicity of the trace.

We are going to construct the natural Moyal deformation of the theory by
substituting ordinary products with @xmath products in the action. This
time we have matrix-valued fields, so the product between two of them
will be the tensor product between @xmath and the matrix product. We
obtain the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we also substitute ordinary products with Moyal products in the gauge
transformation and definition of the field strength

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.52)
     @xmath      (1.53)
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that the gauge transformation is still a symmetry of the action.
In the noncommutative case the invariance of ( 1.51 ) under ( 1.54 ) is
more subtle, though. Cyclicity of the trace is valid for ordinary matrix
product, but not for the tensor product of the latter with @xmath .
However, the cyclicity property of Moyal product under integral ( 1.38 )
can be extended to the case of matrix-valued fields and used to prove
the invariance of the action. In the limit @xmath one recovers the
ordinary theory.

It is very important to observe that while in the ordinary case @xmath
corresponds to an abelian theory with field strength and transformation
laws

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.55)
     @xmath      (1.56)
     @xmath      (1.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the noncommutative case the commutator of two gauge transformations
with parameters @xmath and @xmath is the gauge transformation with
parameter @xmath [ 7 ] . This is nontrivial even in the case @xmath , so
this is a nonabelian theory and its features perfectly mimic the case
with @xmath .

##### Unitarity and causality problems

As anticipated, problems arise when time-space noncommutativity is
considered. The structure of Moyal product ( 1.32 ) leads to terms in
the action with an infinite number of derivatives of fields. This
renders a Moyal-deformed field theory non local. In particular, when
time is involved in noncommutativity, nonlocality in time appears and
the usual framework of quantum mechanics breaks down.

In [ 16 ] unitarity of noncommutative field theory with time-space
noncommutativity has been studied. Scalar field theory deformed with
time-space noncommutativity has been considered and several one loop
amplitudes have been shown not to be unitary. In particular, the two
point function in noncommutative @xmath theory has been shown not to
satisfy the usual cutting rules when @xmath , while these rules are
satisfied when only spatial noncommutativity is present. Moreover,
@xmath scattering in noncommutative @xmath has been considered and again
unitarity of the S-matrix is satisfied only when @xmath .

Recently in a series of papers [ 44 ] a different approach to
perturbative noncommutative field theories with a noncommuting time
variable has been proposed. It has been argued that time-ordering is
nontrivial when time is involved in noncommutativity and so a new
prescription for the computation of Green functions must be given. This
is different with respect to the naive Feynman rules obtained by
multiplying the usual vertices by a phase factor (see ( 1.45 )). It has
been shown that in this framework unitarity is preserved when the
lagrangian of the theory is hermitian.

In [ 15 ] causality of scattering processes in noncommutative field
theory with time-space noncommutativity has been investigated. In
particular, @xmath tree-level scattering amplitudes for massless scalars
with @xmath interaction in a two-dimensional noncommutative spacetime
have been computer there. The ordinary result for the @xmath amplitude
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the coupling constant of the theory. In the
noncommutative case with @xmath , because of the phases appearing in
front of the vertices, one obtains instead

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the two-momenta of the particles satisfying the
conservation law @xmath (all momenta are incoming) and the wedge product
is defined as @xmath . In the center of mass frame ( 1.59 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given an incoming gaussian wave packet

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

the outgoing wave packet, in the limit @xmath , @xmath , is expressed as
follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents a packet concentrated at @xmath . So the
incoming wave-packet, in the special high energy limit considered,
splits into three parts, one concentrated at @xmath , one at @xmath and
one at @xmath . All three propagate towards @xmath .

In the center of mass frame scattering can be seen as bouncing on a
wall. The first packet is an advanced one, which means that it leaves
the wall much before the arrival of the incoming packet. The third term
instead corresponds to a delayed wave, appearing well after the arrival
of the incoming packet. These two terms suggest an interpretation of the
noncommutative particle as a rigid rod. Both terms originate from the
phase factor due to noncommutativity. The second term is not
interesting, since it is neither significantly delayed or advanced.

The advance by itself is not an indication of acausality. A
nonrelativistic example of this is the reflection of a rigid rod of
length L oriented along the direction of motion. The center of mass of
the rod appears to reflect before reaching the wall, but the event is
not acausal. However, there is a problem when both causality and Lorentz
invariance are considered. In our case the advance increases with
energy, therefore the rod seems to expand instead of Lorentz-contract at
growing energies. This bizarre behavior is a sign of the inconsistency
of a field theory with time-space noncommutativity.

When only space-space noncommutativity is considered (in a 2+1
dimensional field theory), the effect of the phase in front of the
vertices is to let outgoing scattered waves originate from the diplaced
position @xmath . This again suggests the interpretation of the incident
particles as extended rods of size @xmath , but orthogonally oriented
with respect to their momentum. In this case there is no violation of
causality.

In [ 17 ] it has been shown that in noncommutative field theories with
time-space noncommutativity tachyonic particles are produced. This gives
a physical interpretation of the perturbative breakdown of unitarity.
Moreover, in this paper a quantitative study of various locality and
causality properties of noncommutative field theories at the quantum
level has been performed.

In collaboration with M.T. Grisaru, O. Lechtenfeld, L. Mazzanti, S.
Penati and A. Popov I have also addressed the problem of acausality in
noncommutative field theory in [ 36 , 37 ] . We have conjectured that in
a noncommutative two-dimensional field theory that is classically
integrable, i.e. it has an infinite number of conserved charges,
acausality may disappear. In [ 37 ] we have shown that this is indeed
the case for the noncommutative integrable sine-Gordon model, whose
S-matrix is factorized, as expected for an integrable system, and
causal. These results will be discussed in detail in chapter 2.
The noncommutative generalization of the sine-Gordon system
characterized by a well-defined S-matrix is not the natural one, though.
In the next section I will begin to explore some possible noncommutative
versions of the scalar theory that differ from the natural one
considered in this section.

In the last part of section 1.2.1 I will discuss time-space
noncommutativity from the string theory point of view. There we will see
that the ill-defined field theories with time-space noncommutativity do
not arise as consistent limits of string theory. However, there exists a
limit where one obtains a theory of open strings living in a
noncommutative spacetime (NCOS).

#### 1.1.3 Other possible deformations: The free scalar field theory
example

Up to now I have considered the natural deformation of a given field
theory, obtained by simply replacing ordinary products with @xmath
products everywhere in the action (and in the definitions of the field
strength and gauge transformations in the Yang-Mills case). I have
discussed some of the peculiar properties of noncommutative field
theories obtained in such a way and noted that some of these are not
welcome in a reasonable field theory.

The natural deformation is not the only way to proceed. Given an
ordinary field theory we can more generally define a noncommutative
deformation of it as a theory written in terms of @xmath products that
reproduces the original commutative theory in the limit @xmath . Of
course the natural deformation is included in this definition, but
different deformations can be constructed, just by adding new terms that
vanish in the limit @xmath .

I would like to discuss a very simple example, the two-dimensional free
massless scalar field theory. We have previously noted that quadratic
terms in the action are not modified by Moyal product. So the natural
deformation of a free scalar field theory is trivial. There are more
possible deformations, though, that are highly nontrivial and very
interesting indeed.

In ordinary geometry we can consider the element @xmath of a nonabelian
group @xmath . With this we can construct the principal chiral model
action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding equation of motion is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of the abelian group @xmath we can parametrize @xmath and
see that the action reduces to the free massless scalar field action. In
the nonabelian case instead the model is nontrivial.

It is possible to add to the principal chiral action a new term, called
Wess-Zumino (WZ) term, that is written in terms of a commuting parameter
@xmath . The resulting theory is called Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) [ 45 ]
model and its action in a @xmath signature is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.65)
                 (1.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the homotopy path @xmath such that @xmath ,
@xmath . The variation of the WZ term is a total derivative in @xmath ,
so the equations of motion obtained from this action are truly
two-dimensional and given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath and @xmath . For an abelian @xmath group
the WZ term vanishes and the WZW model reduces to the free massless
scalar theory.

We have previously observed that in noncommutative geometry the @xmath
group is no longer abelian. Parametrizing the element of noncommutative
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can define noncommutative @xmath principal chiral and WZW models [ 46
] , just substituting @xmath products everywhere in the given actions
and considering @xmath in the noncommutative @xmath group. Both models
reduce to the free massless scalar theory in the commutative limit, so
they are nontrivial noncommutative generalizations of it.

Since many possible noncommutative generalizations of a single ordinary
field theory can be constructed, it is natural to wonder whether one of
these may be “better” than the others so that it could be chosen as
“the” noncommutative version of the original theory.

First of all, criteria should be given to decide whether one
generalization is better than the other. There are a certain number of
properties that render a field theory a “good” theory. For instance
symmetries, classical integrability, causality, unitarity,
renormalizability, quantum integrability, absence of anomalies,
dualities are properties that, when present in the ordinary theory, we
would like to preserve in its noncommutative version. So a good criteria
could be to find a deformation that preserves the good properties of the
ordinary theory, or some of them at least.

The case of a free scalar field theory is very simple and cannot give us
any hint. However, it is possible to add a potential term to the scalar
theory to obtain an interacting theory enjoying nice properties. In my
papers [ 36 , 37 ] , in collaboration with M. Grisaru, O. Lechtenfeld,
L. Mazzanti, S. Penati and A. Popov, I have studied the possible
generalizations of a very special scalar theory, the sine-Gordon system,
describing a scalar field autointeracting by an oscillating potential.
As will be explained in detail in chapter 2, from our analysis of
noncommutative sine-Gordon the WZW-like generalization of the kinetic
term for scalar fields seems to be preferred. This agrees with
bosonization considerations in [ 47 , 48 ] .

#### 1.1.4 The Kontsevich product

In section 1.1.1 we have seen that, in a Poisson manifold with a
derivative without torsion and curvature, such that @xmath ,the only
associative product is Moyal @xmath ( 1.32 ). If one of the three
assumptions is not verified, then this product is no longer associative.
Moreover, we have noticed that in flat spacetime with ordinary
derivatives the assumption of constant @xmath is a restriction needed
for the noncommutative deformation of a translation invariant theory to
preserve this property.

In this section I would like to consider more general situations, where
spacetime may be curved and translations may not be a symmetry anymore.
In particular, as I will show in detail in section 1.2.1, noncommutative
geometry naturally emerges in the context of string theory, that is
naturally embedded in curved backgrounds. Therefore, spacetimes with
torsion and curvature should be considered. Different symmetries
underlying the theory may require Poisson structures @xmath with a
particular dependence on the coordinates. For this reasons it is
interesting to consider the case when the Poisson structure @xmath is
not constant with respect to a certain set of derivatives. One may think
about relaxing the other two constraints regarding the set of
derivatives chosen. Actually, at least in some cases it is possible to
rewrite a Poisson structure with nonflat derivatives and a covariantly
constant Poisson tensor in terms of a nonconstant Poisson tensor and
flat derivatives. The superspace case we will study in the next section
is an example of this.

M. Kontsevich in [ 49 ] generalized the results of Bayen et al. to the
case where derivatives @xmath are without torsion and curvature but the
Poisson structure is not covariantly constant @xmath . In this case
Moyal product ( 1.32 ) is not associative anymore. However, it is
possible to modify Moyal product order by order in the deformation
parameter @xmath to obtain associativity.

Let @xmath be a Poisson manifold, with coordinates @xmath and flat
derivatives @xmath . Let @xmath be the Poisson structure of this
manifold, written in terms of the chosen coordinates as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

First of all we recall that the definition of a Poisson structure
requires associativity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is completely equivalent to the validity of Jacobi identity for the
coordinate algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath is constant, this requirement is trivially satisfied and
does not give any further constraint on the matrix @xmath . When a
general coordinate dependence is allowed, associativity constrains the
functional dependence of the matrix. When @xmath is invertible, i.e. it
exists @xmath satisfying @xmath , ( 1.70 ) can easily be rewritten in
terms of the vanishing of the three-form @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now consider Moyal product ( 1.32 ), expanded up to second order
in the parameter @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.73)
                 (1.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then evaluate the quantity @xmath up to second order in @xmath (note
that associativity is trivially satisfied at first order):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

So nonvanishing terms arise, because of the @xmath dependence of the
Poisson structure. Kontsevich observed that once the trilinear
dependence on the functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is factorized, one
obtains terms with an identical structure with respect to the ones
emerging in the associativity equation for @xmath ( 1.70 ). If one could
modify the definition of the product @xmath ( 1.74 ) in such a way to
obtain exactly the quantity that is constrained to be zero in ( 1.70 ),
one would obtain a product associative up to order @xmath .

We have to add new terms of order @xmath , since associativity is
trivially satisfied at first order. Therefore let us define a new
product @xmath by adding to @xmath a new term of order @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (1.78)
                          @xmath   
                                   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is a coefficient to be determined in such a way that @xmath
is proportional to the constraint ( 1.70 ). One obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The product @xmath that we have defined up to second order in @xmath is
associative if and only if the Jacobi identity for the coordinate
algebra ( 1.71 ) is satisfied. Kontsevich showed that order by order in
@xmath it is always possible to modify Moyal product @xmath in order to
make extra terms vanish when the Jacobi identity for the coordinates is
valid. So Kontsevich @xmath product is uniquely defined at any order in
the deformation parameter @xmath by the requirement of associativity.

#### 1.1.5 Deforming superspace

Up to now, we have only considered noncommutativity of bosonic
coordinates, in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is antisymmetric. Since, as it will be explained in section
2, noncommutative field theories emerge naturally in the context of
string theory and string theory is only consistent in the presence of
supersymmetry, it is natural to consider the problem of deforming a
supersymmetric theory.

It is well-known that the natural setting for discussing supersymmetric
theories is a nontrivial extension of bosonic space, known as
superspace, where bosonic coordinates @xmath are accompanied by
fermionic ones, that I will generally denote with @xmath . So it seems
natural and compelling to ask what happens if we deform also the
anticommutators between fermionic coordinates of superspace. Exactly as
in the bosonic case discussed before, we would like the deformation to
preserve the symmetries of our original theory, described by the group
of supertranslations. Moreover, we would like the deformed algebra to be
associative. In the bosonic case we have seen that this two properties
in flat space were identifying Moyal product.

In collaboration with D. Klemm and S. Penati, I have addressed the
problem of deforming superspace in [ 26 ] . First steps had been taken
in this direction before the appearance of this paper. Nonvanishing
anticommutators of fermionic coordinates have been considered in [ 33 ]
in the context of a possible fermionic substructure of spacetime. In [
50 ] , quantum deformations of the Poincaré supergroup were considered.
In a modern noncommutative geometry context, trivial superspace
deformation of supersymmetric field theories have been analysed, where
only the bosonic sector of the coordinate algebra is modified [ 51 ] .
In [ 52 ] , a Moyal-like deformation of @xmath @xmath superspace was
proposed involving fermionic coordinates, that is associative and
covariant with respect to supersymmetry, but does not preserve the
complex conjugation rules that characterize Majorana-Weyl spinors in
four dimensions. In this paper it was also shown that in general the set
of chiral superfields is not closed under star products that involve
fermionic coordinates. I will discuss the results in [ 52 ] in detail in
the second part of this section.

In [ 26 ] we were mainly concerned with the conditions imposed on the
possible deformations of superspace by requirements such as covariance
under classical translations and supertranslations, Jacobi identities,
associativity of the star product and closure of the set of chiral
superfields under the star product, but we wanted superspace conjugation
relations to be still valid in the deformation. The motivation for this
requirement relies in the fact that in a theory with @xmath
supersymmetries formulated in superspace, the number of fermionic
degrees of freedom is @xmath times the bosonic one. As I will show in
detail, by relaxing spinor conjugation relations in the deformation, one
in fact does not preserve the number of supersymmetries.

The main results in [ 26 ] are that it is possible to fulfill all the
requirements in a @xmath @xmath Minkowski superspace, even if the
contraints imposed on the supercoordinate algebra are strong and only
@xmath and @xmath can be turned on. Moreover, in the same paper we have
shown that euclidean signature is less restrictive and allows for a
nonanticommutative superspace with @xmath different from zero. The
results obtained in my paper will be discussed in section 1.1.6.

Since then a lot of progress has been done in understanding superspace
deformations. Non(anti)commutative superspaces have been shown to emerge
in a superstring theory context, in the presence of Ramond-Ramond (RR)
backgrounds [ 27 , 28 , 29 , 53 ] . I will discuss these results in
section 1.2.4. Furthermore, in the paper by N. Seiberg [ 28 ] , a
deformed superspace that only preserves @xmath supersymmetric of the
original @xmath has been introduced. I will review the properties of
this deformation in section 1.1.7 and compare with the ones obtained in
my paper. Many deformations of superspace field theories have been
studied and their quantum properties have been discussed. I will give a
brief summary of the main results obtained in the second part of section
1.1.7.

I will not give an introduction to supersymmetry and its superspace
formulation. For an introduction to this topics, I suggest the books [
23 , 24 ] and the review paper [ 25 ] .

##### The Ferrara-Lledò proposal

In [ 52 ] the authors consider the problem of generalizing Moyal product
( 1.32 ) to @xmath @xmath superspace. This is described by the set of
superspace coordinates @xmath , where @xmath are four real bosonic
coordinates and @xmath , @xmath are two–component complex Weyl fermions.
The conjugation rule @xmath follows from the requirement to have a four
component Majorana fermion (we use conventions of Superspace [ 24 ] ).
In the standard (anti)commutative superspace the algebra of the
coordinates is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is trivially covariant under the superPoincaré group. The
subgroup of the classical (super)translations (spacetime translations
and supersymmetry transformations)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

is generated by two complex charges @xmath ( @xmath ) and the
four–momentum @xmath subjected to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Representations of supersymmetry are given by superfields @xmath whose
components are obtained by expanding @xmath in powers of the spinorial
coordinates. The set of superfields is closed under the standard product
of functions. The product of two superfields is (anti)commutative,
@xmath , and associative, @xmath . The set of superspace covariant
derivatives is given by @xmath . In both this section and the following
one (so in the papers [ 52 ] and [ 26 ] ) the nonchiral representation
of supersymmetry has been chosen, where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Superspace geometry is nontrivial, because of the presence of a
nonvanishing torsion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

To extend the construction of Moyal product to superspace, one has first
to introduce a superspace Poisson structure generalizing ( 1.20 ). The
authors propose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant matrices. This Poisson structure is
manifestly covariant with respect to supersymmetry. Moreover, it is
associative since it involves only @xmath and @xmath and not @xmath .
Associativity would be broken if the whole set of superspace covariant
derivatives had appeared, because of the nontrivial superspace torsion (
1.85 ). With this Poisson structure the authors construct a Moyal-like
product in superspace as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is an associative product, as one can easily deduce by extending to
superspace the discussion in section 1.1.1.

If we consider the special case when the superfields @xmath and @xmath
are identified with the supercoordinates themselves, we obtain the
following anticommutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.88)
     @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

They are not consistent with the @xmath @xmath superspace conjugation
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Even if in principle a noncommutative deformation is not required to
respect the complex structure present on the original space, the
relation ( 1.90 ) is needed in the original space for the fermionic
degrees of freedom to be equal to the bosonic ones. By relaxing it in
the deformation, one modifies (doubles) the number of supersymmetries.

In the paper [ 52 ] it was also observed that the class of chiral
superfields, defined by the relation @xmath , is not closed under the
product ( 1.87 ). Already at first order in the @xmath expansion
nontrivial terms arise in @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are both
chiral, because of the nontrivial superspace torsion ( 1.85 ). Since the
simplest superspace field theories are written in terms of chiral
superfields, the lack of closure for the chiral class is a serious
obstruction in constructing deformations of known supersymmetric
theories.

#### 1.1.6 Non(anti)commutative superspace

In this section I will discuss the results that I obtained in [ 26 ] ,
in collaboration with D. Klemm and S. Penati, regarding supersymmetric
associative deformations of @xmath @xmath Minkowski and @xmath euclidean
superspace.

##### Supersymmetric deformations of @xmath @xmath superpace

In [ 26 ] , a more systematical approach with respect to [ 52 ] has been
followed to determine the most general non(anti)commutative geometry in
@xmath four dimensional superspace, invariant under the classical
supertranslation group and associative. As I have anticipated before,
the deformation will be required to preserve the complex conjugation
relations that are valid in ordinary superspace.

We will consider the supercoordinates @xmath , generically satisfying
the non(anti)commutative algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the (anti)commutator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is a commutator if at least one of the two indices @xmath , @xmath
is a vector and an anticommutator otherwise.

Let us consider the transformation @xmath . This is the generic symmetry
of the ordinary theory that we would like to preserve in the
deformation. Exactly as in the bosonic case discussed in section 1.1.2,
we will require that the functional dependence of the
non(anti)commutative algebra is not modified under the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since, as discussed in section 1.1.1, bosonic noncommutative
deformations break “particle” Lorentz invariance, we will not worry
about this symmetry in our superspace generalization. We will only take
into consideration the supertranslation group, containing ordinary
bosonic translations and supersymmetry transformations. For @xmath
@xmath superspace conventions, we refer to [ 24 ] (see summary in the
previous section).

In order to define a non(anti)commutative superspace, we consider the
most general structure of the algebra for a set of four bosonic real
coordinates and a complex two–component Weyl spinor with @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath are local functions of the superspace variables and we have
defined @xmath , @xmath . From the conjugation rules for the coordinates
it follows also @xmath and @xmath .

To implement ( 1.94 ) to be the algebra of the coordinates of a
non(anti)commutative @xmath superspace we require its invariance under
the group of space translations and supertranslations ( 1.82 ). As
before, we restrict our analysis to the case of an undeformed group
where the parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in ( 1.82 ) are kept
(anti)commuting ² ² 2 More general constructions of non(anti)commutative
geometries in grassmannian spaces have been considered, where also the
algebra of the parameters is deformed [ 50 ] . .

As in the bosonic case discussed in section 1.1.1, we require the
functional dependence of the @xmath in ( 1.94 ) to be the same at any
point of the supermanifold. To work out explicitly the constraints which
follow, we perform a (super)translation ( 1.82 ) on the coordinates and
compute the algebra of the new coordinates in terms of the old ones. We
find that the functions appearing in ( 1.94 ) are constrained by the
following set of independent equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (1.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with their hermitian conjugates.

Looking for the most general local solution brings us to the following
algebra for a non(anti)commutative geometry in Minkowski superspace
consistent with (super)translations

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (1.98)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.99)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are constant functions.

We note that, while invariance under spacetime translations necessarily
requires the non(anti)commutation functions to be independent of the
@xmath coordinates, as we have seen in section 1.1.1, invariance under
supersymmetry is less restrictive and allows for a particular dependence
on the spinorial coordinates.

On the algebra of smooth functions of superspace variables we can
formally define a graded bracket which reproduces the fundamental
algebra ( 1.98 ) when applied to the coordinates. In the case of bosonic
Minkowski spacetime, the noncommutative algebra ( 1.80 ) can be obtained
by interpreting the l.h.s. of this relation as the Poisson bracket of
classical commuting variables, where, for generic functions of
spacetime, the Poisson bracket is defined as @xmath . Generalizing to
Minkowski superspace, the graded bracket must be constructed as a
bidifferential operator with respect to the superspace variables. Using
covariant derivatives @xmath , for generic functions @xmath and @xmath
of the superspace coordinates we define the bidifferential operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is a constant graded symplectic supermatrix satisfying @xmath , @xmath
denoting the grading of @xmath . It is easy to verify that applying this
operator to the superspace coordinates we obtain ( 1.98 ).

Alternatively, one can express the graded brackets ( 1.101 ) in terms of
torsion free, noncovariant spinorial derivatives @xmath so obtaining a
matrix @xmath explicitly dependent on @xmath . The bracket ( 1.101 ) is
rewritten as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given in ( 1.100 ).

The latter formulation of the graded bracket is not manifestly
covariant, but it is however very useful, since it makes clear that
Kontsevich procedure outlined in section 1.1.4 can be generalized to
superspace to construct an associative deformation of the product
between superfields. All the results from now on can be written in both
ways. In general the covariant formulation is preferred because it
naturally leads to a geometrical interpretation of the results.

##### Deformation of the supersymmetry algebra

It is important to note that the non(anti)commutative extension given in
( 1.98 ) in general deforms the supersymmetry algebra. In the standard
case, defining @xmath , the supersymmetry algebra can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the torsion of the flat superspace ( @xmath are the only
nonzero components). Turning on non(anti)commutativity in superspace
leads instead to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is still the torsion of the flat superspace, while

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

( @xmath means antisymmetrization when at least one of the indices is a
vector index, symmetrization otherwise) is a curvature tensor whose
presence is a direct consequence of the non(anti)commutation of the
grassmannian coordinates. Its nonvanishing components are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

I would like to stress that the curvature terms deforming the
supersymmetry algebra are quadratic in bosonic derivatives and have no
effect on the supercoordinate-algebra. Therefore their presence is not
in disagreement with consistency of the supercoordinate algebra with
supersymmetry.

Since the terms proportional to the curvature in ( 1.106 ) are quadratic
in supersymmetry charges and covariant derivatives, we can define new
graded brackets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.109)
                 (1.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and analogous ones for @xmath and @xmath , which satisfy the standard
algebra ( 1.105 ). The new brackets can be interpreted as a quantum
deformation associated to a @xmath –parameter which in this case is a
rank–four tensor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### Associativity and the geometry of deformed superspace

Given the bidifferential operator ( 1.101 ) associated to the
noncommutative supergeometry defined in ( 1.98 ) it is easy to prove the
following identities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The operator @xmath will then be promoted to a graded Poisson structure
on superspace if and only if Jacobi identities hold

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any triplet of functions of superspace variables. This property is
equivalent to associativity of the fundamental algebra ( 1.98 ). Since
the latter is nontrivial (coordinate-dependent commutators appear), (
1.113 ) is not in general satisfied. Indeed, imposing ( 1.113 ) yields
the nontrivial conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the torsion @xmath and the curvature @xmath have been introduced
in ( 1.105 ) and ( 1.106 ). Equation ( 1.114 ) is the covariant
superspace generalization of bosonic associativity constraint ( 1.70 )
(the analogy with ( 1.70 ) is clearer when it is rewritten in terms of
the “noncovariant” Poisson structure @xmath given in ( 1.103 )).

As in bosonic case, if @xmath is invertible ( @xmath ), equation ( 1.114
) is equivalent to the vanishing of the contorsion tensor @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the superspace generalization of ( 1.72 ), in terms of
manifestly covariant quantities. The only nonvanishing components of
@xmath are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We notice that its bosonic components @xmath vanish due to the @xmath
–independence of the noncommutation functions in ( 1.98 ). The
nonvanishing of @xmath comes entirely from the @xmath –dependence of the
functions in ( 1.100 ). As will be explained in section 1.3, it has been
shown that bosonic coordinate-dependent deformations naturally emerge in
string theory in the presence of curved backgrounds. Nonassociative
deformations also emerge and the parameter governing nonassociativity is
a bosonic three form @xmath . Identifying the superspace analogue of
this may help characterizing the superstring background where deformed
superspaces may appear.

When @xmath is invertible, equation ( 1.115 ) might seem to imply that
the curvature @xmath is zero. This is not true in general because of the
presence of the sign in front, which is dependent on the grading of the
summed index @xmath . Moreover, being puzzled by the unusual pattern of
equations found, we have been trying to prove that ( 1.115 ) is
algebraically implied by ( 1.114 ), but this doesn’t seem to work.

We now search for the most general solutions of the conditions ( 1.114 ,
1.115 ). Writing them in terms of the @xmath components we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first two conditions necessarily imply the vanishing of the
constants @xmath and @xmath . Inserting this result in the third
constraint we immediately realize that it is automatically satisfied and
the only nontrivial condition which survives is the last one. This
equation has nontrivial solutions. For example, the matrix

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.119)
  -- -- -- ---------

for any spinor @xmath , is a solution. It would correspond to assume the
same commutations rules among any bosonic coordinate and the spinorial
variables.

We conclude that the most general associative and non(anti)commutative
algebra in Minkowski superspace has the form

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (1.120)
     @xmath      @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is subject to the last constraint in ( 1.118 ). Setting
@xmath we recover the usual noncommutative superspace considered so far
in literature [ 52 , 54 , 51 ] .

Under conditions ( 1.118 ) the graded brackets ( 1.101 ) satisfy the
Jacobi identities ( 1.113 ), as can be easily proved by expanding the
functions in power series. In this case we have a well–defined super
Poisson structure on superspace.

We note that a non(anti)commutative but associative geometry always
mantains the standard algebra ( 1.105 ) for the covariant derivatives.
In fact, in this case, from ( 1.108 ) it follows @xmath .

##### Construction of a Kontsevich-like product on superspace

We will now describe the first few steps towards the construction of a
star product defined on the class of general superfields. By definition,
this product must be associative, i.e. it has to satisfy the Jacobi
identities ( 1.113 ) when the fundamental algebra is associative.

In section 1.1.4 we have seen that in the nonsupersymmetric case the
lack of associativity of the fundamental algebra is signaled by the
presence of a nonvanishing 3–form @xmath . A product has been
constructed [ 49 ] so that the terms violating the Jacobi identities are
proportional to @xmath . The product is then automatically associative
when the fundamental algebra is.

In the present case we have shown that the lack of associativity in
superspace is related to a nonvanishing super 3–form. This suggests the
possibility to construct a super star product by suitably generalizing
Kontsevich construction [ 49 ] to superspace. The supersymmetric Poisson
structure we have constructed on superspace can be written in a
manifestly covariant form, as in ( 1.101 ), in terms of a constant
matrix and covariant derivatives that have nontrivial torsion, or as in
( 1.103 ), in terms of a coordinate-dependent matrix and torsion free
derivatives. The second formulation allows for a straightforward
generalization of Kontsevich construction we outlined in section 1.1.4.
However, the same procedure can be performed in a manifestly covariant
way, and I choose to give this second version, so that the geometric
interpretation of the results will be clear.

We begin by considering Moyal–deformed product defined in the usual way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary superfields, and @xmath denotes a
deformation parameter. In general, due to the lack of
(anti)commutativity among covariant derivatives (see eq. ( 1.106 )), it
is easy to prove that the @xmath –product is not associative even when
the Poisson brackets are. However, inspired by Kontsevich procedure [ 49
] , we perturbatively define a modified product @xmath with the property
to be associative up to second order in @xmath when the Jacobi
identities are satisfied. Precisely, we find an explicit form for the
product by imposing the Jacobi identities ( 1.113 ) to be violated at
this order only by terms proportional to @xmath . To this end we define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.122)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.123)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Since it is straightforward to show that

  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------
     @xmath                  (1.124)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------

up to second order in @xmath the product is associative if and only if
@xmath , i.e. the fundamental algebra is associative. We note that at
this order only the contorsion enters the breaking of associativity,
being the curvature tensor @xmath of order @xmath .

In [ 26 ] we did not pursue the construction of the star product to all
orders in @xmath but we believed that in principle there were no
obstructions to the generalization of Kontsevich procedure to all
orders. The extension of the superspace product we proposed to all
orders in @xmath has been obtained afterwards in [ 55 ] .

We now discuss the closure of the class of chiral superfields under the
deformed products we have introduced. For a generic choice of the
supermatrix @xmath the star product of two chiral superfields
(satisfying @xmath ) is not a chiral superfield, both for associative
and nonassociative products. However, in the particular case where the
only nonvanishing components of the symplectic supermatrix @xmath are
@xmath and @xmath , chiral superfields are closed both under the
deformed product defined in ( 1.121 ) and under Kontsevich star product
( 1.122 ) (for the latter up to terms of order @xmath ). Clearly for
@xmath the above star products are no more associative. Because of this,
it could be problematic to generalize for instance the Wess–Zumino model
to non(anti)commutative superspace, since @xmath . However, one may
notice that for chiral superfields the above star products become
commutative ³ ³ 3 Generalized star products that are commutative but
nonassociative have been considered in a different context in [ 56 ] . .
This commutativity implies that there is no ambiguity in putting the
parenthesis in the cubic interaction term of a deformed Wess–Zumino
model, since, when @xmath is a chiral superfield, @xmath holds.
Therefore, the action for the deformed Wess–Zumino model

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is well defined and can be studied. Notice that in this case the @xmath
–product in the kinetic term cannot be simply substituted with the
standard product as it happens in superspace geometries where
grassmannian coordinates anticommute [ 52 , 51 ] .

##### Non(anti)commutative @xmath Euclidean superspace

From the discussion of @xmath @xmath superspace it is clear that the
superspace conjugation relations relating @xmath and @xmath are strong
constraints on the non(anti)commutative algebra. The main difference in
the description of euclidean superspace with respect to Minkowski relies
on the reality conditions satisfied by the spinorial variables. So it is
reasonable to hope that in an euclidean signature structures with a
nonvanishing anticommutator between two fermions could appear.

As it is well known [ 57 ] , in euclidean signature a reality condition
on spinors is applicable only in the presence of extended supersymmetry.
In [ 26 ] we concentrated on the simplest case, the @xmath euclidean
superspace, even if our analysis can be easily extended to more general
cases.

In a chiral description the two–component Weyl spinors satisfy a
symplectic Majorana condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . This implies that the most general non(anti)commutative
algebra can be written as an obvious generalization of ( 1.94 ) with the
functions on the rhs now being in suitable representations of the
R–symmetry group. When imposing covariance under (super)translations we
obtain that the most general non(anti)commutative geometry in euclidean
superspace is

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (1.127)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (1.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath constant.

Following the same steps as in the Minkowski case, we can look for the
most general associative algebra. The results we obtain for associative
non(anti)commuting geometries in euclidean superspace are

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (1.129)
     @xmath      @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

or

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (1.130)
     @xmath      @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

We notice that in this case associativity imposes less restrictive
constraints because of the absence of conjugation relations between
@xmath and @xmath . As a consequence, nontrivial anticommutation
relations among @xmath ’s (or @xmath ’s) are allowed. Moreover the
R–symmetry group of the @xmath euclidean superalgebra is broken only by
the constant terms @xmath and @xmath . Setting these terms equal to zero
leads to nontrivial (anti)commutation relations preserving @xmath
–symmetry.

Again, explicit expressions for the corresponding graded brackets can be
obtained as an obvious generalization of ( 1.101 , 1.102 ). In this case
they define a super Poisson structure on euclidean superspace. A simple
example of a super Poisson structure is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We notice that this extension is allowed only in euclidean superspace,
where it is consistent with the reality conditions on the spinorial
variables.

#### 1.1.7 @xmath supersymmetry

##### Seiberg @xmath superspace

In this section I will review nonanticommutative @xmath superspace
introduced by Seiberg in [ 28 ] and I will explain its relation with my
results in [ 26 ] . As I have discussed in detail in the last section,
in [ 26 ] I obtained the most general nonanticommutative deformation of
@xmath @xmath superspace compatible with supersymmetry and
associativity. This involves nontrivial @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
while @xmath , @xmath and @xmath cannot be turned on. The situation
improves in euclidean signature, where it is possible to turn on the
fermionic anticommutators because of the different spinor conjugation
relations. Rigorously, a superspace with euclidean signature can be
defined only with extended supersymmetry, because of the impossibility
to assign consistent reality conditions to @xmath and @xmath in @xmath [
57 ] . This is why I have studied the @xmath euclidean superspace in [
26 ] . However, one can formally define an @xmath euclidean superspace
by temporarily doubling the fermionic degrees of freedom, as it is done
by Seiberg in [ 28 ] .

To show how this works, I will first redefine the @xmath euclidean
spinor variables ( 1.126 ) as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.132)
     @xmath      (1.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These satisfy the reality conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.134)
     @xmath      (1.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and analogous for the dotted variables. Dotted and undotted variables
are unrelated. I will refer to @xmath and @xmath as the left-moving
sector of the theory and to @xmath and @xmath as the right-moving
sector. This terminology will be clarified in section 1.2.4, where the
string theory origin of deformed superspaces will be discussed. We will
see in section 1.2.4 that open string boundary conditions relate left-
and right-moving fermionic variables on the D-brane ( @xmath on the
boundary). As a result, the effective field theory on the brane is
described by an @xmath euclidean superspace with fermionic variables
@xmath and @xmath . For this reason from now on I will only consider
spinor coordinates in the left-moving sector.

In [ 26 ] we have used in both Minkowski and euclidean signature a
nonchiral representation for superspace covariant derivatives. As a
result consistency with supersymmetry transformations implied that if we
turned on a nonvanishing anticommutators between two fermionic
variables, also nonzero boson-boson and boson-fermion commutators
appeared. This made the algebra coordinate dependent and forced us to
build a complicated Kontevich-like product.

A way to obtain a simpler, constant algebra for the supercoordinates is
the following [ 58 ] . In four dimensions it is possible to use a chiral
representation of supersymmetry, where, for each supersymmetry, one of
the two covariant derivatives coincides with the ordinary one while the
other gets dressed. If we make this chiral choice in @xmath euclidean
superspace, by defining

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.136)
     @xmath      (1.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

corresponding to the supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we immediately realize that the nonanticommutative algebra

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath a constant symmetric matrix, is consistent with ( 1.138 )
and trivially associative . One can easily check that, comparing to (
1.106 , 1.107 , 1.108 ), the supersymmetry algebra is not modified by
the deformation but the algebra of covariant derivatives becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.140)
     @xmath      (1.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is a problem when one tries to construct chiral superfields. So,
even if this algebra is very simple, it is not suitable for constructing
deformations of ordinary theories in superspace.

Seiberg in [ 28 ] chose the opposite chiral representation with respect
to ( 1.137 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.142)
     @xmath      (1.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

corresponding to the supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When we turn on a nontrivial anticommutator between the @xmath ’s, we
obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.145)
     @xmath      (1.146)
     @xmath      (1.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is consistent with supersymmetry and associativity (it is just the
“ @xmath ” version of the algebra ( 1.1.6 ) I gave in [ 26 ] and
discussed in the previous section). This is coordinate-dependent and
would require the construction of a Kontsevich-like product for the
superfield algebra. However, Seiberg observed that it is possible to
make the change of variables

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In terms of @xmath the superspace algebra takes the form ( 1.139 ) and
this makes it possible to define a Moyal-like associative product acting
on superfields @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.149)
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.150)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . In contradistinction to the bosonic case, this Moyal-like
product has a finite derivative expansion, because of the grassmannian
nature of the variables involved in the deformation.

With the antichiral representation ( 1.143 ) the covariant derivative
algebra is not deformed, while the supersymmetry algebra is deformed by
curvature terms analogous to the ones we found in ( 1.106 , 1.107 ,
1.108 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.151)
     @xmath      (1.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since only the dotted sector is modified, in [ 28 ] its is argued that
only @xmath is preserved. Exactly as in the @xmath case discussed in the
previous section, these susy-breaking terms do not affect the
supercoordinate algebra, that is consistent with supersymmetry.

In [ 28 ] chiral and vector superfields in @xmath have been extensively
studied. In particular, since the covariant derivatives are not modified
by the deformation, it is possible to define (anti)chiral superfields
whose class is closed under @xmath and to write down the action for a
deformed Wess-Zumino model

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.153)
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.154)
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.155)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the auxiliary field in the chiral multiplet and total
superspace derivatives have been neglected to obtain the last equality.
Similarly, one can see that the @xmath deformation of super Yang-Mills
is characterized by explicitly susy-breaking P-dependent component terms
[ 28 ] . Moreover in [ 28 ] the antichiral ring defined by the operator
relation @xmath has been studied and it has been shown that all its
properties are preserved by the deformation, while the chiral ring
cannot be defined since @xmath is not a symmetry of the theory anymore.

##### Results in non(anti)commutative field theories

After Seiberg’s paper [ 28 ] appeared, deformed superspaces have
attracted much attention and a lot of efforts have been done to
elucidate the properties of nonanticommutative field theories in
superspace. This interest is mostly due to the fact that
nonanticommutative superspaces have been shown to naturally emerge in
superstring theory in the presence of R-R backgrounds [ 27 , 28 , 29 ,
53 ] . I will review the string theory side of the story in section
1.2.4. Here I’m going to browse the huge bibliography and discuss the
main results obtained, without giving any detail. I will first discuss
the progress in understanding @xmath theories.

In [ 28 ] the @xmath deformation of WZ and super Yang-Mills theories
have been proposed. The deformation of WZ model is easy to describe,
since in component formulation it corresponds to adding to the ordinary
action a cubic term in the auxiliary field @xmath . In [ 59 , 60 ] some
features of the deformed WZ model, such as non validity of standard
nonrenormalization theorems, stability of the vacuum energy and
existence of the antichiral ring have been discussed through some
examples, in both component and superspace formulations. In particular,
since supersymmetry plays an important role to guarantee renormalization
through partial cancellation of UV divergences associated to bosonic and
fermionic degrees of freedom, it is compelling to study
renormalizability properties of the @xmath theory where part of the
supersymmetry is explicitly broken.

A systematical analysis of perturbative renormalizability of @xmath WZ
model has been performed in [ 58 ] by explicit calculations up to two
loops. It has been shown that, even if new divergences appear, the model
can be rendered renormalizable by adding ab initio @xmath and @xmath
terms to the ordinary lagrangian. It is somehow expected that these
terms may accompany the @xmath deformation, since they are allowed by
the symmetry of the theory. These two-loop results have been extended to
all orders in perturbation theory in both component and superspace
formulations [ 61 ] . The proof of renormalizability has been given on
the base of dimensional arguments and global symmetries.

The study of deformations of gauge theories is more interesting than the
scalar case. @xmath @xmath gauge theories have been proven to be
renormalizable in [ 62 ] in WZ gauge. This result have been checked up
to one loop in [ 63 ] in component formulation, again in WZ gauge. The
study of these gauge theories in a manifestly gauge independent
superspace setup has been accomplished by generalizing the background
field method to nonanticommutative case [ 64 ] .

In [ 65 , 66 , 67 ] @xmath super Yang-Mills instantons have been
studied.

In [ 68 , 69 ] the problem of constructing a Seiberg-Witten map
analogous to the one discussed in section 1.2.1 for superfields in
deformed superspaces has been considered.

The case with extended supersymmetry has also been considered [ 70 , 71
] and it has been shown that, while in general @xmath supersymmetry is
broken to @xmath , there are particular cases where @xmath survives.
Moreover, super Yang-Mills theory on extended deformed superspaces has
also been studied in [ 68 ] .

@xmath @xmath classical aspects of sigma models characterized by a
general Kähler potential and arbitrary superpotential deformed by a
nonanticommutative product have been studied in [ 72 ] .

Finally, the connection between nonanticommutative geometry and
supermatrix models have been studied in [ 73 , 74 ] .

### 1.2 Non(anti)commutative field theory from the (super)string

#### 1.2.1 Noncommutative Yang-Mills theory from the open string

In this section I mostly refer to [ 7 ] and show that a constant
Neveu-Schwarz Neveu-Schwarz (NS-NS) @xmath -field background modifies
string dynamics nontrivially when D-branes are present. The open string
with extrema constrained to lay on Dp-branes sees a deformed
target-space @xmath metric and a noncommutative target space coordinate
algebra, characterized by a matrix @xmath . Taking a zero slope limit
@xmath in such a way to keep the above open-string parameters finite,
one can obtain two different effective theory descriptions. Depending on
the choice of the regularization prescription, one obtains a field
theory in ordinary space where the background field appears explicitly,
or a noncommutative field theory where the background field only appears
implicitly in the noncommutativity matrix @xmath . We are not going to
give a review of the basic string theory needed in this section. For
this we suggest the textbooks [ 3 , 4 ] .

##### The open string effective metric and noncommutativity parameter

Let us consider the bosonic sector of open string theory, in a
10-dimensional flat spacetime background with metric @xmath , in the
presence of a constant NS-NS field @xmath and Dp-branes. Let us assume
@xmath , where @xmath is a generic spacelike direction and @xmath is
timelike. This means that we are going to consider a magnetic @xmath
field. At the end of this section I will briefly discuss the electric
case, to show that a zero-slope limit giving a noncommutative effective
field theory on the brane is not admitted in this case [ 16 ] .

It is well-known that a constant background @xmath field can be gauged
away in the bulk, but not on the boundary, on the Dp-brane, where it
acts as a constant magnetic (or electric) field . If @xmath , we can
assume @xmath . We will choose spacetime coordinates in such a way that
@xmath for @xmath only and @xmath for @xmath . The worldsheet action is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.156)
     @xmath      (1.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the second equality shows that antisymmetry of @xmath implies that
the @xmath -term is a boundary term. @xmath is the (euclidean) string
worldsheet, @xmath is its boundary, @xmath is the derivative tangent to
the boundary @xmath . Because of the presence of Dp-branes, the boundary
term cannot be eliminated. It modifies the boundary conditions for the
open string in the directions @xmath along the brane

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the derivative in the normal direction with respect to
the boundary @xmath . In this equation both i and j are along the brane.
We observe that for @xmath we obtain Neumann boundary conditions, while
for maximal @xmath rank on the brane and @xmath we get Dirichlet ones.
In the latter case the string extrema are constrained to a single point
on the Dp-brane, since the coordinates along the brane that describe
them do not move. We can thus think that string extrema are attached to
a 0-brane on the p-brane.

From now on we will consider the classical approximation to string
theory. @xmath is a disk, that can be mapped to the upper half plane,
described by complex coordinates @xmath , @xmath , because of conformal
invariance. The boundary conditions ( 1.158 ) can then be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The propagator @xmath with the boundary
conditions ( 1.159 ) is given by [ 75 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.160)
     @xmath      (1.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.162)
     @xmath      (1.163)
     @xmath      (1.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath , @xmath denote the symmetric and antisymmetric part of the
matrix in brackets, respectively. The constant quantities @xmath depend
on @xmath , but not on @xmath and @xmath . They can be fixed to a
certain value by making use of the fact that @xmath is arbitrary.

We are interested in taking the limit @xmath , @xmath in ( 1.161 ). This
is because in the open string case vertex operators are to be inserted
on the boundary of the worldsheet. Taking the limit one obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The function @xmath is @xmath ( @xmath ) for positive (negative) @xmath
. The discontinuity in the propagator can be expressed in terms of the
function @xmath when convenient values for the constants @xmath are
chosen.

@xmath is interpreted as the effective metric seen by open strings. This
can be understood by comparing with the closed string case, where the
propagator between two internal worldsheet points has a short distance
behavior given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is clear from ( 1.165 ) that, in the commutative limit @xmath , the
metric @xmath is for the open string what @xmath is for the closed
string.

By considering the second term in ( 1.165 ), we can see that the
coefficient @xmath can be interpreted as noncommutativity parameter for
the coordinates along the Dp-brane. In conformal field theory there
exists a correspondence between time ordering and operator ordering,
that in this case gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first equality says that the path integral of the time-ordered
combination in the right hand side corresponds to a matrix element of
the equal-time commutator between @xmath and @xmath . So we deduce that
the coordinates @xmath are noncommuting with parameter @xmath .

##### Correlation functions, effective action and Moyal product

Let us now consider the product of two tachyon vertex operators @xmath ,
@xmath , with @xmath . By contracting with the two point function (
1.165 ) we obtain the short distance behavior

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We observe that in the limit @xmath the OPE formula reduces to @xmath
product

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.169)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore we expect that in the limit @xmath the theory should be easily
described in terms of Moyal product. However, many interesting aspects
emerge even without taking that limit.

We have shown that open strings in the presence of a constant @xmath
field on a Dp-brane can be described not only in terms of the two
parameters @xmath and @xmath , but also in terms of two functions @xmath
and @xmath , representing the effective metric and noncommutativity
parameter seen by the open string ending on the brane.

Now we are going to show that, if we choose to work with the second
couple of parameters, the dependence of the effective theory on @xmath
is very simple. The theory with a nonvanishing @xmath can be obtained
from the one with @xmath by simply substituting Moyal @xmath products
characterized by the noncommutativity parameter @xmath to ordinary
products. This is a general feature, no limit has to be taken.

It is well-known that perturbative string theory requires the evaluation
of the path integral of vertex operators the generally take the form
@xmath , where @xmath is a polynomial in the derivatives of @xmath . Let
us now consider the expectation value of the product of @xmath vertex
operators, with momenta @xmath and @xmath along the Dp-brane. We are
interested in determining the explicit dependence on the parameter
@xmath , while we would like to keep the dependence on @xmath implicit.
The two-point function is the sum of two terms, one contains @xmath
only, the other contains @xmath only. When we contract terms containing
derivatives of @xmath , the part of the propagator involving @xmath does
not contribute, because @xmath is a constant function. So we can obtain
the @xmath dependence by just taking into consideration the contraction
between exponentials

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.170)
     @xmath      (1.171)
                 (1.172)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So the @xmath -dependence is simply given by the phase factor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because of momentum conservation @xmath and antisymmetry of @xmath , (
1.173 ) only depends on the cyclic order of the points @xmath on the
worldsheet boundary.

By knowing the @xmath -matrix of low energy massless particles, one can
deduce order by order in @xmath an effective action for the theory. This
will be expressed in terms of a certain number of functions @xmath that
in general may have values in the space of @xmath matrices (think of the
nonabelian gauge theory case). @xmath represents the wave function of
the i-th field. By looking at ( 1.164 ) one notes that @xmath . So the
general form of the effective action for @xmath will be as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath stands for the product of @xmath partial derivatives with
respect to certain unspecified coordinates.

Now it is easy to move on to a theory with @xmath . If the effective
action is written in momentum space, then it is sufficient to insert the
phase factor ( 1.173 ). In configuration space this corresponds to
replacing ordinary products with Moyal @xmath products (see ( 1.36 )).
To conclude, the effective action with @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.175)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So we have found an easy way to describe the theory with @xmath when
knowing the one with @xmath . However we must stress that both theories
have an equally complicated @xmath expansion.

##### The description in the zero-slope limit

The formalism of noncommutative geometry becomes much more powerful when
the zero-slope limit @xmath is taken. This is somehow expected from (
1.169 ).
We would like to take the limit in such a way to keep the open string
parameters @xmath and @xmath finite. This can be done by choosing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.176)
     @xmath      (1.177)
  -- -------- -- ---------

when all the rest is kept fixed (also the two form @xmath ). Equation (
1.164 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.178)
                 (1.179)
     @xmath      (1.180)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The propagator for two points on the boundary becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.181)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For two generic functions @xmath and @xmath we then obtain (see ( 1.169
))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.182)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.183)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is Moyal product ( 1.32 ).
As a result, correlation functions of exponential operators on the disk
boundary are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.184)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the general case with @xmath functions @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### Adding gauge fields

Let us now add to the action ( 1.157 ) a term representing the coupling
of the string worldsheet to a gauge field @xmath . For simplicity we
will take @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing with ( 1.157 ) we see that the constant field @xmath can be
replaced by a gauge field @xmath , whose field strength is @xmath . The
bosonic string coupled to the @xmath -field background is invariant
under the gauge symmetry

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

modulo boundary terms. These terms can be compensated by the shift

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.188)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, physics will be described by the gauge invariant combination
@xmath .

The action ( 1.186 ) is invariant under the transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

since the variation of the integrand is a total derivative.

When we consider a quantum field theory we must pay attention to the
regularization procedure. Physics of course must not depend on the
particular choice of regularization! If we choose a Pauli-Villars
regularization, we obtain an ordinary gauge theory, symmetric under the
usual gauge transformation ( 1.189 ). We can make a different choice,
though. We can use a point-splitting regularization, characterized by
the fact that the product of two operators at the same point never
appears. Actually, one first eliminates the region @xmath and then takes
the limit @xmath . Now we are going to evaluate the variation of the
path integral of the exponential of the action ( 1.186 ) under the gauge
transformation ( 1.189 ), having first expanded the exponential in
series with respect to @xmath . The first term in the expansion gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.190)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Even though the integrand of the second factor is a total derivative,
one gets a boundary contribution for @xmath . In the limit @xmath this
contribution takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.191)
                 (1.192)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To obtain this results one makes use of the fact that there are no
contractions between @xmath and @xmath with the constant propagator (
1.181 ). Moreover, the relation ( 1.183 ) between operators and @xmath
product has been taken into account.

To cancel out the term ( 1.192 ), we have to modify the transformation (
1.189 ). So we discover that the point splitting regularized theory is
not invariant under ( 1.189 ), but under the new transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.193)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We recognize the gauge invariance ( 1.54 ) of noncommutative gauge
theories with @xmath . We have introduced the “hatted” notation @xmath
for fields in a noncommutative algebra.

It is possible to show [ 7 ] that at a generic order @xmath in the
@xmath -expansion of the exponential of the action the correct gauge
invariance is the noncommutative one, when point-splitting
regularization is performed.

Moreover in [ 7 ] the calculation of the expectation value of three
gauge vertex operators is performed. The result of this computation
could also be obtained by considering the following effective action as
a starting point

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.194)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the field strength can be expressed in terms of @xmath as in (
1.54 ).

We have shown that the same string theory in the limit @xmath can be
either described by an effective action corresponding to an ordinary
gauge theory or by one associated to a noncommutative gauge theory,
depending on the choice of the regularization procedure. Since physics
cannot depend on the way this procedure is performed, two results
obtained with different regularizations must be related by a
redefinition of the coupling constants. In the worldsheet action the
spacetime-valued fields play the role of coupling constants, so we
expect that commutative and noncommutative effective descriptions should
be related by a redefinition of these fields.

A natural guess is that a local map @xmath among gauge fields and a
corresponding map @xmath among the group parameters exists. In section
1.1.2 we observed that noncommutative @xmath group is nonabelian. This
tells us that such a correspondence cannot exist. Actually, the
existence of such a map would imply an isomorphism between the ordinary
gauge group and the corresponding noncommutative one. Since an abelian
group cannot be isomorphic to a non abelian one, the first proposal for
the map is ruled out.

However, what is really needed for physics is that the gauge-transformed
field @xmath corresponds to the gauge-transformed field @xmath .
Therefore it is sufficient that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.195)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we can look for a correspondence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.196)
     @xmath      (1.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

satisfying ( 1.195 ). The @xmath -dependence of @xmath solves the
problem of the isomorphism between the two gauge groups. A relation like
( 1.197 ) does not imply any correspondence between the two group
structures. A correspondence of the required form was found in [ 7 ]
(Seiberg-Witten map). It is given in terms of a set of differential
equations describing how @xmath and @xmath must vary with @xmath for the
physics to remain unchanged.

The results discussed in this section concerning an open string ending
on a single Dp-brane can be easily generalized to the case of a stack of
@xmath coincident D-branes. In this case one obtains a @xmath
noncommutative Yang-Mills theory as an effective field theory on the
brane worldvolume. In section 1.2.2 I have commented on the fact that
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath subgroups are not closed under Moyal product,
so in principle one expects that restrictions to this subgroups should
not emerge from the string. Actually, the case of @xmath is ruled out
because the @xmath degree of freedom in @xmath ceases to decouple.
@xmath and @xmath restrictions can instead emerge, in a very nontrivial
way, by orientifold projection, as shown in [ 43 ] .

##### Open string in the presence of an electric NS-NS background and
the breakdown of unitarity and causality in time-space noncommutative
field theories

In section 1.1.2 I have discussed unitarity and causality problems in
noncommutative field theories with time-space noncommutativity, i.e.
with @xmath .

In principle we could expect these theories to arise in string theory in
the presence of D-branes and a constant electric @xmath background.
However, the case of an electric background field is very different with
respect to the magnetic one. It can be shown that if the background
electric field @xmath exceeds the critical upper value @xmath , string
pairs are produced that destabilize the vacuum. So, if the electric
field is along the @xmath direction and the metric is diagonal in the
@xmath plane with components given by @xmath , the bound is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.198)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In [ 76 ] it has been shown that in this case the open string parameters
@xmath are related to the electric field on the brane by the formula

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.199)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As before, to obtain the effective field theory on the brane we have to
consider a zero-slope limit @xmath . From the previous formula, it is
clear that if we want to keep the open string metric @xmath finite in
the limit, when @xmath then also @xmath . Therefore, it is possible to
obtain a field theory description involving massless open string modes
only, but this will be an ordinary field theory and not a noncommutative
one. On the other hand, we can keep the noncommutativity parameter
@xmath finite, but then @xmath must also be finite and we are
considering a string theory and not a field theory.

Indeed, in [ 76 ] , it has been shown that a limit can be taken where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.200)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and all the other parameters are kept fixed, in particular the open
string metric @xmath . In this limit

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.201)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is finite, so time-space noncommutativity is present. The theory
obtained describes open strings in noncommutive spacetime (NCOS). Open
strings decouple from closed strings, therefore also from gravity. In [
77 ] it has been shown that NCOS theory is the S-dual description of
strongly coupled, spatially noncommutative @xmath Yang-Mills theory
(other works concerning NCOS are listed in [ 78 ] ).

We conclude that noncommutative field theory with time-space
noncommutativity does not emerge as a consistent truncation of string
theory. Moreover, string theory in the presence of an electric
background on the brane is unitary and acausal effects are not present [
15 ] . So @xmath corrections to noncommutative “electric” field theory
restore unitarity and causality.

It is clear that “electric” noncommutative field theories are missing
some degrees of freedom, related to the undecoupled massive string
modes, that are necessary for unitarity and causality of the theory. In
[ 17 ] it has been shown that tachyonic particles are produced in
scattering processes of noncommutative field theory with @xmath turned
on. Form the string theory point of view, these particles may be viewed
as a remnant of a continuous spectrum of these undecoupled closed-string
modes.

#### 1.2.2 Generalization to the superstring in RNS and GS formalisms

In this section I will generalize to the superstring the results
obtained in the previous section for the bosonic string. In [ 7 ] the
string with @xmath worldsheet supersymmetry (RNS) is considered. In [ 54
] instead the manifestly target-space supersymmetric superstring (GS) is
discussed. In both cases the open superstring is coupled to a constant
NS-NS background in the presence of D-branes. I’m not going to give an
introduction to these two formalisms for the superstring. For this I
suggest the textbooks [ 3 , 4 ]

##### Open RNS string in the presence of a constant @xmath-field and
D-branes

In [ 7 ] the following action for the RNS string coupled to a constant
magnetic NS-NS background field @xmath is considered

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.202)
                 (1.203)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the directions @xmath , @xmath along the brane the following boundary
conditions are imposed

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.204)
     @xmath      (1.205)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first condition can be naturally obtained by requiring that there
are no boundary terms in the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion. The
second one, involving fermions, is obtained by requiring consistency
under supersymmetry of the boundary conditions, but cannot be obtained
from the action ( 1.203 ). Actually, one finds an inconsistency when
requiring both the vanishing of boundary terms in the variation of the
action and the compatibility of boundary conditions with supersymmetry.
In [ 79 ] (see also [ 80 ] for a nice summary of the methods used) it
has been shown that boundary terms can be added to the action ( 1.203 )
so that the supersymmetric boundary conditions ( 1.205 ) follow as
boundary contributions to the field equations. Therefore, the theory
described by the action @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.206)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and by the boundary conditions ( 1.205 ) is invariant under the rigid
@xmath worldsheet supersymmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.207)
     @xmath      (1.208)
     @xmath      (1.209)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the parameter @xmath is a worldsheet spinor and a spacetime
scalar.

In [ 7 ] the open string is coupled to a gauge field @xmath by adding to
( 1.203 ) the following boundary term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.210)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the ordinary field strength (we are considering @xmath
case for simplicity) and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.211)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The variation of ( 1.210 ) under the supersymmetry transformations (
1.209 ) is a total derivative

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.212)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Exactly as in bosonic case, the theory is regularized by making use of a
“point splitting” technique and extra boundary terms are produced.
Expanding the exponential of the action to first order in @xmath we can
compute the variation of the path integral up to first order in @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.213)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Extra boundary terms appear when @xmath and @xmath . If the following
interaction term is added to the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.214)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the extra terms are cancelled by its variation under ( 1.209 ). So we
deduce that @xmath must be changed into

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.215)
  -- -------- -- ---------

being @xmath the noncommutative field strength. If we had performed a
Pauli-Villars regularization, instead, ( 1.210 ) would have been
invariant under worlsheet supersymmetry ( 1.209 ) and we would have
ended up with field strength and gauge symmetry of ordinary @xmath .

Summarizing, in [ 7 ] it has been shown that the RNS open string in the
presence of a constant @xmath -field and D-branes can be described, in
the zero-slope limit @xmath , either by ordinary gauge theory or by
noncommutative gauge theory on the brane, depending on the choice of the
regularization prescription. The two different descriptions are related
by a Seiberg-Witten map, as in bosonic case.

In [ 79 ] a different approach to the problem of coupling a gauge field
to the open string in the presence of the @xmath field is presented. The
coupling to the @xmath field is reconsidered in a way to preserve both
shift symmetry and supersymmetry. A coupling term different with respect
to ( 1.210 ) is found that is not supersymmetric by itself, but only
together with the rest of the action @xmath and after making use of the
corresponding boundary conditions.

##### Open GS superstring in the presence of a constant @xmath-field and
D-branes

The Green-Schwarz superstring has manifest target space @xmath
supersymmetry. The target space is a ten dimensional superspace
described by the coordinates @xmath , with @xmath . When the theory is
coupled to a certain background and D-branes are present, in principle
target space fermionic coordinates could be involved in
noncommutativity. In [ 54 ] , it has been shown that this is not true in
the simple case of a constant NS-NS background. In this case only
bosonic coordinates become noncommutative. In section 1.2.4 we will see
that fermionic coordinates are indeed involved in noncommutativity when
a constant R-R background is present.

The action for the GS superstring coupled to a constant NS-NS background
in flat spacetime is given by

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (1.217)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.218)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are the supersymmetry invariant one-forms. It is clear from ( 1.217 )
that only bosonic coordinates couple to @xmath . However, boundary
conditions along the D-brane must also be considered before we can
deduce that fermions are not affected by the presence of the background.
We find that bosonic coordinates must satisfy the same boundary
conditions we found in the bosonic case ( 1.158 ). The two fermionic
coordinates @xmath and @xmath must satisfy @xmath on the boundary, where
@xmath is a suitable @xmath -dependent matrix satisfying @xmath . So the
action ( 1.217 ) with these boundary conditions is invariant under the
supersymmetry

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.219)
     @xmath      (1.220)
  -- -------- -- ---------

only if the supersymmetry parameters @xmath also satisfy @xmath . So the
D-brane breaks half of the supersymmetry.

In [ 54 ] an explicit computation is performed to dermine the coordinate
algebra on the brane. Following the method introduced by Chu and Ho [ 81
] , the authors deal with boundary conditions along the brane by
treating them as constraints on phase-space. The presence of these
constraints makes it necessary to consider Dirac brackets instead of
Poisson brackets. Working in a light-cone gauge, in [ 54 ] it was shown
that the fermionic variables surviving the gauge fixing procedure
satisfy a standard anticommutative algebra and only the bosonic sector
is affected by the presence of the constant NS-NS background, exactly as
in [ 7 ] . So it is clear that if we want target-space fermionic
variables to be deformed, we must consider a different background.

#### 1.2.3 Noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills from the @xmath string

In this section I will briefly introduce the @xmath string and its
peculiar properties. Referring to [ 82 ] , I will apply the analysis
outlined in the previous section to the open @xmath string in the
presence of @xmath spacefilling D3-branes and a constant @xmath field to
show that it coincides at tree level with @xmath noncommutative selfdual
Yang-Mills.

The @xmath fermionic string is characterized by an @xmath worldsheet
supersymmetry. For the string to be critical, the target space must be
four-dimensional with signature @xmath . Its propagating degrees of
freedom are the embedding coordinates @xmath and the RNS Majorana
spinors @xmath , @xmath . These matter fields are coupled to the @xmath
supergravity multiplet. Using symmetries of the action, one can show
that all the gravitational degrees of freedom can be gauged away and in
superconformal gauge the action can be written as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.221)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath ( @xmath scaling parameter) is the metric in @xmath . This
action has a residual symmetry given by the @xmath superconformal group,
that also contains rigid @xmath supersymmetry corresponding to the
transformations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.222)
     @xmath      (1.223)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a complex structure compatible with the metric @xmath
(with our flat metric @xmath ).

It has been shown that the open @xmath fermionic string at tree level is
identical to self-dual Yang-Mills in @xmath dimensions [ 83 ] . The
absence of massive states in the physical spectrum is related to the
vanishing of all tree-level amplitudes beyond three-point. The vanishing
of amplitudes implies the existence of symmetries and vice-versa. Since
an infinite number of tree-level amplitudes vanish, we expect an
infinite number of symmetries to be present. These were described in [
84 , 85 ] .

The @xmath string seems to be a master theory quantizing integrable
systems. It is well-known that most integrable models in @xmath and
@xmath can be obtained by dimensional reduction from selfdual
Yang-Mills. In [ 83 ] a possible definition for integrability in @xmath
has been proposed, inspired by the peculiar properties of the tree-level
S-matrix of the @xmath string. A system in @xmath would be classically
integrable if the @xmath -point tree-level amplitudes vanish beyond
@xmath . This definition is reminiscent of the one that can be given in
@xmath concerning factorization of the S-matrix.

The @xmath open fermionic string can be coupled to a two-form NS-NS
background @xmath field. In [ 82 ] it has been shown that additional
boundary terms must be added to the action for the boundary conditions
obtained from the Euler-Lagrange procedure to be @xmath supersymmetric,
exactly as in the case of the @xmath string [ 79 ] . Moreover, the
presence of the second supersymmetry implies a nontrivial constraint on
the @xmath field. This is the compatibility condition with respect to
the complex structure @xmath , i.e. @xmath must be Kähler. The
consistent @xmath gauge fixed action is then

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               (1.225)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ---------

This action functional cannot be obtained from a superspace formulation.

In [ 82 ] it has been shown that the open @xmath string dynamics in the
presence of @xmath coincident D3-branes filling the target space is
modified by a magnetic @xmath field so that the open string sees an
effective metric @xmath and a noncommutative algebra on the brane
characterized by a @xmath parameter. The starting point for the analysis
is again the expression for the open string correlators ( 1.161 ). A
particular choice of the @xmath generators allows us to write the
matrices @xmath and @xmath in terms of the generators of the @xmath
subgroup of @xmath , so that in complete generality the NS-NS field is
expressed in terms of the two quantities @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.226)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this basis the open string effective metric @xmath , noncommutativity
parameter @xmath and coupling @xmath can be obtained and have
expressions similar to the corresponding ones for the ten-dimensional
string ( 1.164 ).

Exactly as in the ten dimensional case a zero-slope limit can be taken
that keeps the open string parameters finite. In this limit it has been
shown that tree-level three-string amplitudes can be obtained from the
noncommutative version of self-dual Yang-Mills in Leznov gauge (this
depends on the choice of the Lorentz frame, one can as well obtain Yang
gauge). The corresponding lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.227)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the open string effective metric and @xmath is the
corresponding derivative defined by @xmath . This result is deduced as
in the ten-dimensional case by noting that the effect of turning on the
@xmath -field is the multiplication of any open string amplitude by a
phase factor ( 1.173 ). This corresponds to replacing ordinary products
with Moyal products in the worldvolume effective field theory.

As a nontrivial check, it has also been shown that the tree-level
four-point function for @xmath noncommutative self-dual Yang-Mills in
Leznov gauge vanishes. Therefore, the natural deformation of selfdual
Yang-Mills in Leznov gauge seems to preserve the nice scattering
properties of the original, commutative theory. We have seen that the
vanishing of tree-amplitudes beyond three-point defines integrable
systems in @xmath exactly as the factorization of the S-matrix is a
definition of a an integrable system in @xmath . So the result in [ 82 ]
suggests that noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills is integrable.

This result will be important for the further developments considered in
[ 37 ] , where, in collaboration with O. Lechtenfeld, L. Mazzanti, S.
Penati and A. Popov, I have constructed a noncommutative version of the
sine-Gordon theory with a factorized S-matrix, that is obtained as a
dimensional reduction of @xmath selfdual Yang Mills.

#### 1.2.4 Non(anti)commutative field theories from the covariant
superstring

In this section I would like to discuss the superstring origin of the
non(anti)commutative superspaces introduced in sections 1.1.5, 1.1.6,
1.1.7.

Up to now I have discussed in detail the case of the open bosonic string
in flat space in the presence of a constant NS-NS background field and
Dp-branes and I have shown that the presence of the background induces a
noncommutativity in the brane coordinate algebra. I have generalized
this result to the RNS superstring, that is characterized by an @xmath
worldsheet supersymmetry and happens to exhibit target space
supersymmetry after a consistent truncation of the spectrum (GSO
projection) is performed. This theory is not manifestly supersymmetric
in target space. I have also shown how the bosonic results can be
generalized to the manifestly target-space supersymmetric GS
superstring. In this case we have seen that the presence of a constant
NS-NS background does not modify the anticommutators between fermionic
coordinates. Finally, I have generalized the bosonic string results to
the @xmath string, characterized by an @xmath worldsheet supersymmetry.
In all these cases a constant NS-NS two-form background has been
considered.

In this section we face the problem of finding a suitable superstring
background that could induce, in the presence of D-branes, a
nonanticommutative deformation of target space fermionic variables,
exactly as the NS-NS B-field induces a deformation of bosonic target
space coordinates. So target space must be a superspace and thus we need
to consider a manifestly supersymmetric version of the superstring. An
example of this is the Green-Schwarz superstring [ 4 ] we considered in
the previous section. It lives in a ten-dimensional superspace and its
action is manifestly supersymmetric. Unfortunately, because of its
complicated worldsheet symmetries, its action in a flat background is
not quadratic, it cannot be quantized in a Lorentz-covariant way and
this renders the formalism terribly difficult to handle.

Recently [ 30 ] a new proposal was made for an action describing the
ten-dimensional superstring, that is manifestly target-space
supersymmetric and is quadratic in a flat background ⁴ ⁴ 4 An
introduction to this formalism will be given in chapter 3. . In this
formalism the R-R field strengths are all contained in a bispinor @xmath
where the two indices may have opposite or same chirality depending
whether we are in IIA or IIB superstring theory. It is natural to think
that, as much as the @xmath background is related to a noncommutative
deformation @xmath , the @xmath background may be related to a @xmath
deformation.

In a series of papers [ 27 , 28 , 53 , 29 ] it has been shown that this
is indeed the case. In the first three papers the four-dimensional
theory obtained from type II ten-dimensional superstring compactified on
a Calabi-Yau three-fold [ 86 , 87 ] has been considered, while in the
last paper the full ten-dimensional superstring theory [ 30 , 88 ] has
been discussed. I will consider the four-dimensional case first, since,
compared to the covariant quantization of the superstring in ten
dimension, the formalism is much simpler in this case, because of the
smaller amount of manifest supersymmetry.

The relevant part of the lagrangian density is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.228)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath are conjugate momenta to the
superspace fermionic variables @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath
respectively ⁵ ⁵ 5 Berkovits covariant formalism is first order for
fermionic variables, whose conjugate momenta are introduced as
independent fields. This was first done by Siegel in his approach to the
GS superstring [ 89 ] . We indicate with dots target space Weyl spinor
chirality and with bars worldsheet holomorphicity. The four dimensional
action corresponding to ( 1.228 ) describes a free conformal field
theory. The fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath satisfy
free equations of motion, second order for @xmath and first order for
fermionic variables. This theory exhibits an @xmath target-space
supersymmetry ⁶ ⁶ 6 It is interesting to note that, if one considers the
undotted fermions only, the model can be regarded as a topological
B-model on euclidean four-dimensional space and the topological BRST
symmetry is strictly connected to the susy transformations generated by
the dotted charges @xmath and @xmath . .

It is useful to apply to ( 1.228 ) the following change of variables

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.229)
     @xmath      (1.230)
     @xmath      (1.231)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and analogous for @xmath and @xmath . In the first line the reader will
recognize the change of variables ( 1.148 ) introduced in section 1.1.7
to obtain Seiberg’s deformed superspace from my @xmath
non(anti)commutative superspace. This transformation was first
introduced by Vafa and Ooguri in [ 27 ] . In the second and third lines
I have written the worldsheet versions of the chiral supersymmetry
charges and superspace covariant derivatives,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.232)
     @xmath      (1.233)
  -- -------- -- ---------

( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are dressed in this
representation). So, @xmath and @xmath represent the conjugate momenta
to @xmath ’s at fixed @xmath exactly as @xmath ’s represent the same
conjugate momenta at fixed @xmath .

The lagrangian ( 1.228 ) can be rewritten in terms of the new variables
as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.234)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the presence of D-branes, one obtains the fermionic boundary
conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.235)
     @xmath      (1.236)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that only preserve half of the supersymmetry, generated by the charges
@xmath and @xmath .

It is possible to couple the action to the R-R background described by
the selfdual graviphoton field strength

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.237)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Only in euclidean signature it is possible to turn on the selfdual part
of the super-two-form field strength @xmath while setting the
antiselfdual part @xmath to zero. This is the stringy counterpart of the
discussion we presented in section 1.1.5 for nonanticommutative
superspaces and works exactly the same way.

It is possible to show that the background ( 1.237 ) is an exact
solution of the full nonlinear string equations of motion and that there
is no backreaction to the metric. This can be seen from the fact that a
purely selfdual field strength does not contribute to the energy
momentum tensor and does not involve the dilaton field in its kinetic
term.

In the action the graviphoton field strength couples to the worldsheet
supersymmetry currents @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.238)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is actually the graviphoton integrated vertex operator ⁷ ⁷ 7 In
chapter 3 I will give a detailed derivation of the corresponding vertex
operator in the ten-dimensional case. , that in this case gives the
whole dynamics since there is no backreaction.

We are interested in the effect of the background on the dynamics, so we
can concentrate on the @xmath sector, with the lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.239)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can integrate out the fields @xmath and @xmath by using their
equations of motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.240)
     @xmath      (1.241)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and obtain the effective lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.242)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We obtain boundary conditions for both fermionic variables and their
derivatives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.243)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.244)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first condition breaks half of the supersymmetry on the boundary.
The second one corresponds to the equality of supersymmetry charges
@xmath on the boundary (see the equations of motion 1.241 ). The
boundary conditions for derivatives of @xmath has first appeared in [ 90
] for the GS superstring. In that case they were additional, unexpected
conditions, required by consistency of boundary conditions under
kappa-symmetry. They were shown not to overconstrain the system, because
they arise as restrictions of the field equations to the boundary. In
this case instead the effective action ( 1.239 ), obtained by
integrating out the fermionic conjugate momenta, is second order for the
fermions. A boundary condition for derivatives of @xmath naturally
arises from requiring that there are no surface terms in the
Euler-Lagrange equations of motion.

One can determine the fermionic propagators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.245)
     @xmath      (1.246)
     @xmath      (1.247)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the boundary we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.248)
  -- -------- -- ---------

corresponding to the algebra

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.249)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the coordinates @xmath and @xmath are not affected by the
background coupling, they remain commuting. This means that the algebra
written in terms of the original coordinate @xmath involves nontrivial
terms in @xmath and @xmath , as required by consistency and first shown
in my paper [ 26 ] .

In [ 27 ] the deformation ( 1.249 ) was not welcome. It has been shown
that when the open superstring is also coupled to a constant gluino
superfield on the boundary, by adding the following term to the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.250)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the superspace deformation ( 1.249 ) is undone and supersymmetry is
restored if the gluino fields satisfy the deformed algebra

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.251)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Instead, in [ 28 ] the supersymmetry-deforming algebra ( 1.249 ) was
accepted and it was shown that in the zero-slope limit the @xmath
theories we discussed in section 1.1.7 naturally emerge in string
theory.

The analysis pursued in [ 28 ] was further developed in [ 53 ] . In this
paper it was shown that the constant selfdual background deforms the
original @xmath superPoincaré algebra into another algebra that has
still eight supercharges, four of which are unaffected by the
background. In the presence of a D-brane, @xmath supersymmetry is
realized linearly and the remaining @xmath is realized nonlinearly. This
interpretation of the new terms arising in the supersymmetry algebra is
similar to the original one we gave in [ 26 ] . There we didn’t consider
the new terms arising in the supersymmetry algebra as symmetry-breaking
terms. We considered them as symmetry-deforming terms and we recast them
in the known form of a q-deformation.

It is very interesting to note that if both selfdual and antiselfdual
field strength are turned on, there is a backreaction that warps
spacetime to euclidean @xmath . The string in this background has been
studied in [ 91 ] and the structure of the action closely resembles the
pure spinor version of the superstring in @xmath [ 88 ] . The action
becomes quadratic in the limit @xmath resembling the Penrose limit in
the ten-dimensional case. @xmath super Yang-Mills on euclidean @xmath
has been studied in [ 92 ] .

A comparison to noncommutativity in the bosonic case is due. First of
all, we notice that the superspace deformation ( 1.249 ) vanishes in the
zero slope limit @xmath unless we also take the limit @xmath . This in
principle can be done since @xmath is an exact solution to the string
equations. Moreover, it is interesting to note that, in
contradistinction to the bosonic case, where the @xmath term only
affects the boundary conditions, the @xmath term only affects the bulk
equations of motion. It would be nice to see if there is a duality
transformation connecting the two cases ⁸ ⁸ 8 In [ 93 ] S-duality was
considered in the context of noncommutative geometry in the presence of
both NS-NS B-field and R-R potentials . .

The four-dimensional results in [ 27 , 28 ] have been generalized to ten
dimensions in [ 29 ] . The main difference between the compactified four
dimensional case and the full ten dimensional case is that a constant
R-R field strength background, represented by a bispinor @xmath , is not
a solution of the ten-dimensional string equations of motion (full
nonlinear type II SUGRA equations), but it is only a solution of the
linearized equations. Therefore in this case there is a backreaction.
Nevertheless, it is possible to compute the corresponding vertex
operator to be added to the action. The resulting theory is not the
complete sigma model. In [ 29 ] it was considered the general case where
a NS-NS constant @xmath , a constant R-R field strength @xmath and
constant gravitinos @xmath @xmath are turned on. The resulting algebra
is characterized by the usual nontrivial bosonic commutator induced by
@xmath , a nontrivial anticommutator between @xmath and @xmath induced
by the R-R field strength and nontrivial commutators between the bosonic
coordinate and the two fermionic ones induced by the two gravitinos. It
would be nice to perform an analogous analysis in the pure spinor
version of the superstring in a p-p wave background [ 94 ] . In this
case the whole sigma model action is known that involves a constant R-R
field strength coupled to fermionic variables in a similar way with
respect to ( 1.242 ).

After the superspace deformation of a theory is known, one can integrate
out the fermionic variables to obtain the component formulation of the
theory. It has been shown in [ 67 ] that the component formulation of
@xmath super Yang-Mills theory can be obtained from standard RNS type
IIB string theory compactified of a Calabi-Yau three-fold in the
presence of a constant graviphoton background with a definite duality. A
graviphoton background can be obtained in euclidean space by wrapping a
R-R 5-form around a 3-cycle of internal Calabi-Yau space. Even if in the
general case the RNS is not suitable to deal with a R-R background, in
the constant graviphoton field strength case there are simplifications
that allow for the computation of tree-level scattering amplitudes on
the disk with the insertion of R-R vertex operators. The method used in
[ 67 ] is intrinsically perturbative, but the results are exact in the
@xmath limit. So the nonanticommutative @xmath super Yang-Mills action
in its component formulation is recovered from RNS string computations.

### 1.3 Generalization to non-constant backgrounds

In this section I would like to discuss some results generalizing the
connection between string theory and noncommutative geometry to the case
of a nonconstant @xmath field. Let us introduce the notation @xmath for
the gauge invariant combination in terms of which the physics of an open
string in the presence of Dp-branes, gauge field @xmath and background
@xmath field is described. The latter will not be constrained to be
constant from now on.

We have to consider three possible situations, of growing complexity

-   constant @xmath

-   nonconstant @xmath , @xmath

-   nonconstant @xmath , @xmath

We have discussed the first case, corresponding to flat D-brane and flat
background, in sections 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 1.2.3 . Summarizing the results in
[ 7 ] , in this case the Dp-brane worldvolume is described in terms of
noncommuting coordinates. @xmath defines an associative symplectic
structure associated to the noncommutativity matrix @xmath . In the
limit @xmath physics can be described by an effective theory which is a
gauge theory deformed by the noncommutative associative Moyal product.
In the limit @xmath the noncommutative parameter @xmath is given by the
inverse of @xmath (see 1.180 ).

The second case has been studied in [ 95 ] . It describes a physical
situation with curved Dp-branes in a flat background. The worldvolume
deformation is decribed by Kontsevich @xmath product, where the
noncommutativity parameter is given by the inverse of @xmath , as
before. In this case @xmath is not constant anymore, so neither is
@xmath and the correct product is Kontsevich @xmath . @xmath is still a
Poisson structure on the manifold, that now exhibits a coordinate
dependence such that associativity is satisfied. The formula ( 1.185 ),
valid in the limit @xmath , is generalized to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.252)
  -- -------- -- ---------

being @xmath Kontsevich associative product.

The last case, discussed in [ 96 ] , is a further generalization to the
case where the background is also curved. @xmath is not a Poisson
structure anymore, since associativity is lost. This is related to the
emergence of a second geometrical object playing a role in the physics
of the system. This is the 3-form @xmath , that has been shown to be the
parameter governing nonassociativity. However, it is always possible to
give a description of the Dp-brane worldvolume in terms of a
Kontsevich-like product. Noncommutativity is still governed by @xmath
and nonassociativity by @xmath .

In [ 96 ] a metric @xmath is considered that is a small perturbation
from the flat metric of section 1.2.1. The string action in a generic
curved background is still of the form ( 1.157 ), where the target space
metric is @xmath , describing a curved spacetime. It is possible to
expand the action around the flat spacetime metric as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.253)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath represents the action in a flat spacetime ( 1.157 ) and
@xmath is the first correction due to the presence of a small curvature.

In situations where a curved background is present, it is convenient to
choose special coordinates, known as Riemann normal coordinates, defined
along geodesics in target space starting from @xmath (see for instance [
97 ] , where the normal coordinate expansion of the metric is introduced
in the context of sigma models and string theory). In terms of these
coordinates the Taylor expansion of every tensor around @xmath is
expressed in terms of covariant tensors evaluated at the origin. In
particular, the expansion for the metric up to second order in @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.254)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the curvature tensor. The analogous expansion for the
@xmath field, in radial gauge, is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.255)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath .

In [ 96 ] a first order approximation in @xmath is applied. The action
considered is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.256)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the action ( 1.157 ) for flat @xmath and constant @xmath
, while @xmath is the first order correction in @xmath , deriving from
the @xmath expansion ( 1.255 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.257)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is treated as an interaction term with respect to the free
theory, described by the action @xmath .

The perturbative analysis with the interaction @xmath gives the
following results. In the limit @xmath correlators are expressed in a
form analogous to ( 1.252 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.258)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is Kontsevich-like nonassociative product, whose definition
is completely analogous to ( 1.78 , 1.79 ), with @xmath . The relation (
1.70 ) is not valid, though, for the noncommutativity parameter @xmath
and the violation of associativity is proportional to the 3-form @xmath
as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.259)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that ( 1.258 ) is problematic, because of the nonassociativity of
@xmath . It is necessary to specify the positions of the points @xmath
on the boundary of the disk, so invariance under cyclic permutations is
lost.

The coordinate algebra is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.260)
  -- -------- -- ---------

showing that the role played by the two-form @xmath is unchanged in the
general curved case. The relations concerning the nonassociativity of
the coordinate algebra are instead

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.261)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.262)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These formulas further clarify the role played by the 3-form @xmath as
the parameter governing nonassociativity.

The deep relationship between spacetime geometry and nonassociativity on
the D-brane worldvolume discovered in [ 96 ] is very interesting,
showing that nonassociative geometry [ 98 ] also plays a role in the new
developments regarding spacetime pioneered by string theory.

It would be nice to generalize the results discussed in this section to
the manifestly target space supersymmetric string (in Green-Schwarz or
Berkovits formalism) to see whether a Kontsevich-like product similar to
the one I proposed in [ 26 ] , in collaboration with D. Klemm and S.
Penati, may emerge in the presence of a nontrivial super-three-form
field strength background .

It would be also interesting to consider a generalization of the
discussion presented in section 1.2.4, where the R-R field strength is
not constant. In particular, when the R-R field strength has a linear
dependence on the bosonic coordinates, it would be nice to investigate
whether Lie algebraic deformed superspaces, characterized by the
fermionic anticommutators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.263)
  -- -------- -- ---------

can appear. These kind of superspace was first studied in [ 33 ] , in a
different context. There, the authors considered the possibility that
bosonic spacetime had a fermionic substructure, given by the relation (
1.263 ). In [ 32 ] , in collaboration with P. A. Grassi, I have started
to consider this problem by computing the vertex operator for the
Berkovits covariant superstring for a R-R field strength with a linear
dependence on the bosonic coordinates. This will be discussed in detail
in chapter 3.

## Chapter 2 Noncommutative deformation of integrable field theories

### 2.1 A brief introduction to selected topics concerning
two-dimensional classical integrable systems

Disclaimer: This section is not a thorough introduction to the vast
field of integrable systems. I will only review topics needed in the two
following sections, where my study of the noncommutative sine-Gordon
system will be presented. In most cases I will not give details and I
will just give references for the interested reader. Moreover, for any
single topic in this section I will exhibit a single example, the
ordinary sine-Gordon model.

#### 2.1.1 Infinite conserved currents and the bicomplex approach

In classical mechanics a system described by @xmath degrees of freedom
is completely integrable when it is endowed with @xmath conserved
currents. In classical field theory, a system with an infinite number of
local conserved currents is also said to be integrable. This is a
property of the equations of motion. For some integrable system an
action is also known that generates the equations by an Euler-Lagrange
procedure, but this is not true in general. Indeed, it is true for the
sine-Gordon model that I will consider in the rest of this chapter.

By making use of the bicomplex technique [ 99 ] it is possible to
construct second order differential equations that are integrable.
Moreover, with this approach it is very easy to generate the
corresponding conserved currents by an iterative procedure.

In this section we use euclidean signature and complex coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

A bicomplex is a triple @xmath where @xmath is an @xmath -graded
associative (but not necessarily commutative) algebra, @xmath is the
algebra of functions on @xmath and @xmath are two linear maps satisfying
the conditions @xmath . @xmath is therefore a space of @xmath -forms.
Let us consider the linear equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a real parameter and @xmath for a given “spin” @xmath .
Suppose a nontrivial solution @xmath exists. Expanding it in powers of
the given parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

one obtains the following equations relating the components @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore we obtain the chain of @xmath -closed and @xmath -exact forms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the chain not to be trivial @xmath must not be @xmath -exact. When
the two differential maps @xmath and @xmath are defined in terms of
ordinary derivatives in @xmath , the conditions @xmath are trivially
satisfied. Therefore, the possibly infinite set of conservation laws (
2.4 ) is not associated to any second order differential equation and it
is not useful for our purpose.

However, it is possible to gauge the bicomplex by dressing the two
differential maps @xmath and @xmath with the connections @xmath and
@xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The flatness conditions @xmath are now nontrivial and give the
differential equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Exactly as before we can consider the linear equation corresponding to (
2.2 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nonlinear equations ( 2.9 ) are the compatibility conditions for (
2.10 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Supposing that the linear equation ( 2.10 ) admits a solution @xmath and
expanding it as @xmath , one obtains the possibly infinite chain of
identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which @xmath -closed and @xmath -exact forms @xmath can be
constructed, when @xmath is not @xmath -exact. Therefore, with a
suitable choice of @xmath and @xmath , it is possible to construct
interesting second order integrable differential equations from ( 2.9 )
and their conserved currents from ( 2.12 ). In general the currents
@xmath are nonlocal functions of the coordinates, since they may be
expressed in terms of integrals, but it is possible to extract local
currents from them that have a physical meaning.

As an example, we can derive the ordinary sine-Gordon equation from this
formalism. Let @xmath , where @xmath is the space of @xmath matrices
with entries in the algebra of smooth functions on ordinary @xmath and
@xmath is a two-dimensional graded vector space with the @xmath basis
@xmath satisfying @xmath . If we take the differential maps

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with commuting constant matrices @xmath and @xmath , then the conditions
@xmath are trivially satisfied.

To obtain nontrivial second order differential equations we can gauge
the bicomplex by dressing @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath generic invertible matrix in @xmath . The condition @xmath
is trivially satisfied, while @xmath yields the nontrivial second order
differential equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the choice

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and taking @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain the sine-Gordon equation from the off-diagonal part of the
matrix equation ( 2.14 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The diagonal part instead gives an equation which is trivially
satisfied.

From this derivation it is clear that the bicomplex approach can be
naturally extended to noncommutative space, by replacing ordinary
products with Moyal products in the whole discussion. In particular
@xmath and @xmath and equations ( 2.9 ) are generalized accordingly.
This will be discussed for the sine-Gordon model in section 2.2.4.

Since in the noncommutative case the group @xmath is not closed any more
and must be extended to @xmath , as we have seen in section 1.1.2, it is
natural to expect that the noncommutative generalization of this
construction for the sine-Gordon equation will be nontrivial.

#### 2.1.2 Reductions from selfdual Yang-Mills

The self-duality equations for Yang-Mills fields in @xmath with
signature @xmath or @xmath [ 117 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

are a famous example of nonlinear integrable equations in four
dimensions. For @xmath gauge theory the potentials @xmath are real. It
is possible to consider an analytic continuation of @xmath into complex
space parametrized by the complex coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . The selfduality equations ( 2.20 ) can be rewritten in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last sign is @xmath is the euclidean case and @xmath in the
kleinian case. The first equation in ( 2.21 ) implies that the
potentials @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ) are pure gauges for fixed
@xmath , @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ), therefore two @xmath complex
matrices @xmath and @xmath can be found such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining @xmath , the last equation can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

describing selfdual Yang-Mills in Yang formulation. This equation
resembles the sum of two WZW model equations (see section 1.1.3)
involving @xmath and @xmath variables, respectively. Therefore Yang
equation ( 2.24 ) can be obtained from the following action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a homotopy path satisfying @xmath and @xmath .

Ward conjectured that all integrable equations in @xmath can be obtained
as dimensional reductions of selfdual Yang-Mills equations [ 127 ] , so
that the latter play the role of a universal integrable system. Since
then the conjecture has been tested on many integrable systems [ 118 ]
whose Lax pair can also be obtained by reduction from the one associated
to the selfduality equations ( 2.20 ). The kleinian case is particularly
interesting because of its connections with the @xmath string, discussed
in section 1.2.2.

Reductions are obtained by requiring invariance under any arbitrary
subgroup @xmath of the group of conformal transformations of @xmath (or
@xmath ). Afterwards algebraic constraints can be applied to the
arbitrary matrices involved in the equations to obtain known integrable
models. In most cases invariance under translations in certain
directions is required. Therefore it is clear that there are many more
possibilities in reducing selfdual Yang-Mills in @xmath with respect to
the euclidean case, since, instead of requiring invariance under the
usual complex coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

(combining space with space and time with time), in the kleinian case
one can also require invariance with respect to light-cone coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

(combining space and time).

As an example I will show how ordinary euclidean sine-Gordon model can
be obtained from selfdual Yang-Mills equations.

The euclidean version of Yang equation ( 2.24 ) gives the sine-Gordon
equation if one choses

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In fact one finds that the field @xmath satisfies ( 2.18
) with @xmath .

It will be also useful to know that the sine-Gordon equation can be
obtained from kleinian selfdual Yang-Mills equations through a two-step
reduction procedure. First of all one requires independence of Yang
equation ( 2.24 ) under one of the real coordinates @xmath , reducing to
the @xmath model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant vector in spacetime. A nonzero @xmath breaks
Lorentz invariance but restores integrability when it is spacelike and
with unit length (nonlinear sigma models in @xmath dimensions can be
Lorentz invariant or integrable but not both [ 127 ] ). From this
equation, in the case @xmath , we can make a further reduction [ 107 ]
by choosing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath depending on only two coordinates with different signature.
As a result, we obtain the sine Gordon equation in @xmath dimensions for
the field @xmath .

#### 2.1.3 Properties of the S-matrix

In section 2.1.1 we have seen how to construct nonlinear differential
equations in two-dimensions with the property of having an infinite
number of conserved currents. We have also said that from that
construction it is possible to extract conserved currents that are local
and thus have a physical meaning. In this case the corresponding
equations are called integrable. Moreover, we have seen an example of
two-dimensional integrable system, the ordinary sine-Gordon equation.

The S-matrix of a two-dimensional theory with an infinite set of
conserved currents that are local and yield conserved charges which are
components of Lorentz tensors of increasing rank enjoys several nice
properties.

-   The general multiparticle S-matrix is elastic, i.e. the number and
    set of momenta of particles of any given mass remains the same
    before and after the collision.

-   Any multiparticle S-matrix factorizes into a product of two-particle
    S-matrices.

-   These two-particle S-matrices satisfy a cubic equation that in most
    cases is sufficient to obtain exact expressions for them (unitarity
    must be used, though!). The sine-Gordon model is one of these cases.

These are of course very nice properties. Indeed, the task of computing
the general S-matrix considerably simplifies, since it reduces to
determining only the two-body S-matrix.

I’m not going to give a proof of this theorem. The interested reader can
for instance refer to [ 100 ] . The key ingredient in the proof is the
sufficient complexity of the conserved charges (i.e. the growing Lorentz
rank). However, locality is strongly used and its is unclear whether the
kind of nonlocality introduced by the @xmath product can be a problem.
As we discussed in section 1.1.2, unitarity and causality problems arise
in theories with noncommutating time, such as 1+1 theories, together
with a general breakdown of the quantum mechanics framework.

In my paper [ 36 ] , an explicit example of a noncommutative two
dimensional theory with an infinite number of conserved currents that
does not have a factorized S-matrix was constructed. Therefore, it seems
that the theorem cannot be trivially extended to noncommutative case.
However, in my paper [ 37 ] , a noncommutative two-dimensional system
which is integrable and has a factorized S-matrix was constructed. It
might be that a nontrivial interplay between integrability and causality
drives a system to exhibit or not a factorized S-matrix. These issues
will be discussed in the rest of this chapter.

#### 2.1.4 Solitons

The name soliton refers to solutions of nonlinear equations that
represent a localized packet travelling without changing shape or
velocity and preserving these properties after collision with other
packets. In complicated equations containing nonlinear and dispersive
terms, the existence of this kind of solution is a highly nontrivial
property, due to a special balance between the effects of these two
kinds of contributions.

A very famous example of a system displaying this kind of classical
solutions is the sine-Gordon model. It can be shown that this system,
described by the equation of motion ( 2.18 ), admits the following
static finite-energy solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

(soliton) and the corresponding one (antisoliton) obtained by the
discrete transformation @xmath , which is a symmetry of the system.
Moving solutions can be obtained from static ones by Lorentz
transformation. A third kind of solution is present, called doublet or
breather solution, which can be interpreted as a bound system made of a
soliton-antisoliton pair. For a detailed derivation of these solutions
the reader should refer to [ 100 ] . It can be shown by studying exact
time-dependent solutions representing scattering of solitons that the
colliding solitons do not change shape or velocity after collision. From
direct inspection of these scattering solutions, representing two (or
more) (anti)solitons far apart and approaching with a relative velocity,
it is clear that the only effect of the collision in the distant future
is some time delay (see [ 100 ] ).

Solitons solutions are not present in any scalar field theory with a
potential bounded from below in spatial dimension greater than two, as
the energy of any field configuration can always be lowered by
shrinking. This follows from a simple scaling argument by Derrick [ 101
] .

Let us consider a theory for a single scalar field in D+1 dimensions for
simplicity (the discussion can be easily extended to a set of @xmath
interacting scalar fields), described by the standard relativistic
lagrangian. The corresponding energy functional for static
configurations is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be an extremum of ( 2.36 ). Consider the energy of the
configuration @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we assumed that @xmath is an extremum, we require @xmath . This
gives the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the potential @xmath is bounded from below by zero and @xmath , than
kinetic and potential terms in this equation must vanish separately and
thus no nontrivial space-dependent solutions are admitted. In the case
@xmath one obtains that @xmath . If @xmath has only discrete minima,
then also in @xmath no time-dependent solutions are allowed. However,
when @xmath has a continuos set of minima (in the case with more than
one scalar field), possible space-dependent solutions are permitted.

Notice that this proof is not valid when higher derivative terms are
present and when the scalar field is described by a nonrelativistic
lagrangian. Moreover, only static solutions are excluded, while
time-dependent ones are allowed.

### 2.2 Deforming an integrable field theory: The sine-Gordon model (a
first attempt)

#### 2.2.1 Noncommutative solitons

In this section I will mostly refer to the ICTP lectures by R. Gopakumar
[ 11 ] . To the interested reader, I also suggest the lectures by N.
Nekrasov [ 12 ] and by J. Harvey [ 13 ] . Since the literature
concerning noncommutative solitons is vast, I only give a partial list
of references in [ 102 ] . To this, one should add references [ 103 ,
104 , 105 , 106 ] where solitons of a specific 2+1 integrable model are
studied, which are related the noncommutative sine-Gordon solitons in my
work [ 37 ] that will be discussed in section 2.3.5.

A quite universal feature of noncommutative field theories is that they
admit classical finite energy soliton solutions that have no counterpart
in local field theories. This novel soliton solutions are more or less
insensitive to the details of the specific theory considered, so in this
section I will consider the scalar theory in 2+1 dimensions for
simplicity, with only spatial noncommutativity.

In section 2.1.5 we have seen that ordinary scalar theory, with a
standard relativistic lagrangian and a potential with a discrete set of
minima, does not have any localized solution in spatial dimension
greater than one [ 101 ] (see section 2.1.5). In the following we will
see that spatial nonlocality induced by noncommutativity allows for the
presence of novel localized solutions that vanish in the commutative
limit.

Consider the energy functional for static configurations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are complex coordinates in the two dimensional
noncommutative space and @xmath is the corresponding Moyal product. As
we have seen in section 1.1.1, integrated quadratic terms are unaffected
by Moyal product, so only the potential term is modified with respect to
the ordinary theory. Since we know that for @xmath there are no
solitonic solutions, we will first consider the limit @xmath . It is
useful to rescale the complex coordinates @xmath , @xmath , so that the
@xmath product does not depend explicitly on the deformation parameter
and the energy functional becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all the @xmath dependence is in front of the potential term. In
the limit @xmath the kinetic term is negligible with respect to the
potential term, at least for localized configurations varying over a
size of order one in the rescaled coordinates. Therefore, we will look
for solutions of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

For instance, in the case of a cubic potential, one has to solve the
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the commutative case this equation would only admit the constant
solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the extrema of the function @xmath .

Nonlocality introduced by Moyal product allows for more interesting
solutions. Recalling the Weyl-Moyal correspondence we introduced in
section 1.1.1, relating functions in a noncommutative algebra to
operators in a suitable Hilbert space, we see that functions @xmath
satisfying @xmath exist and correspond to projectors @xmath , @xmath ,
in the Hilbert space. Therefore it is clear that @xmath is a solution of
( 2.42 ) when @xmath is a projection operator on some subspace of the
Hilbert space and @xmath is an extremum of @xmath . Since integration
over coordinates @xmath , @xmath corresponds through the Weyl-Moyal
correspondence to trace over the Hilbert space, the energy functional in
operator language is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most general solution to ( 2.42 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients @xmath are chosen among the ordinary constant
extrema @xmath of @xmath and @xmath are mutually orthogonal projection
operators.

To understand the physical meaning of the solutions we have found, we
have to go back to configuration space. One finds that the solutions (
2.45 ) are radially symmetric in space and with an @xmath -dependence
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the n-th Laguerre polynomial. The simplest solution @xmath
is a gaussian. Moreover, non radially symmetric solutions can be
generated by noting that the action in the limit @xmath has the @xmath
symmetry @xmath , where @xmath is a unitary operator acting on the
Hilbert space. It can be easily proven that radially symmetric solutions
are stable against small fluctuations when they are constructed around a
local minimum configuration @xmath of the potential @xmath and that non
radially symmetric are stable too, since @xmath rotations do not change
the energy. So stable solitons are present when the potential has at
least two minima.

The @xmath symmetry is broken when @xmath corrections are taken into
account (i.e. the kinetic term is not negligible anymore). Most of the
infinite solutions we found in the @xmath case disappear, but it was
found that an interesting finite dimensional moduli space remains.

Finally, I would like to discuss the connection between solitons in
noncommutative field theory and D-branes. Actually, these solitons are
the D-branes of string theory manifested in a field theory. Therefore,
their study allows for probing stringy features in the more controlled
context of field theory.

An example of a stringy application of our discussion of solitons in
scalar noncommutative field theory is in the context of tachyon
condensation. It is well-known that bosonic string theory is unstable
because of the presence of a tachyonic scalar field @xmath . The
effective action for the tachyon field can be obtained by integrating
out massive string fields and is expected to take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where higher derivative terms and terms involving massless modes have
been neglected. @xmath is a general potential with an unstable extremum
at @xmath and a minimum chosen to be @xmath . As we have seen in section
1.2.1, turning on a B-field is equivalent to replacing the closed string
metric @xmath with the effective open string metric @xmath and ordinary
products with Moyal products in ( 2.48 ). In the zero-slope limit
derivative terms can be neglected. The solitons of the theory obtained
in this limit are the noncommutative solitons we studied before. For
instance the gaussian solution @xmath localized in two of the
noncommutative directions is a candidate for the @xmath -brane. These
solitons display the same instability of the corresponding D-branes,
since they correspond to an extremum of @xmath that is a maximum.

From this brief discussion it should be clear that noncommutative field
theories exhibit stringy features, such as D-branes, in the simpler
context of a field theory. Therefore, their study can be helpful in the
understanding of many string theory issues and tachyon condensation is
just one example among these.

#### 2.2.2 Noncommutative deformation of integrable field theories

As we have seen in chapter 1, bosonic noncommutative field theories
display a variety of interesting properties but also problematic
features, when time is involved in noncommutativity. In this context, an
interesting question is how noncommutativity could affect the dynamics
of exactly solvable field theories, as for instance two–dimensional
integrable theories. As we have seen in section 2.1.1, a common feature
of these systems is that the existence of an infinite chain of local
conserved currents is guaranteed by the fact that the equations of
motion can be written as zero curvature conditions for a suitable set of
covariant derivatives [ 108 , 109 ] . In some cases, as for example the
ordinary sine–Gordon or sigma models, an action is also known which
generates the integrable equations according to an action principle.

Constructing a consistent noncommutative generalization of a
two-dimensional theory is a particularly challenging problem though,
since, when working with a Minkowski signature, time must be necessarily
involved in noncommutativity.

Noncommutative versions of ordinary models are intuitively defined as
models which reduce to the ordinary ones when the noncommutation
parameter @xmath is removed. As we discussed in detail for the specific
example of the free massless scalar field theory in section 1.1.3, in
general noncommutative generalizations are not unique as one can
construct different noncommutative equations of motion which collapse to
the same expression when @xmath goes to zero. For two dimensional
integrable systems, a general criterion to restrict the number of
possible noncommutative versions is to require classical integrability
to survive in noncommutative geometry. This suggests that any
noncommutative generalization should be performed at the level of
equations of motion by promoting the standard zero curvature techniques.
This program has been worked out for a number of known integrable
equations in Refs. [ 110 , 111 ] .

In chapter 1 we have discussed how noncommutative theories naturally
arise in the context of string theory. In particular, in section 1.2.2,
we have shown how the open @xmath string in the presence of a constant
NS-NS background and a stack of @xmath D3-branes can be described, in
the zero-slope limit, by @xmath noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills
theory. Tree-level S-matrix computations show that the vanishing of
amplitudes beyond three point, which is characteristic of ordinary
selfdual Yang-Mills, is preserved in the noncommutative theory,
suggesting that noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills, as its ordinary
counterpart, is endowed with classical integrability. In section 2.1.3,
we have seen that many ordinary integrable models in two and three
dimensions can be obtained through a dimensional reduction procedure
from selfdual Yang-Mills. From all this it is clear that dimensional
reduction from noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills could be another
useful technique to generate possibly integrable noncommutative systems
in 1+1 and 2+1 dimensions.

It is well known that in integrable commutative field theories there is
no particle production and the S-matrix factorizes. A priori the same
relation between the existence of infinite conserved charges and
factorization properties of scattering processes might be lost in the
noncommutative case. Nonlocality in time, responsible for acausal
behavior of scattering processes and non unitarity, may interfere in a
way to spoil these nice scattering properties. On the other hand, one
may also hope that classical integrability would alleviate these
pathologies arising when time-space noncommutativity is present. In any
case it would be nice to construct a noncommutative generalization of a
given ordinary integrable theory characterized by a well-defined and
factorized S-matrix.

Finally, as we have seen in section 2.1.5, two-dimensional integrable
field theories admit soliton solutions. In the noncommutative case, as
we have seen in section 2.2.5, a new kind of soliton appears that
vanishes in the commutative limit. The class of soliton solutions of the
noncommutative version of an integrable field theory is expected to
display both solitons that reduce to ordinary ones in the commutative
limit and new solitons that vanish in the limit.

#### 2.2.3 The natural noncommutative generalization of the sine-Gordon
model

In my papers [ 36 , 37 ] , in collaboration with M.T. Grisaru, O.
Lechtenfeld, L. Mazzanti, S. Penati and A.D. Popov, continuing the
program initiated by M.T. Grisaru and S. Penati in [ 34 ] , I have
addressed the problem of generalizing the sine-Gordon theory to
noncommutative space.

The main motivation for this work was the evidence that the natural
deformation of this theory, described by the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the corresponding equations of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

is affected by some problems both at the classical and the quantum
level.

At the classical level it does not seem to be integrable since the
ordinary currents promoted to noncommutative currents by replacing the
products with @xmath –products are not conserved [ 34 ] . Moreover, we
don’t know how to find a systematic procedure to construct conserved
currents since the equations of motion cannot be obtained as zero
curvature conditions (a discussion about the lack of integrability for
this system is also given in Ref. [ 112 ] ).

Scattering properties of the natural generalization of the sine-Gordon
model have been investigated in [ 112 ] . It was found that particle
production occurs. The tree level @xmath amplitude does not vanish.

At the quantum level the renormalizability properties of the ordinary
model ( 2.49 ) defined for @xmath seem to be destroyed by
noncommutativity. The reason is quite simple and can be understood by
analyzing the structure of the divergences of the NC model compared to
the ordinary ones [ 113 , 114 ] . In the @xmath regime the only
divergences come from multitadpole diagrams. In the ordinary case the
@xmath –loop diagram gives a contribution @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
are the UV and IR cut–offs respectively. This result is independent of
the number @xmath of external fields and of the external momenta. As a
consequence the total contribution at this order can be resummed as
@xmath and the divergence is cancelled by renormalizing the coupling
@xmath . This holds at any order @xmath and the model is renormalizable.

In the noncommutative case the generic vertex from the expansion of
@xmath brings nontrivial phase factors which depend on the momenta
coming out of the vertex and on the noncommutativity parameter. The
final configuration of phase factors associated to a given diagram
depends on the order we use to contract the fields in the vertex.
Therefore, in the noncommutative case the ordinary @xmath –loop diagram
splits into a planar and a certain number of nonplanar configurations,
where the planar one has a trivial phase factor whereas the nonplanar
diagrams differ by the configuration of the phases (for a general
discussion see Refs. [ 2 , 115 ] ). The most general noncommutative
multitadpole diagram is built up by combining planar parts with
nonplanar ones where two or more tadpoles are intertwined among
themselves or with external legs. Since the nonplanar subdiagrams are
convergent [ 115 , 9 , 116 ] a generic @xmath –loop diagram contributes
to the divergences of the theory only if it contains a nontrivial planar
subdiagram. However, different @xmath –loop diagrams with different
configurations of planar and nonplanar parts give divergent
contributions whose coefficients depend on the number @xmath of external
fields and on the external momenta. A resummation of the divergences to
produce a cosine potential is not possible anymore and the
renormalization of the couplings of the model is not sufficient to make
the theory finite at any order. Noncommutativity seems to deform the
cosine potential at the quantum level and the theory loses the
renormalizability properties of the corresponding commutative model.

Thus, the “natural” generalization of sine–Gordon is not satisfactory
and one must look for a different noncommutative generalization
compatible with integrability and/or renormalizability.

#### 2.2.4 A noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon equation with an
infinite number of conserved currents

In Ref. [ 34 ] M.T. Grisaru and S. Penati constructed a classically
integrable noncommutative generalization of the sine-Gordon model, by
implementing the bicomplex approach described in section 2.1.1 (as in
that section, here we use euclidean signature and complex coordinates
@xmath , @xmath ).

The bicomplex @xmath is considered, where in this case @xmath , @xmath
is the space of @xmath matrices with entries in the algebra of smooth
functions on noncommutative @xmath and @xmath is a two-dimensional
graded vector space with the @xmath basis @xmath satisfying @xmath . The
differential maps are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with commuting constant matrices @xmath and @xmath . The conditions
@xmath are trivially satisfied.

As we have seen in section 2.1.1, to obtain nontrivial second order
differential equations the bicomplex must be gauged. In the derivation
of the noncommutative sine-Gordon given in [ 34 ] the @xmath operator is
dressed as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath generic invertible matrix in @xmath to be determined in a
way to obtain a generalization of the sine-Gordon. While the condition
@xmath is trivially satisfied, @xmath gives rise to nontrivial second
order differential equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the choice

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

equation ( 2.52 ) is a matrix equation in @xmath , corresponding to the
system of two coupled equations of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first equation contains the potential term which is the “natural”
generalization of the ordinary sine potential, whereas the other one has
the structure of a conservation law and can be seen as imposing an extra
condition on the system. In the commutative limit, the first equation
reduces to the ordinary sine–Gordon equation, whereas the second one
becomes trivial. The equations are in general complex and possess the
@xmath symmetry of the ordinary sine–Gordon ( invariance under @xmath ).

The reason why integrability seems to require two equations of motions
can be traced back to the general structure of unitary groups in
noncommutative geometry. In the bicomplex approach the ordinary
equations are obtained as zero curvature conditions for covariant
derivatives defined in terms of @xmath gauge connections. If the same
procedure is to be implemented in the noncommutative case, the group
@xmath , which is known to be not closed in noncommutative geometry, has
to be extended to a noncommutative @xmath group and a noncommutative
@xmath factor enters necessarily into the game. The appearance of the
second equation in ( 2.56 ) for this noncommutative integrable version
of sine-Gordon is then a consequence of the fact that the fields develop
a nontrivial trace part. We note that the pattern of equations found in
[ 34 ] seems to be quite general and unavoidable if integrability is of
concern. In fact, the same has been found in Ref. [ 112 ] where a
different but equivalent set of equations was proposed.

In [ 34 ] classical integrability of the system described by the set of
equations ( 2.56 ) was proven by extracting from the bicomplex chain a
set of conserved currents that are local, in the sense that they are
functions of the field @xmath and its derivatives, but not of integrals
of @xmath . Since Moyal product has an infinite expansion in derivatives
of fields, this introduces a kind of nonlocality in the theory that is
intrinsic and unavoidable when working in a noncommutative space. In [
34 ] the expansion in the noncommutativity parameter @xmath has been
studied for the first currents to check their relation with ordinary
currents and to explicitly verify their conservation up to second order
in the deformation parameter.

#### 2.2.5 Solitons

The presence of two equations of motion is in principle very restrictive
and one may wonder whether the class of solutions is empty. To show that
this is not the case, in Ref. [ 34 ] solitonic solutions were
constructed perturbatively which reduce to the ordinary solitons when we
take the commutative limit. Since a classical action was not found in [
34 ] , these solitonic solutions found are said to be localized in the
sense that at order zero in the deformation parameter they reduce to the
well-known euclidean solitons of the sine-Gordon theory. Since the
solution at order zero determines the solution to all orders in the
deformation parameter, in [ 34 ] these solitons are called localized at
all orders. More generally, we observe that the second equation in (
2.56 ) is automatically satisfied by any chiral or antichiral function.
Therefore, we expect the class of solitonic solutions to be at least as
large as the ordinary one. In the general case, instead, we expect the
class of dynamical solutions to be smaller than the ordinary one because
of the presence of the nontrivial constraint. However, since the
constraint equation is one order higher with respect to the dynamical
equation, order by order in the @xmath -expansion a solution always
exists. This means that a Seiberg–Witten map between the NC and the
ordinary model does not exist as a mapping between physical
configurations, but it might be constructed as a mapping between
equations of motion or conserved currents.

The kind of noncommutative solitons discussed in section 2.2.1 has not
been studied in [ 34 ] . These solutions in principle should be present
in this model. However, the model described in [ 34 ] was shown to
display bad scattering properties [ 36 ] , as I will show in detail in
section 2.2.9. For this reason it had to be discarded and replaced with
a new model described in section 2.3 [ 37 ] . Both kinds of soliton
solutions were studied in detail for this model (see section 2.3.5).

#### 2.2.6 Reduction from noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills

The material presented in this section and the following ones, until the
end of section 2.2, is mostly taken from the paper [ 36 ] , written in
collaboration with M.T. Grisaru, L. Mazzanti and S. Penati.

The (anti-)selfdual Yang–Mills equation is well-known to describe a
completely integrable classical system in four dimensions [ 117 ] . In
the ordinary case the equations of motion for many two dimensional
integrable systems, including sine–Gordon, can be obtained through
dimensional reduction of the (anti)selfdual Yang-Mills equations [ 118 ]
.

We have seen in section 2.1.3 that a convenient description of the
(anti)selfdual Yang-Mills system is the so called @xmath -formulation,
given in terms of a @xmath matrix-valued @xmath field satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are complex variables treated as
formally independent.

In the ordinary case, the sine-Gordon equation can be obtained from (
2.57 ) by taking @xmath in @xmath to be [ 119 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath depends on @xmath and @xmath only and @xmath are the Pauli
matrices.

A noncommutative version of the (anti-)selfdual Yang–Mills system can be
naturally obtained [ 120 ] by promoting the variables @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath to be noncommutative thus extending the ordinary
products in ( 2.57 ) to @xmath –products. In this case the @xmath field
lives in @xmath .

As we outlined in section 1.2.3, it has been shown [ 82 ] that
noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills naturally emerges from open @xmath
strings in a B-field background. Moreover, in [ 120 , 121 , 111 ]
examples of reductions to two-dimensional noncommutative systems were
given. It was also argued that the noncommutative deformation should
preserve the integrability of the systems [ 111 , 122 ] .

We now show that our noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon equations
can be derived through dimensional reduction from the noncommutative
selfdual Yang-Mills equations. For this purpose we consider the
noncommutative version of equations ( 2.57 ) and choose @xmath in @xmath
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to the matrix equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath have been defined in ( 2.56 ). Now, taking the
trace we obtain @xmath which is the constraint equation in ( 2.56 ). As
a consequence, the term proportional to @xmath gives rise to the
dynamical equation in ( 2.56 ) for the particular choice @xmath .
Therefore we have shown that the equations of motion of the
noncommutative version of sine–Gordon proposed in [ 34 ] can be obtained
from a suitable reduction of the noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills
system as in the ordinary case. From this derivation the origin of the
constraint appears even more clearly: it arises from setting to zero the
trace part which the matrices in @xmath naturally develop under @xmath
–multiplication.

Solving ( 2.60 ) for the particular choice @xmath we obtain the
alternative set of equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Order by order in the @xmath -expansion the set of equations ( 2.56 )
and ( 2.62 ) are equivalent. Therefore, the set ( 2.62 ) is equally
suitable for the description of an integrable noncommutative
generalization of sine-Gordon.

Since our noncommutative generalization of sine–Gordon is integrable,
the present result gives support to the arguments in favor of the
integrability of noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills system.

#### 2.2.7 The action

We are now interested in the possibility of determining an action for
the scalar field @xmath satisfying the system of eqs. ( 2.56 ). We are
primarily motivated by the possibility to move on to a quantum
description of the system.

In general, it is not easy to find an action for the dynamical equation
(the first eq. in ( 2.56 )) since @xmath is constrained by the second
one. One possibility could be to implement the constraint by the use of
a Lagrange multiplier. Another quite natural possibility is to try to
obtain the action by a dimensional reduction procedure from @xmath
selfdual Yang-Mills action in Yang formulation. Unfortunately, this does
not work, since WZW-like terms disappear from the reduced action because
of cyclicity of Moyal product in an integral. As a result one obtains a
reduced action generating nonchiral equations, different from the chiral
ones in eqs. ( 2.56 ) and ( 2.62 ).

We consider instead the equivalent set of equations ( 2.62 ). We rewrite
them in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath . Since @xmath is in general complex @xmath
can be seen as an element of a noncommutative complexified @xmath . The
gauge group valued function @xmath is subject to the equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

obtained by taking the h.c. of ( 2.64 ).

In order to determine the action it is convenient to concentrate on the
first equation in ( 2.64 ) and the second one in ( 2.66 ) as the two
independent complex equations of motion which describe the dynamics of
our system.

We first note that the left-hand sides of equations ( 2.64 ) and ( 2.66
) have the chiral structure which is well known to correspond to a
noncommutative version of the WZNW action [ 46 ] (see section 1.1.3).
Therefore we are led to consider the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, introducing the homotopy path @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath (
@xmath is a commuting parameter) we have defined

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

and similarly for @xmath . The first part of the action can be
recognized as the noncommutative generalization of a complexified @xmath
WZNW action [ 123 ] .

To prove that this generates the correct equations, we should take the
variation with respect to the @xmath field ( @xmath ) and deal with
complications which follow from the fact that in the noncommutative case
the variation of an exponential is not proportional to the exponential
itself. However, since the variation @xmath is arbitrary, we can forget
about its @xmath dependence and write @xmath , trading the variation
with respect to @xmath with the variation with respect to @xmath .
Analogously, the variation with respect to @xmath can be traded with the
variation with respect to @xmath .

It is then a simple calculation to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we obtain the first equation in ( 2.64 ). Treating @xmath as
an independent variable an analogous derivation gives the second
equation in ( 2.66 ) from @xmath .

We note that, when @xmath is real, @xmath and the action ( 2.67 )
reduces to @xmath . In general, since the two equations ( 2.56 ) are
complex it would be inconsistent to restrict ourselves to real
solutions. However, it is a matter of fact that the equations of motion
become real when the field is real. Perturbatively in @xmath this can be
proved order by order by direct inspection of the equations in [ 34 ] .
In particular, at a given order one can show that the imaginary part of
the equations vanishes when the constraint and the equations of motion
at lower orders are satisfied.

#### 2.2.8 The relation to the noncommutative Thirring model

In the ordinary case the equivalence between the Thirring and
sine–Gordon models [ 113 ] can be proven at the level of functional
integrals by implementing the bosonization prescription [ 45 , 124 ] on
the fermions. The same procedure has been worked out in noncommutative
geometry [ 47 , 48 ] . Starting from the noncommutative version of
Thirring described by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

the bosonization prescription gives rise to the action for the bosonized
noncommutative massive Thirring model which turns out to be a
noncommutative WZNW action supplemented by a cosine potential term for
the noncommutative U(1) group valued field which enters the bosonization
of the fermionic currents. In particular, in the most recent paper in
Ref. [ 47 ] it has been shown that working in Euclidean space the
massless Thirring action corresponds to the sum of two WZNW actions once
a suitable choice for the regularization parameter is made. Moreover, in
Ref. [ 48 ] it was proven that the bosonization of the mass term in (
2.71 ) gives rise to a cosine potential for the scalar field with
coupling constant proportional to @xmath .

The main observation is that our action ( 2.67 ) is the sum of two
noncommutative WZNW actions plus cosine potential terms for the pair of
@xmath group valued fields @xmath and @xmath , considered as
independent. Therefore, our action can be interpreted as coming from the
bosonization of the massive noncommutative Thirring model, in agreement
with the results in [ 47 , 48 ] .

We have shown that even in the noncommutative case the sine–Gordon field
can be interpreted as the scalar field which enters the bosonization of
the Thirring model, so proving that the equivalence between the Thirring
and sine–Gordon models can be maintained in noncommutative
generalizations of these models. Moreover, the classical integrability
of our noncommutative version of sine–Gordon proven in [ 34 ] should
automatically guarantee the integrability of the noncommutative Thirring
model.

In the particular case of zero coupling ( @xmath ), the equations ( 2.67
) and ( 2.62 ) correspond to the action and the equations of motion for
a noncommutative @xmath WZNW model [ 46 ] , respectively. Again, we can
use the results of [ 34 ] to prove the classical integrability of the
noncommutative @xmath WZNW model and construct explicitly its conserved
currents.

#### 2.2.9 (Bad) properties of the S-matrix

In section 2.1.4 we showed that in integrable commutative field theories
there is no particle production and the S-matrix factorizes. In the
noncommutative case properties of the S-matrix have been investigated
for two specific models: The @xmath theory in two dimensions [ 15 ] and
the nonintegrable “natural” NC generalization the the sine–Gordon model
[ 112 ] . In the first reference a very pathological acasual behavior
was observed due to the space and time noncommutativity (see section
1.1.2). For an incoming wave packet the scattering produces an advanced
wave which arrives at the origin before the incoming wave. In the second
model investigated it was found that particle production occurs. The
tree level @xmath amplitude does not vanish.

It might be hoped that classical integrability would alleviate these
pathologies. In the NC integrable sine-Gordon case, since we have an
action, it is possible to investigate these issues. As described below
we have computed the scattering amplitude for the @xmath process and
found that the acausality of Ref. [ 15 ] is not cured by integrability.
We have also computed the production amplitudes for the processes @xmath
and @xmath and found that they don’t vanish.

We started from our action ( 2.69 ) rewritten in terms of Minkowski
space coordinates @xmath and real fields ( @xmath , @xmath with @xmath
real)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and we derived the following Feynman’s rules

-   The propagator

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.74)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   The vertices

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (2.75)
         @xmath      
                     (2.76)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.77)
      -- -------- -- --------

    is the phase factor coming from the @xmath -products in the action
    (we have indicated @xmath ), @xmath are all incoming momenta and we
    used momentum conservation.

At tree level the @xmath process is described by the diagrams with the
topologies in Fig. 1.

[] Figure 1: Tree level @xmath amplitude

Including contributions from the various channels and using the three
point and four point vertices of eqs. ( 2.76 ) we obtained for the
scattering amplitude the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the center of mass momentum and @xmath .

For comparison with Ref. [ 28 ] this should be multiplied by an incoming
wave packet

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Fourier transformed with @xmath . We have not attempted to carry out
the Fourier transform integration. However, we note that for @xmath very
large @xmath and @xmath are concentrated around large values and the
scattering amplitude assumes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is equivalent to the result in Ref. [ 15 ] , leading to the same
acausal pathology ¹ ¹ 1 It is somewhat tantalizing that a change in the
relative coefficient between the two terms would lead to a removal of
the trigonometric factors which are responsible for the acasual
behavior. .

We describe now the computation of the production amplitudes @xmath and
@xmath . At tree level the contributions are drawn in Figures 2 and 3,
respectively.

[] Figure 2: Tree level @xmath amplitude

[] Figure 3: Tree level @xmath amplitude

For any topology the different possible channels must be taken into
account. This, as well as the complicated expressions for the vertices,
has led us to use an algebraic manipulation program computer. We used
Mathematica @xmath to symmetrize completely the vertices ( 2.76 ). This
allows to take automatically into account the different diagrams
obtained by exchanging momenta entering a given vertex. The contribution
from each diagram was obtained as a product of the combinatorial factor,
the relevant vertices and propagators. Due to the length of the program
it was impossible to handle the calculation in a completely analytic
way. Instead, the program was run with assigned values of the momenta
and arbitrary @xmath and @xmath . For both the @xmath and @xmath
processes the result is nonvanishing. As a check of our calculation we
mention that the production amplitudes vanish when we set @xmath , for
any value of the coupling and the momenta.

#### 2.2.10 Conclusions

In [ 36 ] , in collaboration with M.T. Grisaru, L. Mazzanti and S.
Penati I have investigated some properties of the integrable
noncommutative sine–Gordon system proposed in [ 34 ] . We succeeded in
constructing an action which turned out to be a WZNW action for a
noncommutative, complexified @xmath augmented by a cosine potential. We
have shown that even in the noncomutative case there is a duality
relation between our integrable noncommutative sine–Gordon model and the
noncommutative Thirring.

Noncommutative WZNW models have been shown to be one–loop renormalizable
[ 125 ] . This suggests that the noncommutative sine–Gordon model
proposed in [ 34 ] is not only integrable but it might lead to a
well-defined quantized model, giving support to the existence of a
possible relation between integrability and renormalizability.

Armed with our action we investigated some properties of the S--matrix
for elementary excitations. However, in contradistinction to the
commutative case, the S--matrix turned out to be acasual and
nonfactorizable ² ² 2 Other problems of the S-matrix have been discussed
in [ 16 , 126 ] . . The reason for the acasual behavior has been
discussed in [ 15 ] where it was pointed out that noncommutativity
induces a backward-in-time effect because of the presence of certain
phase factors (see section 1.1.2). It appears that in our case this
effect is still present in spite of integrability.

It is not clear why the presence of an infinite number of local
conserved currents (local in the sense that they are not expressed as
integrals of certain densities) does not guarantee factorization and
absence of production in the S-matrix as it does in the commutative
case. The standard proofs of factorization use, among other assumptions,
the mutual commutativity of the charges - a property we have not been
able to check so far because of the complicated nature of the currents.
But even if the charges were to commute the possibility of defining them
as powers of momenta, as required in the proofs, could be spoiled by
acausal effects which prevent a clear distinction between incoming and
outgoing particles.

In a series of papers [ 44 ] a different approach to quantum
noncommutative field theories has been proposed when the time variable
is not commuting. In those papers it has been argued that the problems
associated to time-space noncommutativity are due to the fact that the
time-ordering procedure does not commute with the star multiplication.
Starting from the usual definition of the S-matrix in terms of the
time-ordered exponential of the interaction term in the action and
applying Wick theorem, one cannot combine the contraction functions of
positive and negative frequency to obtain the causal Feynman propagator.
Therefore, it has been suggested that, instead of the Feyman approach [
2 ] , one should use the time ordered perturbation theory extended to
the noncommutative case. Moreover, it has been shown that in this
framework unitarity is preserved as long as the interaction lagrangian
is explicitly hermitian. It would be interesting to redo our
calculations in that approach to see whether a well-defined factorized
S-matrix for our model can be constructed. In this context it would be
also interesting to investigate the scattering of solitons present in
our model [ 34 ] .

In the next section a novel noncommutative sine-Gordon system, obtained
by dimensional reduction from the @xmath model introduced in [ 104 ] ,
will be constructed and studied. We will see that it exhibits nice
scattering properties, consistent with the usual relation between
integrability and factorization of the S-matrix.

### 2.3 The noncommutative integrable sine-Gordon model

#### 2.3.1 Introduction

In this section I will present the results I obtained, in collaboration
with O. Lechtenfeld, L. Mazzanti, S. Penati and A.D. Popov, in [ 37 ] .
The main goal of that work was to find a noncommutative generalization
of the sine-Gordon system which, as a hallmark of integrability,
possesses a well-defined causal and factorized S-matrix. Furthermore,
its equations of motion should admit noncommutative multi-soliton
solutions which represent deformations of the well known sine-Gordon
solitons.

In sections 2.2.4 and 2.2.5 I have discussed the results obtained in [
34 ] , where a model was proposed which describes the dynamics of a
complex scalar field by a couple of equations of motion. These equations
were obtained as flatness conditions for a @xmath bidifferential
calculus [ 110 ] and automatically guarantee the existence of an
infinite number of local conserved currents. The same equations were
also generated in [ 36 ] via a particular dimensional reduction of the
noncommutative @xmath selfdual Yang-Mills equations in euclidean space.
However, this reduction did not work at the level of the action, which
turned out to be the sum of two WZW models augmented by a cosine
potential. Evaluating tree-level scattering amplitudes it was
discovered, furthermore, that this model suffers from acausal behavior
and a non-factorized S-matrix, meaning that particle production occurs.

At this point it is important to note that the noncommutative
deformation of an integrable equation is a priori not unique, because
one may always add terms which vanish in the commutative limit, as we
have seen in section 1.1.3. For the case at hand, for example, different
inequivalent ansätze for the @xmath matrices entering the bicomplex
construction [ 110 ] are possible as long as they all reproduce the
ordinary sine-Gordon equation in the commutative limit. It is therefore
conceivable that among these possibilities there exists an ansatz
(different from the one in [ 34 , 36 ] ) which guarantees the classical
integrability of the corresponding noncommutative model. What is already
certain is the necessity to introduce two real scalar fields instead of
one, since in the noncommutative realm the @xmath subgroup of @xmath
fails to decouple. What has been missing is a guiding principle towards
the “correct” field parametrization.

Since the sine-Gordon model can be obtained by dimensional reduction
from 2+2 dimensional selfdual Yang-Mills theory via a 2+1 dimensional
integrable sigma model [ 127 ] , and because the latter’s noncommutative
extension was shown to be integrable in [ 103 ] , it seems a good idea
to contruct an integrable generalization of the sine-Gordon equation by
starting from the linear system of this integrable sigma model endowed
with a time-space noncommutativity. This is the key strategy of this
paper. The reduction is performed on the equations of motion first, but
it also works at the level of the action, so giving directly the 1+1
dimensional action we are looking for. This success is an indication
that the new field parametrization proposed in [ 37 ] is the proper one.

To be more precise, in [ 37 ] we proposed three different
parametrizations, by pairs of fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , all
related by nonlocal field redefinitions but all deriving from the
compatibility conditions of the underlying linear system [ 103 ] . The
first two appear in Yang formulation [ 117 ] while the third one arises
in Leznov formulation [ 128 ] . For either field pair in Yang
formulation, the nontrivial compatibility condition reduces to a pair of
“noncommutative sine-Gordon equations” which in the commutative limit
degenerates to the standard sine-Gordon equation for @xmath or @xmath ,
respectively, while @xmath or @xmath decouple as free bosons. The
alternative Leznov formulation has the advantage of producing two
polynomial (actually, quadratic) equations of motion for @xmath but
retains their coupling even in the commutative limit.

With the linear system comes a well-developed technology for generating
solitonic solutions to the equations of motion. In [ 37 ] the dressing
method [ 129 , 108 ] was employed to explicitly outline the construction
of noncommutative sine-Gordon multi-solitons, directly in 1+1 dimensions
as well as by reducing plane-wave solutions of the 2+1 dimensional
integrable sigma model [ 104 ] . The one-soliton sector was completely
analyzed and it was found that the standard soliton solution are
recovered as undeformed. Noncommutativity becomes palpable only at the
multi-soliton level.

It was shown in [ 82 ] that the tree-level @xmath -point amplitudes of
noncommutative 2+2 dimensional SDYM vanish for @xmath , consistent with
the vanishing theorems for the @xmath string. Therefore, we were
expecting nice properties of the S-matrix to be inherited by this
noncommutative sine-Gordon theory. Indeed, a direct evaluation of
tree-level amplitudes revealed that, in the Yang as well as the Leznov
formulation, the S-matrix is causal and no particle production occurs.

#### 2.3.2 A noncommutative integrable sigma model in @xmath dimensions

As has been known for some time, nonlinear sigma models in @xmath
dimensions may be Lorentz-invariant or integrable but not both [ 127 ] .
Since the integrable variant, introduced in section 2.1.3, serves as our
starting point for the derivation of the sine-Gordon model and its
soliton solutions, we shall present its noncommutative extension [ 103 ]
in some detail in the present section.

##### Conventions in noncommutative @xmath

In @xmath we shall use (real) coordinates @xmath in which the
Minkowskian metric reads @xmath . For later use we introduce the
light-cone coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

In view of the future reduction to @xmath dimensions, we choose the
coordinate @xmath to remain commutative, so that the only non-vanishing
component of the noncommutativity tensor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Linear system

Consider on noncommutative @xmath the following pair of linear
differential equations [ 103 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where a spectral parameter @xmath has been introduced. The auxiliary
field @xmath takes values in U @xmath and depends on @xmath or,
equivalently, on @xmath . The @xmath matrices @xmath and @xmath , in
contrast, do not depend on @xmath but only on @xmath . Given a solution
@xmath , they can be reconstructed via ³ ³ 3 Inverses are understood
with respect to the star product, i.e. @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

It should be noted that the equations ( 2.83 ) are not of first order
but actually of infinite order in derivatives, due to the star products
involved. In addition, the matrix @xmath is subject to the following
reality condition [ 127 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ‘ @xmath ’ is hermitian conjugation. The compatibility conditions
for the linear system ( 2.83 ) read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

By detailing the behavior of @xmath at small @xmath and at large @xmath
we shall now “solve” these equations in two different ways, each one
leading to a single equation of motion for a particular field theory.

##### Yang-type solution

We require that @xmath is regular at @xmath [ 84 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

which defines a U @xmath -valued field @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Therewith,
@xmath and @xmath are quickly reconstructed via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to see that compatibility equation ( 2.87 ) is then automatic
while the remaining equation ( 2.86 ) turns into [ 103 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

This Yang-type equation [ 117 ] can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the alternating tensor with @xmath and @xmath is a fixed
spacelike vector. Clearly, this equation is not Lorentz-invariant but
(deriving from a Lax pair) it is integrable.

One can recognize ( 2.91 ) as the field equation for (a noncommutative
generalization of) a WZW-like modified U @xmath sigma model [ 127 , 130
] with the action ⁴ ⁴ 4 which is obtainable by dimensional reduction
from the Nair-Schiff action [ 131 , 132 ] for SDYM in 2+2 dimensions

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (2.92)
                    
  -- -- -------- -- --------

where Greek indices include the extra coordinate @xmath , and @xmath
denotes the totally antisymmetric tensor in @xmath . The field @xmath is
an extension of @xmath , interpolating between

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

and ‘ @xmath ’ implies the trace over the U @xmath group space. Finally,
@xmath is a constant vector in (extended) space-time.

##### Leznov-type solution

Finally, we also impose the asymptotic condition that @xmath with some
constant unitary (normalization) matrix @xmath . The large @xmath
behavior [ 84 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

then defines a @xmath -valued field @xmath . Again this allows one to
reconstruct @xmath and @xmath through

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.95)
  -- -- -- --------

In this parametrization, compatibility equation ( 2.86 ) becomes an
identity but the second equation ( 2.87 ) turns into [ 103 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

This Leznov-type equation [ 128 ] can also be obtained by extremizing
the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is merely cubic.

Obviously, the Leznov field @xmath is related to the Yang field @xmath
through the non-local field redefinition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

For each of the two fields @xmath and @xmath , one equation from the
pair ( 2.86 , 2.87 ) represents the equation of motion, while the other
one is a direct consequence of the parametrization ( 2.89 ) or ( 2.95 ).

#### 2.3.3 Reduction to noncommutative sine-Gordon

##### Algebraic reduction ansatz

In section 2.1.3 we have seen that the (commutative) sine-Gordon
equation can be obtained from the self-duality equations for SU(2)
Yang-Mills upon appropriate reduction from @xmath to @xmath dimensions.
In this process the integrable sigma model of the previous section
appears as an intermediate step in @xmath dimensions, and so we may take
its noncommutative extension as our departure point, after enlarging the
group to U(2). In order to avoid cluttering the formulae we suppress the
‘ @xmath ’ notation for noncommutative multiplication from now on: all
products are assumed to be star products, and all functions are built on
them, i.e. @xmath stands for @xmath and so on.

The dimensional reduction proceeds in two steps, firstly, a
factorization of the coordinate dependence and, secondly, an algebraic
restriction of the form of the U(2) matrices involved. In the language
of the linear system ( 2.83 ) the adequate ansatz for the auxiliary
field @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath denotes some constant unitary matrix (to be
specified later) and @xmath is a constant parameter. Under this
factorization, the linear system ( 2.83 ) simplifies to ⁵ ⁵ 5 The
adjoint action means @xmath .

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.100)
  -- -- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath . Taking into account the asymptotic behavior (
2.88 , 2.94 ), the ansatz ( 2.99 ) translates to the decompositions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.101)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

To aim for the sine-Gordon equation, one imposes certain algebraic
constraints on @xmath and @xmath (and therefore on @xmath ). Their
precise form, however, is not needed, as we are ultimately interested
only in @xmath or @xmath . Therefore, we instead directly restrict
@xmath to the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and with projectors @xmath and @xmath . This imbeds @xmath into a U(1)
@xmath U(1) subgroup of U(2). Note that @xmath and @xmath do not
commute, due to the implicit star product. Invoking the field
redefinition ( 2.98 ) we infer that the corresponding reduction for
@xmath should be ⁶ ⁶ 6 Complex conjugates of scalar functions are
denoted with a dagger to remind the reader of their noncommutativity.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the “bridge relations”

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.105)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In this way, the @xmath -matrix @xmath is restricted to be off-diagonal.

We now investigate in turn the consequences of the ansätze ( 2.101 ,
2.103 ) and ( 2.102 , 2.104 ) for the equations of motion ( 2.90 ) and (
2.96 ), respectively.

##### Reduction of Yang-type equation

Let us insert the ansatz ( 2.101 ) into the Yang-type equation of
motion ( 2.90 ). After stripping off the @xmath factors one obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Specializing with ( 2.103 ) and employing the identities @xmath we
arrive at @xmath , with

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.107)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Since the brackets multiplying @xmath are equal and opposite, it is
worthwhile to present the sum and the difference of the two equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.108)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

It is natural to introduce the angle fields @xmath via

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In terms of these, the equations ( 2.108 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.110)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We propose to call these two equations “the noncommutative sine-Gordon
equations”. Besides their integrability (see later sections for
consequences) their form is quite convenient for studying the
commutative limit. When @xmath , ( 2.110 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because the equations have decoupled we may choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and reproduce the familiar sine-Gordon equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One learns that in the commutative case the reduction is SU(2) @xmath
U(1) @xmath since the U(1) @xmath degree of freedom @xmath is not
needed. The deformed situation, however, requires extending SU(2) to
U(2), and so it is imperative here to keep both U(1)s and work with two
scalar fields.

Inspired by the commutative decoupling, one may choose another
distinguished parametrization of @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which defines angles @xmath and @xmath for the linear combinations
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Inserting this into ( 2.107 ) one
finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.115)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In the commutative limit, this system is easily decoupled to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

revealing that @xmath and @xmath in this limit.

It is not difficult to write down an action for ( 2.107 ) (and hence for
( 2.110 ) or ( 2.115 )). The relevant action may be computed by reducing
( 2.92 ) with the help of ( 2.101 ) and ( 2.103 ). The result takes the
form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the abelian WZW action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is a homotopy path satisfying the conditions @xmath and
@xmath . Parametrizing @xmath as in ( 2.114 ) and using the
Polyakov-Wiegmann identity, the action for @xmath and @xmath reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.119)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this parametrization the WZ term has apparently been shifted entirely
to the @xmath field while the cosine-type self-interaction remains for
the @xmath field only. This fact has important consequences for the
scattering amplitudes.

It is well known [ 45 , 124 , 133 ] that in ordinary commutative
geometry the bosonization of @xmath free massless fermions in the
fundamental representation of SU( @xmath ) gives rise to a WZW model for
a scalar field in SU( @xmath ) plus a free scalar field associated with
the U(1) invariance of the fermionic system. In the noncommutative case
the bosonization of a single massless Dirac fermion produces a
noncommutative U(1) WZW model [ 47 ] , which becomes free only in the
commutative limit. Moreover, the U(1) subgroup of U( @xmath ) does no
longer decouple [ 35 ] , so that @xmath noncommuting free massless
fermions are related to a noncommutative WZW model for a scalar in U(
@xmath ). On the other hand, giving a mass to the single Dirac fermion
leads to a noncommutative cosine potential on the bosonized side [ 134 ,
48 ] .

In contrast, the noncommutative sine-Gordon model we propose in this
paper is of a more general form. The action ( 2.117 ) describes the
propagation of a scalar field @xmath taking its value in U(1) @xmath
U(1) @xmath U(2). Therefore, we expect it to be a bosonized version of
two fermions in some representation of U(1) @xmath U(1). The absence of
a WZ term for @xmath and the lack of a cosine-type self-interaction for
@xmath as well as the non-standard interaction term make the precise
identification non-trivial however.

##### Reduction of Leznov-type equation

Alternatively, if we insert the ansatz ( 2.102 ) into the Leznov-type
equation of motion ( 2.96 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Specializing with ( 2.104 ) this takes the form @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The decomposition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

then yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.124)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

These two equations constitute an alternative description of the
noncommutative sine-Gordon model; they are classically equivalent to the
pair of ( 2.108 ) or, to be more specific, to the pair of ( 2.115 ). For
the real fields the “bridge relations” ( 2.105 ) read

  -- -- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath            (2.125)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ---------

One may “solve” one equation of ( 2.115 ) by an appropriate field
redefinition from ( 2.125 ), which implies already one member of ( 2.124
). The second equation from ( 2.115 ) then yields the remaining “bridge
relations” in ( 2.125 ) as well as the other member of ( 2.124 ). This
procedure works as well in the opposite direction, from ( 2.124 ) to (
2.115 ). The nonlocal duality between @xmath and @xmath is simply a
consequence of the equivalence between ( 2.90 ) and ( 2.96 ) which in
turn follows from our linear system ( 2.83 ).

The “ @xmath description” has the advantage of being polynomial. It is
instructive to expose the action for the system ( 2.124 ). Either by
inspection or by reducing the Leznov action ( 2.97 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 2.3.4 Relation with the previous noncommutative generalization of
the sine-Gordon model

The noncommutative generalizations of the sine-Gordon model presented
above are expected to possess an infinite number of conservation laws,
as they originate from the reduction of an integrable model [ 103 ] . It
is worthwhile to point out their relation to the noncommutative
sine-Gordon model I discussed in section 2.2, which also features an
infinite number of local conserved currents.

In [ 34 ] an alternative noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon model
was proposed. Using the bicomplex approach the equations of motion were
obtained as flatness conditions of a bidifferential calculus, ⁷ ⁷ 7 This
subsection switches to Euclidean space @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
are derivatives with respect to complex coordinates.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is a suitable matrix in U(2) or, more generally, in
complexified U(2). In [ 34 ] the @xmath matrix was chosen as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.129)
  -- -- -- ---------

with @xmath being a complex scalar field. This choice produces the
noncommutative equations (all the products are @xmath -products)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As shown in [ 36 ] these equations (or a linear combination of them) can
be obtained as a dimensional reduction of the equations of motion for
noncommutative U(2) SDYM in 2+2 dimensions.

The equations ( 2.130 ) can also be derived from an action which
consists of the sum of two WZW actions augmented by a cosine potential,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath given in ( 2.118 ) for @xmath in complexified U(1). However,
this action cannot be obtained from the SDYM action in 2+2 dimensions by
performing the same field parametrization which led to ( 2.130 ).

Comparing the actions ( 2.117 ) and ( 2.131 ) and considering @xmath and
@xmath as independent U(1) group valued fields we are tempted to
formally identify @xmath and @xmath . Doing this, we immediately realize
that the two models differ in their interaction term which generalizes
the cosine potential. While in ( 2.131 ) the fields @xmath and @xmath
show only self-interaction, the fields @xmath and @xmath in ( 2.117 )
interact with each other. As we will see in section 2.3.6 this makes a
big difference when evaluating the S-matrix elements.

We close this section by observing that the equations of motion ( 2.110
) can also be obtained directly in two dimensions by using the bicomplex
approach described in [ 34 ] . In fact, if instead of ( 2.129 ) we
choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

it is easy to prove that ( 2.127 ) yields exactly the set of equations (
2.110 ). Therefore, by exploiting the results in [ 34 ] it should be
straightforward to construct the first nontrivial conserved currents for
the present model.

#### 2.3.5 Solitons

##### Dressing approach in 2+1 dimensions.

The existence of the linear system allows for powerful methods to
systematically construct explicit solutions for @xmath and hence for
@xmath or @xmath . For our purposes the so-called dressing method [ 129
, 108 ] proves to be most practical, and so we shall first present it
here for our linear system ( 2.83 ), before reducing the results to
solitonic solutions of the noncommutative sine-Gordon equations.

The central idea is to demand analyticity in the spectral parameter
@xmath for the linear system ( 2.83 ), which strongly restricts the
possible form of @xmath . The most elegant way to exploit this
constraint starts from the observation that the left hand sides of the
differential relations (D):=( 2.84 ) as well as the reality condition
(R):=( 2.85 ) do not depend on @xmath while their right hand sides are
expected to be nontrivial functions of @xmath (except for the trivial
case @xmath ). More specifically, @xmath being compact, the matrix
function @xmath cannot be holomorphic everywhere but must possess some
poles, and hence the right hand sides of (D) and (R) should display
these (and complex conjugate) poles as well. The resolution of this
conundrum demands that the residues of the right hand sides at any
would-be pole in @xmath have to vanish. We are now going to evaluate
these conditions.

The dressing method builds a solution @xmath featuring @xmath simple
poles at positions @xmath by left-multiplying an @xmath -pole solution
@xmath with a single-pole factor of the form @xmath , where the @xmath
matrix function @xmath is yet to be determined. In addition, we are free
to right-multiply @xmath with some constant unitary matrix @xmath .
Starting from @xmath , the iteration @xmath yields a multiplicative
ansatz for @xmath which, via partial fraction decomposition, may be
rewritten in an additive form (as a sum of simple pole terms). Let us
trace this iterative procedure constructively.

In accord with the outline above, the one-pole ansatz must read ( @xmath
)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with some @xmath matrix functions @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath .
The normalization matrix @xmath is constant and unitary. It is quickly
checked that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

meaning that @xmath is a rank @xmath projector built from an @xmath
matrix function @xmath . The columns of @xmath span the image of @xmath
and obey @xmath . When using the second parametrization of @xmath in (
2.133 ) one finds that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

modulo a freedom of normalization. Finally, the differential relations
yield

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some @xmath matrices @xmath and @xmath , after having defined

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because the @xmath are linear differential operators it is easy to write
down the general solution for ( 2.136 ): Introduce “co-moving
coordinates”

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that on functions of @xmath alone the @xmath act as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, ( 2.136 ) is solved by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.140)
     @xmath      (2.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath . Appearing to the right of @xmath , the exponential factor
is seen to drop out in the formation of @xmath via ( 2.134 ) and ( 2.135
). Thus, no generality is lost by taking @xmath . We learn that any
@xmath -holomorphic @xmath matrix @xmath is admissible to build a
projector @xmath which then yields a solution @xmath (and thus @xmath )
via ( 2.133 ). Note that @xmath need not be determined seperately but
follows from our above result. It is not necessary to also consider the
residues at @xmath since their vanishing leads merely to the hermitian
conjugated conditions.

Let us proceed to the two-pole situation. The dressing ansatz takes the
form ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are to be determined but @xmath and @xmath can
be copied from above. Indeed, inspecting the residues of (R) and (D) at
@xmath simply confirms that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is just carried over from the one-pole solution. Relations for @xmath
and @xmath arise from

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.144)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.145)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the first equation makes use of the multiplicative form of the
ansatz ( 2.142 ) while the second one exploits the additive version. We
conclude that @xmath is again a hermitian projector (of some rank @xmath
) and thus built from an @xmath matrix function @xmath . Furthermore, (
2.145 ) reveals that @xmath cannot be identified with @xmath this time,
but we rather have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

instead. Finally, we consider

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is solved by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any @xmath -holomorphic @xmath matrix function @xmath and @xmath .
Once more, we are entitled to put @xmath . Hence, the second pole factor
in ( 2.142 ) is constructed in the same way as the first one, except for
the small complication ( 2.146 ). Again, @xmath and @xmath can be read
off the result if needed.

It is now clear how the iteration continues. After @xmath steps the
final result reads

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.149)
  -- -- -- ---------

featuring hermitian rank @xmath projectors @xmath at @xmath , via

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for arbitrary @xmath -holomorphic @xmath matrix functions @xmath . The
corresponding classical Yang and Leznov fields are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.152)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.153)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The solution space constructed here is parametrized (slightly
redundantly) by the set @xmath of matrix-valued holomorphic functions
and the pole positions @xmath . The so-constructed classical
configurations have solitonic character (meaning finite energy) when all
these functions are algebraic.

The dressing technique as presented above is well known in the
commutative theory; novel is only the realization that it carries over
verbatim to the noncommutative situation by simply understanding all
products as star products (and likewise inverses, exponentials, etc.).
Of course, it may be technically difficult to @xmath -invert some
matrix, but one may always fall back on an expansion in powers of @xmath
.

##### Solitons of the noncommutative sine-Gordon theory

We should now be able to generate @xmath -soliton solutions to the
noncommutative sine-Gordon equations, say ( 2.115 ), by applying the
reduction from @xmath to @xmath dimensions (see previous section) to the
above strategy for the group U(2), i.e. putting @xmath . In order to
find nontrivial solutions, we specify the constant matrix @xmath in the
ansatz ( 2.99 ) for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which obeys the relations @xmath and @xmath . Pushing @xmath beyond
@xmath we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With hindsight from the commutative case [ 108 ] we choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(which commutes with @xmath ) and restrict the poles of @xmath to the
imaginary axis, @xmath with @xmath . Therewith, the co-moving
coordinates ( 2.138 ) become

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

defining @xmath as real linear functions of the light-cone coordinates.
Consequentially, from ( 2.152 ) we get @xmath and find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Repeating the analysis of the previous subsection, one is again led to
construct hermitian projectors

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath matrix functions @xmath are subject to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and some numbers @xmath (note that now rank @xmath ) which again we can
put to zero. On functions of the reduced co-moving coordinates @xmath
alone,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that ( 2.161 ) is solved by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, it is useful to rewrite

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.164)
  -- -- -- ---------

because then @xmath may be absorbed into @xmath by shifting @xmath . The
multipliers @xmath drop out in the computation of @xmath . Finally, to
make contact with the form ( 2.156 ) we restrict the constants @xmath to
be real.

Let us check the one-soliton solution, i.e. put @xmath . Suppressing the
indices momentarily, absorbing @xmath into @xmath and dropping @xmath ,
we infer that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.165)
     @xmath      (2.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which has @xmath . Since here the entire coordinate dependence comes in
the single combination @xmath , all star products trivialize and the
one-soliton configuration coincides with the commutative one. Hence, the
field @xmath drops out, @xmath SU(2), and we find, comparing ( 2.165 )
with ( 2.156 ), that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

reproducing the well known sine-Gordon soliton with mass @xmath . Its
moduli parameters are the velocity @xmath and the center of inertia
@xmath at zero time [ 108 ] . In passing we note that in the “ @xmath
description” the soliton solution takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.169)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Noncommutativity becomes relevant for multi-solitons. At @xmath , for
instance, one has

  -- -- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath            (2.170)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ---------

We refrain from writing down the lengthy explicit expression for @xmath
in terms of the noncommuting coordinates @xmath and @xmath , but one
cannot expect to find a unit (star-)determinant for @xmath except in the
commutative limit. This underscores the necessity of extending the
matrices to U(2) and the inclusion of a nontrivial @xmath at the
multi-soliton level.

It is not surprising that the just-constructed noncommutative
sine-Gordon solitons themselves descend directly from BPS solutions of
the @xmath dimensional integrable sigma model. Indeed, putting back the
@xmath dependence via ( 2.155 ), the @xmath dimensional projectors
@xmath are built from @xmath matrices

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.171)
  -- -- -- ---------

In the last expression the right factor drops out on the computation of
projectors; the remaining column vector agrees with the standard
conventions [ 127 , 103 , 108 , 106 ] . Reassuringly, the coordinate
dependence has combined into @xmath . The ensueing @xmath dimensional
configurations @xmath are nothing but noncommutative multi-plane-waves
the simplest examples of which were already investigated in [ 106 ] .

#### 2.3.6 (Nice) properties of the S-matrix

In this section we compute tree-level amplitudes for the noncommutative
generalization of the sine-Gordon model proposed in section 2.3.3, both
in the Yang and the Leznov formulation. In commutative geometry the
sine-Gordon S-matrix factorizes in two-particle processes and no
particle production occurs, as a consequence of the existence of an
infinite number of conservation laws. In the noncommutative case it is
interesting to investigate whether the presence of an infinite number of
conserved currents is still sufficient to guarantee the integrability of
the system in the sense of having a factorized S-matrix.

The previous noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon model we
introduced and studied in section 2.2 is endowed with an infinite set of
conserved currents. In section 2.2.9 we have seen that, despite the
existence of an infinite chain of conservation laws, particle production
occurs in that model and that the S-matrix is neither factorized nor
causal. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Acausal behaviour in noncommutative field theory was first
observed in [ 15 ] and shown to be related to time-space
noncommutativity. As already stressed in section 2.3.4, the
noncommutative generalization of the sine-Gordon model we proposed in [
37 ] and discussed in the present section 2.3 differs from the one
studied in [ 34 ] in the generalization of the cosine potential.
Therefore, both theories describe the dynamics of two real scalar
fields, but the structure of the interaction terms between the two
fields is different. We then expect the scattering amplitudes of the
present theory to behave differently from those of the previous one. To
this end we will compute the amplitudes corresponding to @xmath
processes for the fields @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath -model (Yang
formulation) as well as for the fields @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath
-model (Leznov formulation). In the @xmath -model we will also compute
@xmath and @xmath amplitudes for the massive field @xmath . In both
models the S-matrix will turn out to be factorized and causal in spite
of their time-space noncommutativity.

##### Amplitudes in the “@xmath-model”. Feynman rules

We parametrize the @xmath -model with @xmath as in ( 2.119 ) since in
this parametrization the mass matrix turns out to be diagonal, with zero
mass for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Expanding the action ( 2.119 )
up to the fourth order in the fields, we read off the following Feynman
rules:

-   The propagators

      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
            @xmath   @xmath      (2.172)
            @xmath   @xmath      (2.173)
      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

-   The vertices (including a factor of “i” from the expansion of @xmath
    )

      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
            @xmath   @xmath      (2.174)
            @xmath   @xmath      (2.175)
      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

      -- -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
            @xmath   @xmath            (2.177)
                                       
            @xmath   @xmath            (2.179)
                                       
            @xmath   @xmath            (2.180)
                              @xmath   
      -- -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where we used the conventions of section 2 with the definitions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.181)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, we have defined

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.182)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and use the convention that all momentum lines are entering the vertex
and energy-momentum conservation has been taken into account.

We now compute the scattering amplitudes @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and
the production amplitude @xmath . We perform the calculations in the
center-of-mass frame. We assign the convention that particles with
momenta @xmath and @xmath are incoming, while those with momenta @xmath
and @xmath are outgoing.

##### Amplitude @xmath

The four momenta are explicitly written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.183)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the on-shell condition @xmath . There are two topologies of
diagrams contributing to this process. Taking into account the leg
permutations corresponding to the same particle at a single vertex, the
contributions read

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

The second diagram is actually affected by a collinear divergence since
the total momentum @xmath for the internal massless particle is on-shell
vanishing. We regularize this divergence by temporarily giving a small
mass to the @xmath particle. It is easy to see that the amplitude is
zero for any value of the small mass since the wedge products @xmath and
@xmath from the two vertices always vanish. As an alternative procedure
we can put one of the external particles slightly off-shell, so
obtaining a finite result which vanishes in the on-shell limit.

Summing all the contributions, for the @xmath amplitude we arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.184)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which perfectly describes a causal amplitude.

A nonvanishing @xmath amplitude appears also in the noncommutative
sine-Gordon proposal of [ 34 , 36 ] . However, there the amplitude has a
nontrivial @xmath -dependence which is responsible for acausal behavior.
Comparing the present result with the result in [ 36 ] , we observe that
the same kind of diagrams contribute. The main difference is that the
exchanged particle is now massless instead of massive. This crucial
difference leads to the cancellation of the @xmath -dependent
trigonometric behaviour which in the previous case gave rise to
acausality.

##### Amplitude @xmath

In this case the center-of-mass momenta are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the on-shell condition @xmath has already been taken into account.
For this amplitude we have the following contributions

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

Again, a collinear divergence appears in the second diagram. In order to
regularize the divergence we can proceed as before by assigning a small
mass to the @xmath particle. The main difference with respect to the
previous case is that now the @xmath particle also appears as an
external particle, with the consequence that the on-shell momenta in (
2.185 ) will get modified by the introduction of a regulator mass. A
careful calculation shows that the amplitude is zero for any value of
the regulator mass, due to the vanishing of the factors @xmath and
@xmath from the vertices.

Therefore, the two nonvanishing contributions add to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### Amplitude @xmath

There are two possible configurations of momenta in the center-of-mass
frame, describing the scattering of the massive particle with either a
left-moving or a right-moving massless one. In the left-moving case the
momenta are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while in the right-moving case we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.188)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the left-moving case ( 2.187 ) the results are

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

For the right-moving choice ( 2.188 ), we obtain instead

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

In this second case an infrared divergence is present due to the
massless propagator, but again it can be cured as described before. In
both cases the scattering amplitude vanishes,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### Amplitude @xmath

The momenta in the center-of-mass frame are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.190)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this case we have three kinds of diagrams contributing. The
corresponding results are

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

Summing the four contributions, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.191)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as it should be expected for a production amplitude in an integrable
model. The same is true for the time-reversed production,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.192)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Summarizing, we have found that the only nonzero amplitude for
tree-level @xmath processes is the one describing the scattering among
two of the massive excitations. The result is constant, independent of
the momenta and so describes a perfectly causal process. Since the
result is independent of the noncommutation parameter @xmath it agrees
with the four-point amplitude for the ordinary sine-Gordon model.
Finally, we have found that the production amplitudes @xmath and @xmath
vanish, as required for ordinary integrable theories.

As a further check of our calculation and an additional test of our
model we have computed the production amplitude @xmath and the
scattering amplitude @xmath . In both cases the topologies we have to
consider are

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| []                    | []                    | []                    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| []              | []              | []              | []              |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 | .               |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

Due to the growing number of channels and ordering of vertices, it is no
longer practical to perform the calculations by hand. We have used
Mathematica @xmath to symmetrize the vertices and take automatically
into account the different diagrams obtained by exchanging momenta
entering a given vertex. The computation has been performed with
assigned values of the external momenta but arbitrary values for @xmath
and @xmath . We have found a vanishing result for both the scattering
and the production amplitude. This is in agreement with the commutative
sine-Gordon model results.

##### Amplitudes in the “@xmath-model”

We now discuss the @xmath amplitudes in the Leznov formulation. The
theory is again described by two interacting fields, @xmath massless and
@xmath massive. Referring to the action ( 2.126 ) we extract the
following Feynman rules,

-   The propagators

      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
            @xmath   @xmath      (2.193)
            @xmath   @xmath      (2.194)
      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

-   The vertex

      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
            @xmath   @xmath      (2.195)
      -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Again, we compute scattering amplitudes in the center-of-mass frame.
Given the particular structure of the vertex, at tree level there is no
@xmath scattering. To find the @xmath amplitude we assign the momenta (
2.183 ) to the external particles. The contributions are

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

We note that a collinear divergence appears in the last diagram which
can be regularized as described before. Summing the two nonvanishing
contributions we obtain complete cancellation.

For the @xmath amplitude the center-of-mass-momenta are given in ( 2.190
). The only topology contributing to this production amplitude has two
channels, yielding

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

which are both zero, so giving a vanishing result once more. The same is
true for the @xmath production process.

Finally, for the @xmath amplitude, we refer to the center-of-mass
momenta defined in ( 2.187 ) and ( 2.188 ). In both cases the
contributions are

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| []        | =         | @xmath    | []        | =         | @xmath    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

and so we find that the sum of the two channels is always equal to zero.

Since all the @xmath amplitudes vanish, the S-matrix is trivially causal
and factorized.

Both in the ordinary and noncommutative cases the “ @xmath -model” is
dual to the “ @xmath -model”. In the commutative limit the “ @xmath
-model” gives rise to a sine-Gordon model plus a free field which can be
set to zero. In this limit our amplitudes exactly reproduce the
sine-Gordon amplitudes. On the other hand, the amplitudes for the “
@xmath -model” all vanish. Therefore, in the commutative limit they do
not reproduce anything immediately recognizable as an ordinary
sine-Gordon amplitude. This can be understood by observing that, both in
the ordinary and in the noncommutative case, the Leznov formulation is
an alternative description of the sine-Gordon dynamics and obtained from
the standard Yang formulation by the nonlocal field redefinition given
in ( 2.125 ). Therefore, it is expected that the scattering amplitudes
for the elementary exitations, which are different in the two
formulations, do not resemble each other.

#### 2.3.7 Conclusions

In this section 2.3 I have introduced and discussed a novel
noncommutative sine-Gordon system [ 37 ] based on two scalar fields,
which seems to retain all advantages of @xmath dimensional integrable
models known from the commutative limit. The rationale for introducing a
second scalar field was provided by deriving the sine-Gordon equations
and action through dimensional and algebraic reduction of an integrable
@xmath dimensional sigma model: In the noncommutative extension of this
scheme it is natural to generalize the algebraic reduction of SU(2)
@xmath U(1) to one of U(2) @xmath U(1) @xmath U(1). We gave two
Yang-type and one Leznov-type parametrizations of the coupled system in
( 2.110 ), ( 2.115 ) and ( 2.124 ) and provided the actions for them,
including a comparison with previous proposals. It was then outlined how
to explicitly construct noncommutative sine-Gordon multi-solitons via
the dressing method based on the underlying linear system. We found that
the one-soliton configuration agrees with the commutative one but
already the two-soliton solutions gets Moyal deformed.

What is the gain of doubling the field content as compared to the
standard sine-Gordon system or its straightforward star deformation?
Usually, time-space noncommutativity adversely affects the causality and
unitarity of the S-matrix (see, e.g. [ 112 , 34 , 36 ] ), even in the
presence of an infinite number of local conservation laws. In contrast,
the model described in [ 37 ] seems to possess an S-matrix which is
causal and factorized , as we checked for all tree-level @xmath
processes both in the Yang and Leznov formulations. Furthermore, we
verified the vanishing of some @xmath scattering amplitudes and @xmath
production amplitudes thus proving the absence of particle production.

It would be nice to understand what actually drives a system to be
integrable in the noncommutative case. A hint in this direction might be
that the model proposed in [ 34 ] has been constructed directly in two
dimensions even if its equations of motion (but not the action) can be
obtained by a suitable reduction of a four dimensional system
(noncommutative self-dual Yang-Mills). The model proposed in this paper,
instead, originates directly, already at the level of the action, from
the reduction of noncommutative self-dual Yang-Mills theory which is
known to be integrable and related to the @xmath string [ 82 ] .

Several directions of future research are suggested by our results.
First, one might hope that our noncommutative two-field sine-Gordon
model is equivalent to some two-fermion model via noncommutative
bosonization. Second, it would be illuminating to derive the exact
two-soliton solution and extract its scattering properties, either
directly in our model or by reducing wave-like solutions of the 2+1
dimensional sigma model [ 106 , 105 ] . Third, there is no obstruction
against applying the ideas and techniques of this paper to other 1+1
dimensional noncommutative integrable systems in order to cure their
pathologies as well.

## Chapter 3 Covariant superstring vertices and a possible nonconstant
superspace deformation

### 3.1 An introduction to the pure spinor superstring

In this section I will mostly refer to the review paper [ 135 ] .

#### 3.1.1 Motivation: Problems with RNS and GS formalisms

In section 1.2.2 I have briefly outlined how the discussion of the
stringy origin of bosonic noncommutative geometry presented in section
1.2.1 can be generalized to the superstring, in both RNS and GS
formalisms. As anticipated, both of them display some awkward features,
due to their target-space or worldsheet symmetry structure,
respectively.

The RNS formalism is characterized by an @xmath worldsheet
supersymmetry. The field content is the set of bosonic coordinate fields
@xmath (worldsheet scalars and spacetime vectors) together with the
worldsheet spinors (and spacetime vectors) @xmath . The worldsheet
action for the string in a flat background is quadratic, therefore the
quantization in this formalism is straightforward. After a suitable
consistent truncation of the spectrum (GSO projection), the theory also
enjoys target space supersymmetry, but clearly this symmetry is not
manifest. As a result, a series of problems arises, for instance in the
computation of amplitudes with more than four external fermions and in
dealing with general R-R backgrounds.

The GS formalism instead is manifestly target-space supersymmetric, but
the worldsheet symmetry structure is quite complicated. Target space is
a ten-dimensional superspace described by the bosonic coordinates @xmath
and their superpartners @xmath , @xmath (in type II case). For the
number of physical fermionic degrees of freedom to be related to the
bosonic ones as required by target-space supersymmetry, a worldsheet
fermionic local symmetry must be present ( @xmath -symmetry, [ 136 ] ).
Therefore, the natural supersymmetric generalization of the bosonic
string action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the worldsheet metric and @xmath is the supersymmetrized
bosonic momentum, does not work, not being @xmath -symmetric. When
@xmath a WZ term @xmath can be added, so that the resulting action
@xmath is @xmath -symmetric (for this discussion the reader can refer to
[ 4 ] and references therein). @xmath in conformal gauge and in a flat
background is given by ( 1.217 ) with @xmath . It is nonquadratic and
describes a complicated, interacting worldsheet field theory. This fact
prevents quantization except in light-cone, where the action reduces to
a quadratic form. Since light-cone gauge is not manifestly Lorentz
covariant, problems in the computation of amplitudes emerge also in this
formalism and only four-point tree and one-loop amplitudes have been
computed. Moreover, backgrounds that do not allow for a light-cone
choice cannot be dealt with at the quantum level.

An alternative approach to the GS formalism was introduced by Siegel [
89 ] . The main problem of the GS superstring is that a set of
phase-space constraints arise at the classical level whose structure do
not allow for a Dirac quantization procedure. In particular, since the
conjugate momenta @xmath to the fermionic variables @xmath do not appear
in the action, one has phase space constraints @xmath together with the
Virasoro constraint @xmath related to the conformal gauge choice. The
anticommutator of the @xmath ’s is proportional to the @xmath ’s. As a
result, half of the fermionic constraints are first class and half are
second class [ 138 ] . The separation of the two different kinds of
constraint cannot be achieved in a manifestly Lorentz covariant way.
This explains why quantization of the model only works in light-cone
gauge.

In [ 89 ] Siegel proposed to rewrite the GS action in a first order
formalism for the fermionic variables, hoping that a set of phase space
constraints that are all first class could be found. These contraints
were to be constructed out of the supersymmetric objects @xmath , @xmath
and the GS constraint @xmath , no longer constrained to vanish. The
explicit form of the left-moving contribution to the GS action in
conformal gauge in Siegel formalism is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the fermionic conjugate momenta @xmath are independent variables.
This approach was shown to work for quantizing the superparticle, but
not the superstring, since its correct physical spectrum was never
obtained. We should note that the action ( 3.2 ) is quadratic and
therefore it is immediate to determine the OPE’s between the free
fields. Quantization of this theory is as simple as the in RNS
formalism.

In the next section we will see how Siegel action ( 3.2 ) is the
starting point for the construction of a formalism for the superstring
that allows for a covariant quantization and describes the same physics
as the RNS and GS strings.

#### 3.1.2 Pure spinor superstring basics

From now on I will use the Weyl representation of the @xmath
ten-dimensional Dirac matrices, where they are off-diagonal and @xmath
and @xmath are the real symmetric @xmath off-diagonal blocks, satisfing
the Fierz identities @xmath .

Useful properties to keep in mind are the following. Every symmetric
bispinor can be decomposed in terms of a vector and a five form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

while every antisymmetric bispinor can be decomposed in terms of a three
form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our conventions for @xmath @xmath superspace covariant derivatives and
supersymmetry charges are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Berkovits completed Siegel action ( 3.2 ) by adding some missing
worldsheet ghost degrees of freedom. The evaluation of what’s missing in
Siegel approach can be achieved by “counting”. Siegel action ( 3.2 )
gives the free-field OPE’s

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.9)
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this, we can determine the contributions of the different fields to
the conformal anomaly. Since fermionic fields contribute -32 and bosonic
ones +10, the missing fields should contribute +22. Moreover, one can
consider the contribution to the Lorentz current coming from fermionic
degrees of freedom @xmath and compare to the analogous term in RNS
formalism @xmath . The current-current OPE’s are similar, except for the
coefficient of the double pole term, which is +4 in Siegel case and +1
in RNS case. Therefore, the missing ghost variables should contribute to
the Lorentz current in a way to produce a -3 in the double pole.

Indeed, Berkovits found that an irreducible representation of @xmath
with these characteristics exists. This is a bosonic pure-spinor
satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

To solve this constraint and find the free ghost fields, one has to
break the manifest Lorentz covariance to a @xmath subgroup of (Wick
rotated) @xmath . In terms of this parametrization one can write down
the ghost-field action, check that the OPE of the ghost contribution to
the Lorentz current has a -3 coefficient in the double pole and that the
stress tensor has central charge +22, as required. Apparently, one goes
back to the old problem of the lack of manifest Lorentz covariance.
However, one can formally write down an action in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the independent conjugate momenta @xmath of the ghost field @xmath
have been introduced, and then “remember” that the @xmath fields are
constrained by equation ( 3.11 ). Both the action and the pure spinor
constraint are manifestly Lorentz covariant. The problem is how to deal
with constrained fields in a path integral approach.

When there are first class constraints in a theory, a BRST quantization
procedure can be applied and the BRST charge is constructed out of the
constraints themselves multiplied by ghost fields. When the constraints
are second class, this does not work because the BRST charge one obtains
is not nilpotent. In Berkovits approach to the superstring, the
(left-moving) BRST-like charge is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the constraint of the GS superstring that in this
formalism plays the role of the supersymmetric version of the fermionic
conjugate momentum @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, this construction of @xmath could be reminiscent of some sort
of BRST quantization of the GS superstring.

From the free OPE’s ( 3.10 ) one can compute the OPE’s between the
composite variables @xmath and find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the BRST charge ( 3.13 ) is nilpotent because of the pure
spinor condition ( 3.11 ). Also because of the pure spinor condition,
one observes that the ghost conjugate momentum @xmath can only appear in
combinations that are invariant under the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with arbitrary @xmath . These gauge-invariant combinations are the pure
spinor contribution to the Lorentz current @xmath and the ghost number
current @xmath .

In the superparticle case, the BRST charge ( 3.13 ) and pure spinor
condition ( 3.11 ) can be obtained by an honest, although unusual, gauge
fixing procedure starting from the Brink-Schwarz action in
semi-light-cone gauge rewritten in the Siegel formalism.

Unfortunately, no analogous procedure works for the superstring.
Following the usual prescription of the BRST quantization rules, we
could start from the GS superstring and define the quantum action as
follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Green-Schwarz action in conformal gauge [ 4 ] . By
moving on to a Siegel description for fermionic fields and by explicitly
writing down all the contributions to ( 3.17 ), one obtains ( 3.12 ).
Even if this looks like the usual BRST procedure, we have to notice that
the BRST-like operator @xmath is nilpotent up to gauge transformations (
3.16 ). This compensates the fact that the Green-Schwarz action is not
invariant under BRST transformations. In addition, we can always add
BRST invariant terms to the action. However, there is no procedure to
get ( 3.17 ) from an honest gauge fixing of the Green-Schwarz action (a
suggestion is given in [ 139 ] ).

Now I’m going to discuss pure spinor superstring vertex operators. I
will first derive the open superstring vertices for simplicity. Closed
superstring vertices will be studied in much detail in section 3.1.3.

Since in the open string case vertices are to be inserted on the
boundary of the worldsheet, where the boundary condition @xmath holds,
they can be expressed in terms of the left-moving fermions only (or,
more correctly, in terms of the linear combination @xmath and the
corresponding one for the fermionic momenta).

Physical states for the open superstring are defined as ghost-number one
states in the cohomology of @xmath , defined in ( 3.13 ), with @xmath
satisfying the pure spinor condition ( 3.11 ). Open superstring vertex
operators with @xmath are constructed out of the fields @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and the gauge invariant objects @xmath and @xmath
containing the ghost momenta. They are obtained as the generic
combinations with ghost number one and conformal weight @xmath at zero
momentum. Since the composite objects @xmath , @xmath and @xmath carry
conformal weight one and @xmath carries ghost number one, it is clear
that for instance the most general vertex operator at @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

By requiring @xmath , one obtains the equations of motion for the spinor
superfield @xmath . By making use of the OPE

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

one finds that the superfield @xmath must satisfy the equation @xmath .
Because of the property ( 3.3 ) and the pure spinor condition ( 3.11 ),
this is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be shown that these are the superMaxwell equations written in
terms of a spinor superfield. Equation @xmath is invariant under the
gauge transformation @xmath where @xmath is a generic scalar superfield.
Indeed, this implies the gauge transformation for the spinor superfield
@xmath , which is the expected gauge transformation of superMaxwell
theory.

Going on to the next mass level, @xmath , one finds that the most
general vertex operator is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Cohomology equations and gauge transformations imply that the
superfields appearing in the vertex describe a spin two multiplet.

The integrated massless open superstring vertex operator @xmath can be
obtained by making use of the cohomology descent equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is expanded in terms of the 1-forms @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The descent equation ( 3.24 ) is satisfied when the superfields @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are governed by the superMaxwell equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath      (3.27)
     @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equation is redundant, since it is implied by the previous one
and by the pure spinor condition ( 3.11 ). The vertex ( 3.25 ) was first
found by Siegel in [ 89 ] , except for the pure spinor term, by making
use of superspace arguments.

All this discussion can be easily generalized to type II closed
superstrings. The field content is @xmath where @xmath , two
Majorana-Weyl spinors @xmath , @xmath with @xmath (with opposite or same
chirality depending whether one is in IIA or IIB case), their conjugate
momenta @xmath , @xmath , two ghosts @xmath , @xmath satisfying the pure
spinor conditions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the corresponding conjugate momenta @xmath , @xmath . Again,
supersymmetric versions of the fermionic conjugate momenta can be
introduced as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The BRST operators are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the left- and right-moving supersymmetrized
bosonic momenta

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to pure spinor constraints, the BRST charges are nilpotent up to
gauge transformations of @xmath , @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

with arbitrary local parameters @xmath and @xmath . Gauge invariant
operators are

  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.36)
  -- -- -- --------

By formally following the usual prescription of the BRST quantization
rules, we can define the quantum action starting from the GS superstring
in Siegel formalism as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

By exploiting the different contributions in ( 3.37 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is BRST invariant and invariant under the gauge transformation (
3.35 ) if the spinors @xmath are pure. The action is also invariant
under the @xmath supersymmetry transformations generated by @xmath where
the explicit expressions for the supersymmetry currents are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting to note that these do not anticommute with the BRST
operators @xmath and @xmath , since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the BRST-invariant quantities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also introduce the Lorentz currents

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfy the following commutation relations with the BRST charges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

are BRST invariant. By using the equations of motion from ( 3.38 ) it is
easy to show that the currents @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are holomophic and anti-holomorphic, respectively.

In the following section I will describe in detail type II vertex
operators, their descent equations and the corresponding superfield
equations of motion and gauge transformations. These closed string
vertices are as usual obtained by taking the left-right product of the
open superstring vertices I described in the present section.

#### 3.1.3 Type II superstring vertex operators

In this section I will describe in detail the construction of the closed
superstring ghost number @xmath local vertex operator @xmath and of the
integrated vertex operators @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , related to it
by the closed string descent equations.

Introducing the notation @xmath for local vertex operators with ghost
number @xmath in the left (right) sector and (anti)holomorphic indices
@xmath , we identify

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The descent equations read ¹ ¹ 1 Here we use the square brackets to
denote both commutation and anti-commutation relations. The difference
is established by the nature of the operators involved in the relations.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the holomorphic and antiholomorphic
differentials. @xmath and @xmath are the BRST charges for holomorphic
and antiholomorphic sectors we introduced in ( 3.32 ). More explicitly,
at the first level we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

while at the next level we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, finally,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vertex operators @xmath are to be expanded in powers of ghost fields
@xmath and @xmath or in powers of the supersymmetric holomorphic and
antiholomorphic 1-forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The explicit expressions of these 1-form operators in terms of sigma
model fields are given in ( 3.30 , 3.34 , 3.36 ). The coefficients are
superfields of the coordinates @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . A further
relation is obtained by acting from the left on the first equation of (
3.54 ) with @xmath or on the second with @xmath . Using eqs. ( 3.52 ),
one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the closed string analogue of ( 3.24 ) and relates the
integrated vertex @xmath to the unintegrated one @xmath .

Equations ( 3.51 , 3.52 , 3.54 ) are invariant under the gauge
transformations given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the zero forms @xmath and @xmath have ghost number @xmath and
@xmath and are proportional to @xmath and @xmath , and the coefficients
are superfields. The holomorphic and antiholomorphic 1-forms @xmath and
@xmath are to be expanded in terms of the 1-forms @xmath and @xmath
given in ( 3.55 ) and coefficients are again superfields.

In addition, the gauge parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
must satisfy the following consistency conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations resemble the descent equations for the open string
vertex operator @xmath , but in that case there are boundary conditions
for the fermionic fields: @xmath at @xmath .

Equations ( 3.60 ) and ( 3.61 ) are further invariant under the gauge
transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are generic superfields. However, consistency
with ( 3.58 ) imposes @xmath . The superfield @xmath will be useful to
define a suitable gauge fixing procedure and to take into account the
reducible gauge symmetry of the NS-NS two form of 10-dimensional
supergravity.

To derive equations ( 3.52 ) we can view the vertex operators @xmath and
@xmath as deformations of the BRST charges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the vertex operator @xmath as the deformation of the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 3.51 ) are derived by requiring the nilpotency of the new charges
and the vanishing of their anticommutation relation.

#### 3.1.4 Amplitudes

Since the worldsheet ghost variables @xmath are constrained by the pure
spinor condition ( 3.11 ), it is not obvious how the define a path
integral in this variables and therefore how to compute superstring
amplitudes. For this reason in [ 140 ] a different formulation was
proposed where the pure spinor constraint is relaxed by adding more
fields to the theory. Clearly this should be done without modifying the
BRST cohomology, that was shown to reproduce the correct superstring
physical spectrum [ 141 , 142 ] . However, Berkovits recently showed [
31 ] that multiloop superstring amplitudes can be computed in the pure
spinor formalism, by introducing an analogue of the RNS “picture
changing” operators.

When only tree-level amplitudes are under concern, a prescription can be
given to compute them relying on properties of BRST cohomology, as shown
in [ 143 ] . The prescription given there was shown to coincide with the
standard RNS one in [ 144 ] . In terms of the vertex operators @xmath ,
the amplitudes on the sphere are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the three unintegrated vertex operators are needed to fix the
@xmath invariance on the sphere. An unintegrated vertex @xmath can be
replaced by a product of @xmath and @xmath vertices @xmath which has the
same total ghost number and the same total conformal spin as the
original vertex @xmath . In [ 143 ] supersymmetry and gauge invariance
were proven under the assumption that the prescription for the zero
modes is the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

As anticipated, this zero-mode prescription is justified by
cohomological arguments. In fact, by analogy with the RNS case, one
deduces that the the expectation value for the +3 ghost-number vertex
operator for the Yang-Mills antighost must be fixed to one and there is
a unique state of such ghost number in the pure-spinor BRST cohomology,
given by @xmath .

In [ 31 ] Berkovits has given a general prescription for the computation
of multiloop amplitudes in the pure spinor formalism for the
superstring. Since in my work I didn’t compute amplitudes, I’m not going
to give technical details about this. However, I will discuss the
various difficulties that were overcome in [ 31 ] .

As outlined in section 3.1.1, the ghost variables can appear only as
@xmath (with conformal weight 0) or in the two gauge-invariant
combinations @xmath and @xmath (with conformal weight 1). Because of the
pure spinor constraint ( 3.11 ), @xmath has only eleven free components.
As a result, on a genus @xmath surface @xmath has eleven independent
zero-modes and @xmath and @xmath have @xmath ones. It is not obvious how
to determine a Lorentz covariant prescription to integrate over these
ghost zero-modes. A Lorentz-invariant measure for @xmath @xmath was
constructed in [ 31 ] . Moreover, it has been noted that zero modes of
@xmath and @xmath are related by a constraint following from the pure
spinor relation ( 3.11 ), such that all these zero-modes can be
expressed in terms of ten free @xmath zero-modes. The measure for these
free modes, @xmath , is also given in [ 31 ] .

On a genus @xmath surface, one integrates out all the non-ghost fields
and the ghost non-zero-mode fields by making use of the given OPE’s. One
is then left with an expression like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

that only depends on the ghost zero-modes. Then one uses the Lorentz
invariant measures to define the integration over these zero-modes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

To compute the integral, as in RNS formalism [ 137 ] , it is necessary
to insert picture changing operators involving the delta-functions
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where the constant spinor and antisymmetric
tensor @xmath and @xmath should not affect the amplitudes (that
otherwise could not be Lorentz invariant!). These picture changing
operators will be called @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. Their
insertion in loop amplitudes is necessary to absorb the ghost
zero-modes. Exactly as in the RNS formulation, picture changing
operators must be BRST-invariant with a BRST-trivial worldsheet
derivative, this second requirement needed for the amplitudes to be
independent of PCO’s positions on the worldsheet. In [ 31 ] operators
with these properties were constructed and it was also shown that even
if they are not supersymmetric, their variation is BRST-trivial. As a
result, supersymmetry is preserved (up to surface terms). In [ 31 ] it
was also shown that the computation of tree amplitudes with the Lorentz
covariant measure for pure spinor zero-modes agrees with the previous
prescription obtained by cohomology arguments.

To compute loop amplitudes a last ingredient is missing. In fact, in RNS
formalism, in the computation of a @xmath -loop amplitude the insertion
of @xmath @xmath -ghosts is necessary. The @xmath -ghost has @xmath
ghost number and satisfies the relation @xmath where @xmath is the
stress tensor. The problem is that in the pure spinor formalism the
ghost conjugate momentum @xmath only appears in the gauge invariant
combinations @xmath and @xmath that have both ghost-number zero. So
apparently there is no candidate for an analogue of the @xmath ghost in
this formalism. However, in [ 31 ] it was shown that the picture raising
operator @xmath , that will be present in the expression of a general
multiloop amplitude, can be used to construct a nonlocal operator @xmath
, carrying ghost-number zero, such that @xmath . From @xmath it is
possible to define a local @xmath , however for the computation of the
amplitudes it will be sufficient to know the nonlocal operator (about
this topic, see also [ 145 ] ).

With all these ingredients one can give the following super-Poincaré
covariant prescription for the computation of a generic @xmath -point
@xmath -loop closed string amplitude

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.73)
                          @xmath   
                                   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath means left-right product, @xmath are the Teichmuller
parameters associated to the Beltrami differentials @xmath and @xmath
are the dimension @xmath closed superstring vertex operators for the
@xmath external states. When @xmath , the general prescription ( 3.73 )
must be modified, as usual, by changing one integrated vertex operator
with an unintegrated one.

Even though this formalism is quite cumbersome for computing superstring
amplitudes, it makes it easy to prove some general vanishing theorems,
as it is somehow expected because of the great amount of manifest
symmetries. Actually, the general vanishing of certain amplitudes can be
deduced by just counting zero-modes. For instance, S-duality of type IIB
superstrings imply that @xmath terms in the low energy effective action
do not receive perturbative corrections above one loop [ 146 ] . In RNS
formalism, this was checked only up to two loops in [ 147 ] . In the
pure spinor formalism for the superstring, instead, this can be easily
proven for general @xmath [ 31 ] . Furthermore, it is well-known that
massless N-point superstring @xmath -loop amplitudes vanish for @xmath .
This is equivalent to perturbative finiteness of the theory, when
unphysical divergences are not present in the interior of moduli space [
148 ] . This was proven in [ 149 ] by an argument that made use of both
GS and RNS formalisms. In the pure spinor formalism this can also be
proven by counting zero-modes [ 31 ] .

#### 3.1.5 What we can (cannot) do with this formalism, up to now

In this section I would like to summarize the results obtained with the
pure spinor formalism for the superstring.

First of all, I should say that in [ 141 , 142 ] it was proven that the
pure spinor BRST cohomology reproduces the correct superstring spectrum.
Therefore, the pure spinor formalism describes the same physics as the
RNS and the GS formalisms. In the following I will describe how the pure
spinor superstring proved to be superior to analyze many aspects of
string theory.

As discussed in the previous sections, the main motivation to introduce
a superPoincaré covariant formulation for the superstring is the number
of difficulties one encounters when trying to compute a general
superstring amplitude in the RNS and GS formalisms. As we have seen in
the previous section, the pure spinor formalism for the superstring in
principle allows to compute arbitrary @xmath -point multiloop amplitudes
(even though, in practice, only tree-level [ 150 ] and four-point
one-loop [ 31 ] amplitudes (that can be computed also in RNS or GS
formalisms) have been explicitly evaluated up to now). Furthermore, we
have already stressed that a big advantage of the pure spinor
formulation is the possibility to prove vanishing theorems at arbitrary
order in the perturbative expansion.

When I wrote my paper [ 32 ] , in collaboration with P.A. Grassi, the
prescription for computing a general multiloop amplitude was not known.
However it was already clear that the computation of the amplitudes in
the pure spinor formalism is rather involved, even in the tree-level
case. One of the biggest problems is the complexity of the expression
for unintegrated and integrated vertex operators, due to the manifest
symmetries that render the formulation redundant. As we have seen in
section 3.1.3, vertices are written in terms of superfields satisfying a
set of linearized equations of motion, where the physical fields, such
as the graviton, dilaton, R-R field strength and so on, do not appear
explicitly. To write down the component expansion of the vertex, one has
to solve the equations of motion, after having chosen a specific gauge.
This procedure is quite complicated and determining the vertex for a
given physical field is not an easy task. In [ 32 ] , P.A. Grassi and I
described an iterative procedure to compute type II vertices that
eliminates auxiliary fields from the vertices and allows to determine
the whole @xmath and @xmath vertex expansion given the physical fields.

Another serious problem of RNS formalism is the difficulty in dealing
with general R-R background. We have seen that vertices for closed
superstring can be written and that the equations of motion and gauge
trasformations for the superfields appearing in the vertices are the
linearized supergravity equations and gauge transformations. Moreover,
the pure spinor superstring can be naturally coupled to a general
supergravity background. It has been shown in [ 151 ] that nilpotency
and holomorphicity of the pure spinor BRST charge imply the on-shell
superspace constraints of the supergravity background. Aspects of the
superstring in specific R-R backgrounds, such as @xmath and the pp-wave
were considered in [ 94 , 152 , 153 ] . Furthermore, as we have seen in
section 1.2.4, non(anti)commutative superspaces were shown to emerge
when open superstrings in the presence of D-branes and R-R backgrounds
are considered. The natural setting for this discussion was the
ten-dimensional pure spinor superstring [ 29 ] and its compactification
on a CY three-fold [ 27 , 28 ] .

In the open string case, requiring BRST invariance also implies the
correct equations of motion for the background fields. Indeed, in [ 154
] it was shown that classical BRST invariance of the open pure spinor
superstring implies the supersymmetric Born-Infeld equations, that were
first determined by making use of superembedding techniques [ 155 ] in [
156 ] (for the application of the superembedding formalism to determine
higher-order corrections to the effective dynamics of string/M theory
branes, see also [ 157 ] ). @xmath -symmetry in the GS string and
superembedding formalism is replaced by BRST symmetry in the pure spinor
formalism.To obtain the supersymmetric Born-Infeld equations from the
pure spinor formalism for the superstring, one requires that the left
and right pure spinor BRST currents are equal on the worldsheet boundary
in the presence of the background.

I would also like to say that the pure spinor formalism has been
successfully used to quantize the @xmath superparticle [ 158 ] .
Moreover, by replacing ten-dimensional pure spinors with
eleven-dimensional pure spinors, the formalism has been extended to the
@xmath superparticle and supermembrane [ 159 ] . The covariant
prescription to compute loop amplitudes in the covariant formalism for
the superstring I briefly discussed in section 3.1.4 has been
generalized to the eleven-dimensional superparticle in [ 160 ] .

The supermembrane is a quite problematic object in string theory, since
the impossibility of performing a covariant quantization has made it
difficult to study its properties. However, the supermembrane is worth
studying, since it is expected to be related to M-theory, which is the
underlying eleven dimensional theory from which the nonpertubative
symmetries of string theory are believed to come. In [ 159 ] Berkovits
“replaced” @xmath -symmetry with BRST symmetry as he did for the
superstring. However, not all the problems of the supermembrane are
solved by moving on to a pure spinor description, since the pure spinor
supermembrane action is not quadratic in a flat background. In [ 159 ] a
conjecture is made that supermembrane amplitudes can however be computed
and that they are M-theory scattering amplitudes which, after a suitable
compactification that reduces to ten dimensions, reproduce Type IIA
superstring scattering amplitudes. These amplitudes would contain
non-perturbative information about the Type IIA superstring which might
be useful for studying M-theory.

Finally, in my paper [ 32 ] , P. A. Grassi and I discussed an
application of pure spinor techniques to the construction of off-shell
vertex operators in the asymmetric picture, that could be useful to
study the coupling of R-R potentials to D-branes. We also proposed an
application to closed string field theory, by studying antifields in
this formalism and constructing a kinetic term for the closed string
field theory action that seems to respect the correct symmetries and
generate the right equations.

To conclude, I would like to stress that, even if the construction of
the pure spinor formalism might seem “ad hoc” and not justified by an
underlying general principle, it is the first successful covariant
method to quantize the superstring. It has already proven to be useful
to deal with many aspect of string theory that were unreachable by the
other formalisms. It might be that in the end a more natural and elegant
construction of the covariant superstring will be found. However, it is
now very clear that the pure spinor approach at least goes in the right
direction and is very effective and useful in string theory.

### 3.2 An iterative procedure to compute the vertex operators

In this section, I will present the general procedure to compute pure
spinor closed string vertex operators I introduced in [ 32 ] , in
collaboration with P.A. Grassi.

#### 3.2.1 Warm up: The open superstring case

Motivated by the increasing interest in the covariant techniques for
computation of the amplitudes in string theory, in [ 32 ] P.A. Grassi
and I provided a calculation scheme for superstring vertex operators in
pure spinor approach [ 30 , 140 ] . Since the amount of symmetries that
are manifest in the covariant formulation increases, also the number of
auxiliary fields increases and a useful technique to compute the basic
ingredients is needed. In [ 32 ] we provided such a procedure and some
applications (that will be discussed in section 3.3). First of all I
will briefly review the open superstring case, to explain the main idea
that will be applied in the next sections to the more complicated closed
string case.

In the case of the open superstring, we have seen in section 3.1.2 that
the massless sector is described by a vertex operator @xmath at ghost
number one, where @xmath is a pure spinor satisfying ( 3.11 ) and @xmath
is the spinorial component of the superconnection. The superfield @xmath
can be completely expressed in terms of the gauge field @xmath and the
gluino @xmath , for example as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vertex operator @xmath belongs to the cohomology of the BRST charge
@xmath , where @xmath is defined in section 3.1.2, if and only if the
components of @xmath satisfy the linear Maxwell and Dirac equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contributions @xmath are given in terms of the derivatives of @xmath
and @xmath and are completely fixed by the equations of motion ( 3.29 )
given in [ 161 ] , where @xmath is the vectorial part of the
superconnection and @xmath is the superderivative. The lowest components
of @xmath in ( 3.74 ) are eliminated by a gauge fixing condition.

Even though the computation of all terms in the expansion of @xmath
seems a straightforward procedure, technically it is rather involved.
However, there exists a powerful technique which simplifies the task.
The main idea is to choose a suitable gauge fixing such as for instance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reduces the independent components in the superfield @xmath . This
choice ² ² 2 The following gauge condition has a counterpart in bosonic
string theory: @xmath . This fixes the gauge invariance under @xmath and
it coincides with the Lorentz gauge in momentum space @xmath . The gauge
fixing yields the equation @xmath which can be solved directly by
inverting @xmath and obtaining @xmath . fixes part of the super-gauge
transformation @xmath , where @xmath is a scalar superfield with ghost
number zero. To reach the gauge ( 3.76 ), we have to impose @xmath ,
which implies that @xmath . Expanding @xmath as @xmath , all components
with @xmath are fixed except the lowest component @xmath , which
corresponds to the usual bosonic gauge transformation of Maxwell theory.

Acting with @xmath on ( 3.76 ) and using the equations of motion ( 3.29
), one gets the recursive relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
     @xmath      (3.78)
     @xmath      (3.79)
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . So, given the zero-order component of @xmath , we can
compute the order- @xmath component of @xmath . The same can be done for
@xmath , the spinorial field strength @xmath and the bosonic curvature
@xmath making use of the other three equations. This renders the task of
computing all components of @xmath in terms of initial data @xmath and
@xmath a purely algebraic problem ( [ 162 ] and [ 163 ] ). Moreover, one
is able to compute all components of the superfields appearing in the
(descent) ghost-number-zero vertex operator @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfies the descent equation @xmath . Here @xmath is the
boundary worldsheet coordinate and @xmath is the pure spinor part of the
Lorentz current. As we have seen in section 3.1.2, the operators @xmath
and @xmath are the supersymmetric line element and the fermionic
constraint of the Green-Schwarz superstring [ 4 ] , respectively.

In my paper [ 32 ] , we applied the same technique to IIA/IIB
supergravity. Starting from the vertex operators for closed
superstrings, we derived the complete set of equations from the BRST
cohomology and we defined all curvatures and gauge transformations.
Then, we imposed a set of gauge fixing conditions to remove the lowest
components of the superfields and we derived an iterative procedure to
compute all components. We showed that a further gauge fixing is needed
to fix the reducible gauge symmetries and we showed that all chosen
gauges can indeed be reached.

The procedure for closed strings is original by itself, but, more
importantly, our analysis leads to a generalization of ( 3.76 ) to all
vertex operators, associated to both massless and massive states.
Indeed, in [ 32 ] we showed that the gauge fixing ( 3.76 ) can be
written in terms of a new nilpotent charge @xmath (with negative ghost
number) as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

This imitates the Siegel gauge in string field theory. When restricted
to massless states, this generalized gauge fixing condition reduces to
the gauge fixing ( 3.76 ) for open superstrings and to the corresponding
gauge fixing for closed strings. When applied to massive states, ( 3.82
) also leads to a suitable gauge fixing. In our paper, we explicitly
derived the gauge conditions for the first massive state for the open
superstring. Again, ( 3.82 ) fixes all auxiliary fields in terms of the
physical on-shell data and eliminates the lowest components.

I would like to stress that in [ 32 ] we only considered deformations
(vertex operators) at first order in the coupling constant, neglecting
the backreaction of background fields.

#### 3.2.2 Linearized IIA/IIB supergravity equations

In the present section we derive the equations of motion for the
massless background fields in superspace from the BRST cohomology of the
superstring. Let us start from the simplest equations ( 3.51 ) for the
vertex @xmath whose general expression is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The superfield @xmath satisfies the equations of motion [ 161 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the antisymmetrized product of five gamma matrices. The
pure spinor conditions imply that only the 5-form parts of the @xmath
and @xmath are indeed constrained [ 30 , 135 , 164 ] . By using Bianchi
identities, one can show that they yield the type IIA/IIB supergravity
equations of motion at the linearized level. All auxiliary fields
present in the superfield @xmath are fixed by eqs. ( 3.84 ).

As outlined before, one can use different types of vertices to simplify
the computations. Integrated vertices are written in terms of a huge
number of different superfields, whose components are completely fixed
by the equations of motion. As a result, these vertices are quite
complicated espressions.

The set of superfields needed to compute @xmath can be grouped into the
following matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first components of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
identified with the supergravity fields as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the
graviton, the NS-NS two-form, the dilaton, the two gravitinos (the
gamma-traceless part of @xmath , @xmath ), the two dilatinos (the
gamma-trace part of @xmath , @xmath ) and the RR field strengths. IIA
and IIB differ in the chirality of the two spinorial indices @xmath and
@xmath . This changes the type of RR fields present in the spectrum. The
first components of the superfields @xmath ( @xmath ), @xmath ( @xmath )
and @xmath are identified with the linearized gravitational connection
@xmath , the curvature of the gravitinos and the linearized Riemann
tensor, respectively. The remaining superfields are the spinorial
partners of the above superfields. Those constraints are given in terms
of the spinorial components @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
structure of superspace formulation of type IIA and IIB supergravity in
the present framework is also discussed in [ 151 ] .

Given the vectors @xmath and @xmath (see ( 3.55 )) we can explicitly
write the vertex operator @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.89)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.90)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.91)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.92)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From equations ( 3.51 ), ( 3.52 ), ( 3.54 ) and ( 3.56 ) in the previous
section we derive the complete set of equations for the background
fields

  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.94)
  -- -- -- --------

where the labels @xmath denote the scaling dimensions of the generators
of the extended super-Poincaré algebra [ 89 , 165 ] which the equations
belong to.

Moreover, one obtains the following eight equations, which do not
provide further information, since they are implied by ( 3.94 ) and pure
spinor conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
     @xmath      (3.96)
     @xmath      (3.97)
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we assumed that the superfields @xmath and @xmath correspond to
the linearized curvatures of the connections, we can derive new
equations needed for the iterative procedure outlined in the
introduction. By contracting equations ( 3.94 ) with respect to the
bosonic derivative and antisymmetrizing the bosonic indices, one obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.99)
     @xmath      (3.100)
     @xmath      (3.101)
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(we define @xmath ). The identification of the superfields @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with the linearized curvatures is
automatically derived in the formalism [ 140 ] , and equations ( 3.99 )
are the usual Bianchi identities.

In order to show that the above equations imply the supergravity
equations of motion we proceed as follows. We first consider the third
line of ( 3.99 ) and the @xmath line of ( 3.94 ), that we recall for the
reader convenience

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Acting with @xmath on @xmath and using the commutation relations of the
@xmath ’s, one gets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we also used the first equation of ( 3.103 ) and @xmath (which
follows from ( 3.103 )). In the second line we used the first equation
in the second line on ( 3.103 ) and the identity @xmath . By performing
the same manipulations on the hatted quantities we derive the equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Decomposing @xmath in terms of Dirac matrices, it is straightforward to
show that ( 3.108 ) implies the equations of motion for the RR fields.

Acting again with @xmath on ( 3.108 ) and using equations ( 3.103 ) one
gets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and analogously for @xmath . These equations are the Maxwell equations
for the curvature of the gravitinos. They are not enough to describe the
dynamic of gravitinos and we have to invoke new equations coming from
the second line of ( 3.99 ) and the @xmath line of ( 3.99 ).

Applying @xmath on @xmath and with @xmath on @xmath , the same algebraic
manipulations yield

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which are the Dirac equations for the gravitinos. These equations are
gauge invariant under the gauge transformations discussed in the next
section since the gauge parameters have to satisfy a field equation. In
addition, as above, we find the equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which are, at the lowest component of the superfield @xmath and @xmath ,
the equations of motion of the graviton, the dilaton and the NS-NS form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
     @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Pursuing this line of reasoning, one can derive similar equations for
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which guarantee that the fields
are either pure gauge or auxiliary fields. Finally, by studying the last
line of ( 3.99 ) and the line @xmath of ( 3.94 ), one derives new
equations for @xmath and @xmath , which do not give further information
since they are implied by the previous ones.

#### 3.2.3 Gauge transformations and gauge fixing

In order to solve the equations of motion ( 3.94 ) and ( 3.99 ) it is
convenient to choose a suitable gauge. Indeed, for supersymmetric
theories, the large amount of auxiliary fields can be reduced by
choosing the Wess-Zumino gauge. We first discuss the general structure
of the gauge transformations ( 3.58 ), we then provide a gauge fixing
and we finally check that this gauge can be reached. In the present
framework, the gauge parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
satisfy equations ( 3.60 ) and ( 3.61 ) and they are defined up to the
gauge transformation ( 3.62 ). This additional gauge invariance is fixed
by a further gauge fixing.

The general structure of the gauge parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.115)
     @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are superfields in the variables @xmath , and @xmath . In
terms of these superfields, eq. ( 3.60 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while eq. ( 3.61 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
     @xmath      (3.119)
     @xmath      (3.120)
     @xmath      (3.121)
     @xmath      (3.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These equations look like the superspace field equations for
superMaxwell theory ( 3.29 ), however the superfields @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath and the corresponding hatted quantities depend on
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the eqs. ( 3.118 ) are not
sufficient to determine completely the components of those superfields.
The free independent components are indeed the gauge parameters. We also
note that the last pair of equations is trivial when the previous
equations and the pure spinor conditions are imposed. Finally, because
of the similarity with SYM case, it is quite natural to impose the
condition that @xmath and @xmath are the linearized curvatures of @xmath
and @xmath . Again, this assumption is automatic in [ 140 ] . The gauge
transformations of the superfields in @xmath are given by

  -------- ---------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath     
  @xmath   @xmath     @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath     
  @xmath   @xmath     @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath     @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath     @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath     @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath     
  @xmath   @xmath     @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath .   
  -------- ---------- --------

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.123)
  -- -- -- ---------

From these equations, we easily see that the superfields @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are indeed gauge invariant, as expected, being
linearized field strengths. At zero order in @xmath and @xmath eq. (
3.123 ) gives the gauge transformations of supergravity fields. For
example, the first components of @xmath and @xmath are to be identified
with the parameters of diffeomorphisms @xmath and with the gauge
transformations of the NS-NS form @xmath . So, the zero-order terms of
the gauge parameter superfields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and of the
corresponding hatted quantities are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.124)
     @xmath      (3.125)
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, the large amount of gauge parameters allows us to choose
the gauge

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.127)
     @xmath      (3.128)
     @xmath      (3.129)
     @xmath      (3.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Indeed, we have at our disposal the parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath and the corresponding hatted quantities to impose the gauge (
3.127 ). Before showing that the gauge can be reached we have to notice
that the transformations ( 3.123 ) and the equations ( 3.117 ) are
invariant under the residual gauge transformations ( 3.62 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.131)
     @xmath      (3.132)
     @xmath      (3.133)
     @xmath      (3.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

depending on the scalar superfield @xmath . This requires an additional
gauge fixing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To show that the gauge choice ( 3.127 ) can be reached by the gauge
transformations ( 3.123 ), we have to solve, for instance, the equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and analogously for all other gauge conditions ( 3.127 ). By using the
properties of the superderivative, gauge fixing ( 3.135 ), consistency
conditions ( 3.118 ), and by defining the operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we get the following recursive equations

  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.138)
  -- -- -- ---------

The operator @xmath acts on homogeneous polynomials in @xmath and @xmath
by multiplication by the degree of homogeneity and it does not change
its degree. Therefore, the relations ( 3.138 ) are recursive in powers
of @xmath and @xmath . They can be solved algebraically given @xmath
order by order in @xmath and @xmath and this proves that the gauge can
indeed be imposed. Of course, to reconstruct the gauge-parameter
superfields by means of the recursive equations ( 3.138 ), we also need
lowest order data for them. These are the zero order supergravity gauge
parameters ( 3.124 ). To obtain the last couple of equations we used the
additional condition that @xmath and @xmath are the linearized
curvatures of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 3.2.4 Recursive equations and explicit solution (up to order
@xmath)

The next step is the derivation of the recursion equations for
supergravity superfields. Acting with @xmath and @xmath on the gauge
fixing conditions ( 3.127 ), and using the definition ( 3.137 ), it is
straightforward to derive the recursion relations from eq. ( 3.94 )

  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.139)
  -- -- -- ---------

  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.140)
  -- -- -- ---------

  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.141)
  -- -- -- ---------

  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.142)
  -- -- -- ---------

A given superfield appears in two groups of equations in order that both
its @xmath and @xmath components are fixed. Inside each group there is
an iterative structure (see [ 162 ] and [ 163 ] ) which allows us to
solve those equations recursively given the initial conditions and there
is a hierarchical structure among the different groups of equations
which allows us to solve them subsequently. To provide the initial data,
we identify the lowest-components of the matrix superfield @xmath in (
3.85 ) with supergravity fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the linearized gravitational connection and curvatures are given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.144)
     @xmath      (3.145)
     @xmath      (3.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, analogously, for @xmath and @xmath .

In the following we give the component-expansion for the physical
superfields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , up to second order in
both @xmath and @xmath . The corresponding curvatures can be easily
computed from the defining equations ( 3.144 ).

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.150)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.154)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.158)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.162)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

In the following we list the solution up to second order in both @xmath
and @xmath for the auxiliary superfields @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.166)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                                   
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.169)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.172)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.175)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.178)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

It is easy to verify that this expansion satisfies the gauge conditions
( 3.127 ) and that all auxiliary fields have been eliminated and
reexpressed in terms of derivatives of physical supergravity fields.

The next step is to insert the expansion ( 3.154 ) into the definition
of the vertex operator ( 3.89 ) and recombine the worldsheet one-forms
@xmath and @xmath in order to get a more manageable expression. However,
it makes sense to provide such expression for an interesting example in
section 3.3.

We have to notice that the vertex operator @xmath contains only the
superfield @xmath which encodes all the needed information regarding the
supergravity fields, which however appear at higher orders in @xmath ’s
and @xmath ’s. This is sufficient for amplitudes computations, even
though the measure factor on zero modes in the correlation functions has
to soak up plenty of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s ( [ 30 , 143 , 166 ] ).

#### 3.2.5 Gauge fixing for massive states

In the previous sections, we explored the gauge fixing for the massless
sector of open and closed string theory. However, the spectrum of string
theory contains infinitely many massive states defined, in the closed
string case, by the equations

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.179)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath . The index @xmath denotes the mass of the
state. Even if these equations can be solved by expanding the vertex
operators @xmath in terms of the building-blocks @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath ,…, it is convenient to fix a gauge as in the massless
case and then solve the equations by an iterative construction as shown
in the previous section. However, since we cannot explore the complete
set of vertices and provide a gauge fixing for each of them, we propose
a definition of gauge fixing based on new anticommuting and nilpotent
charges to be imposed on the physical states. This resembles the Siegel
gauge (where the corresponding charges are @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath are the left- and right-moving antighosts) used in
string field theory to eliminate all auxiliary fields and to define the
propagator for the string field.

We introduce the following charges “dual” to the BRST operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.180)
  -- -------- -- ---------

They are nilpotent and anti-commute. They are not supersymmetry
invariant as can be directly seen by the presence of @xmath and @xmath .
This in fact implies that we are choosing a non symmetric gauge which
can be viewed as a generalization of the Wess-Zumino gauge condition in
10 dimensions. It eliminates the lowest non physical component of the
superfields and it fixes the auxiliary fields – appearing at higher
order in the superspace expansion – in terms of the physical fields and
their derivatives. In addition, @xmath are not invariant under the gauge
transformations ( 3.35 ) , but their gauge variations are BRST invariant
because of the pure spinor conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.181)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, @xmath have the following commutation relations with the BRST
operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.182)
     @xmath      (3.183)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.184)
     @xmath      (3.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Acting on superfields @xmath , we have that @xmath and @xmath . The
ordering of fields in the operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
is needed to define the corresponding currents. The operators are gauge
invariant under ( 3.35 ) because of ( 3.181 ). The main difference with
respect to Siegel gauge fixing in string field theory is that in that
case @xmath and @xmath are holomorphic and antiholomorphic anticommuting
currents of spin 2.

In the case of the open superstring, denoting by @xmath and by @xmath
the BRST and gauge fixing operators, the gauge condition on the massless
vertex operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We notice that the field @xmath in @xmath is harmless for massless
vertices, but it will give a nontrivial contribution in the massive
case. In the latter case one has to add a compensating non-gauge
invariant contribution on the r.h.s. of ( 3.186 ) in order to compensate
the fact that @xmath is not gauge invariant under ( 3.35 ).

Applying @xmath on the left hand side of ( 3.186 ) applying @xmath on
the equation @xmath and using the commutation relations ( 3.182 ), we
obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Eliminating the ghost @xmath , we end up with equation ( 3.77 ) for the
superfields @xmath and @xmath . This procedure can be clearly
generalized to massive states. First, we discuss the closed string case,
then we show an example for the first massive state for open
superstrings and, finally, we show that the zero momentum cohomology
satisfies the same equations generalized to zero modes.

For closed strings, we reproduce the gauge fixing ( 3.127 ) by the
following conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.188)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, for the gauge parameters @xmath and @xmath in eq. ( 3.114 ), by the
gauge condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which coincides with ( 3.135 ). Applying the BRST charge on the left
hand sides of ( 3.188 ), acting with @xmath and @xmath on equations (
3.51 ), and finally using the commutation relations ( 3.182 ), we derive
the conditions for the iterative equations given in the previous
section.

Let us show that the gauge fixing ( 3.186 ) also fixes the gauge
transformations in a suitable way for the first massive state of the
open superstring @xmath , leading to a recursive procedure to compute
the vertex operator in term of the initial data, a multiplet of on-shell
fields containing a massive spin 2 field [ 4 ] .

A general decomposition of @xmath in terms of fundamental
building-blocks is given in ( 3.23 ) and its gauge transformation is
generated by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.190)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.191)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The decompositions are based on the requirement that the vertex operator
should be invariant under the gauge transformation @xmath given in (
3.35 ). A further gauge transformation of @xmath would be a variation of
a negative ghost number field. The only one is the antighost @xmath ,
but there is no gauge invariant operator only with @xmath without @xmath
. Notice that we have to add a (BRST-invariant) compensating term of the
form @xmath in order to reabsorb the non-invariance of @xmath .

Imposing ( 3.186 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.192)
     @xmath      (3.193)
     @xmath      (3.194)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This gauge fixing can be reached by adjusting the parameters @xmath and
@xmath . Using equations ( 3.192 ) and applying the operator @xmath , we
obtain the iterative relations to compute the vertex. The gauge fixing (
3.192 ) fixes only the supergauge part of the gauge transformation. This
gauge does not fix the physical gauge transformation of the massive spin
2 system [ 167 ] .

Finally, we show that the measure for zero modes satisfies the gauge
fixing proposed above. In fact, by restricting the attention to zero
momentum cohomology, we supersede @xmath with the differential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.195)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which acting on @xmath , yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.196)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, for the closed superstring, the ghost number @xmath
cohomology representative satisfies the corresponding gauge fixing.

Even if the gauge fixing is not manifestly supersymmetric, the
supersymmetry of the target space theory is still a symmetry. As usual,
in the Wess-Zumino gauge, a supersymmetry transformation must be
accompanied by a gauge transformation to bring the vertex to the
original gauge. This means that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (the supersymmetry generator @xmath is
given in ( 3.39 )). As an example, we show that @xmath can be indeed
found for the massless sector of the open superstring and the extension
is similar for the other cases. Equation ( 3.197 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.198)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.199)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again, this equation can be solved iteratively in powers of @xmath ’s
and it follows that @xmath . ( 3.199 ) can be checked explicitly on the
solutions ( 3.154 ).

### 3.3 An example: Linearly @xmath-dependent Ramond-Ramond field
strength and possible Lie-algebraic superspace deformations

In this section I will discuss in detail one application of the
iterative procedure I presented in the previous section. The
unintegrated and integrated vertices for a particular nonconstant R-R
field-strength will be computed, that are expected to be related to a
nonconstant deformation of ten-dimensional superspace. At the end of the
section, other two applications will be briefly described. No details
will be given for these two, since they are not related to
noncommutative geometry, which is the main subject of this thesis.
However, the interested reader can refer to my work [ 32 ] , where the
three applications are discussed.

#### 3.3.1 Motivation: Nonconstant superspace deformations

In section 1.2.4, we have seen how non(anti)commutative superspaces,
first studied in [ 52 ] and in my paper [ 26 ] , arise in the context of
superstring theory, when open superstrings in the presence of R-R
backgrounds and D-branes are considered. Up to now, only supergeometries
with constant fermion-fermion anticommutators have been derived,
associated to a constant R-R background, for the superstring
compactified on a CY three-fold [ 27 , 28 ] and for the uncompactified
ten-dimensional superstring [ 29 ] . In both cases the covariant
formulation for the superstring has been used.

In section 1.3 we have discussed how, in the bosonic case, nonconstant
deformations of the coordinate algebra are related to the presence of a
general curved NS-NS background. Therefore, it is natural to expect that
more general, nonconstant R-R backgrounds can lead to nonconstant
superspace deformations. In particular, in [ 29 ] it was conjectured
that from non-constant RR field strengths one can derive new equal-time
commutation relations between coordinates @xmath and @xmath living on
the boundaries such as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.200)
  -- -------- -- ---------

generalizing the construction of Lie-algebraic non-commutative
geometries to supermanifolds [ 33 ] (for a different example of a
Lie-algebraic geometry in superspace see [ 50 ] ).

The vertex operator for non-constant R-R fields strengths is the basic
ingredient of this kind of analysis.

#### 3.3.2 The ansatz for the RR field strength

Applying the iterative method I introduced in the previous section, I
will show how to compute the vertex for linearly @xmath -dependent RR
field strengths. This is the most simple @xmath -dependent background
one can consider. Moreover, it is interesting since it is supposed to be
related to the nonconstant deformation ( 3.200 ).

We will consider the following ansatz for the R-R field strength

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.201)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is constant. @xmath must satisfy equations ( 3.108 ), which
become @xmath for the specific ansatz ( 3.201 ). Equations ( 3.108 ) can
be rewritten in terms of forms by decomposing @xmath according to Dirac
equations. For example, for type IIB we have the 1-form @xmath , the
3-form @xmath and the 5-form @xmath . Solving the Bianchi identities we
get @xmath , @xmath ,… and the field equations are @xmath , @xmath ,…
These can be solved in terms of quadratic polynomials @xmath , @xmath ,…
where @xmath , @xmath ,… are constant background fields.

In the constant field strength case, our iterative procedure can be
applied to compute the integrated and unintegrated vertex operators. One
obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.202)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the supersymmetry currents given in ( 3.39
). So it is easy to see that equation ( 3.56 ) is verified with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.203)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is clearly BRST invariant (see ( 3.41 ) and ( 3.42 )).

Since in the @xmath and @xmath expansions of the physical and auxiliary
superfields @xmath ,…, @xmath (see eqs. ( 3.154 and ( 3.178 )) the
number of bosonic derivatives acting on physical zero-order components
grows with growing order in @xmath and @xmath , it is clear that the
ansatz ( 3.201 ) will correspond to only a few non-zero terms in the
expansion. Actually, the highest-order contributions are @xmath and
@xmath terms. Here we give the explicit expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.204)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.205)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.206)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.207)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.208)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.209)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.210)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.211)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.212)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.213)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.214)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.215)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.216)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.217)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.218)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.219)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.220)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.221)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.222)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.223)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.224)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.225)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.226)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.227)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.228)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.229)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.230)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 3.3.3 The vertex for linearly @xmath-dependent RR field strength

To obtain the vertices @xmath and @xmath for the linearly @xmath
-dependent RR field strength we have to insert ( 3.204 ) and ( 3.230 )
back into ( 3.83 ) and ( 3.89 ).

For the unintegrated vertex operator we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.231)
     @xmath      (3.232)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while for the integrated vertex operator @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.234)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.235)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.236)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.237)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Unfortunately, the complicated structure of @xmath prevents from a
simple analysis of superspace deformations as in [ 29 ] . In the future
it would be nice to find a way to study superspace deformations deriving
from nonconstant R-R backgrounds. The computation of this vertex is a
first step, but it is clear that plenty of work is needed to understand
how to use it to compute the way it deforms the supergeometry.

### 3.4 Other applications

#### 3.4.1 Vertex operators with R-R gauge potentials

In the presence of D-branes, one can ask which states couple to them and
which vertex operators describe such interaction. As it was discussed in
[ 168 ] in the framework of RNS formalism, one has to construct the
vertex operators for R-R fields in the asymmetric picture. In addition,
a propagating closed string (i.e. with non vanishing momentum) emitted
from a disk or a D-brane, has to be off-shell. Therefore, one needs to
break the BRST invariance by allowing a non vanishing commutator with
@xmath where @xmath are the picture conserving parts of BRST charges in
the RNS formalism. In particular in [ 169 ] the authors construct a
solution of @xmath , where @xmath is the vertex operator in the
asymmetric picture. The off-shell vertex operators directly couple the
R-R potentials to the worldvolume of the D-brane.

In [ 32 ] , we constructed analogous vertices for closed superstrings
which do not satisfy the classical supergravity equations of motion, but
modified superfield constraints. They allow for a description of the R-R
gauge potentials, in contradistinction to the on-shell formalism case,
where only the field strengths @xmath appear. First of all, there are
some important differences. The two BRST charges @xmath and @xmath
contain a single term and therefore the decomposition used in [ 169 ] is
not viable. In addition, there are no different pictures (in the usual
sense) for a given vertex since there are no superghosts associated to
local worldsheet supersymmetry. There is, however, the possibility of
constructing two operators which resemble the picture lowering and
raising operator [ 31 ] , as we briefly discussed in section 3.1.4, but
the implications of this new idea in the present context have not been
explored yet.

Nevertheless we can construct an off-shell formalism by considering the
following combination of vertices with different ghost numbers:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.238)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the notation @xmath stands for vertex operators with the left
ghost number @xmath and with the right ghost number @xmath . The ghost
number of the l.h.s. is just the sum of the ghost numbers. By expanding
this in terms of the pure spinor ghost and by applying the modified
condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.239)
  -- -------- -- ---------

instead of the usual two conditions for the left and right sectors, we
showed that this leads to equations of motion that are deformations of
the usual supergravity constraints. The way constraints are relaxed to
go off-shell follows very closely the case of @xmath super-Yang-Mills
presented in [ 170 ] . By following a procedure analogous to the one
described in section 3.2.4, a suitable gauge-fixing can be applied to
eliminate auxiliary fields. The superfields can then be expanded in
@xmath and @xmath and one finds that R-R gauge-potentials explicitly
appear. The construction of vertices with R-R potentials in covariant
formulation has been also discussed in [ 93 ] . There the authors
considered only the constant case.

#### 3.4.2 Antifields and the kinetic terms for closed superstring field
theory

The linearized form of supergravity equations written in terms of the
BRST charges of the pure spinor sigma model gives us the framework to
analyze some aspects of closed string field theory action. As it is
well-known, the action for closed string field theory has to take into
account the presence of selfdual forms (for example the five form in
type IIB supergravity). This can be done either by breaking explicitly
the Lorentz invariance, or by admitting an infinite number of fields in
the action [ 171 ] .

In [ 32 ] we showed that this action can be indeed constructed by
mimicking the bosonic closed string field theory action discussed in [
172 ] (and in references therein).

To this purpose, we derived the set of antifields for the massless
sector of closed string theory, we discussed the coupling of the fields
to the antifields for a closed string field theory action and we finally
proposed a kinetic term which leads to the correct equations of motion.
We showed that we could easily account for new fields which nevertheless
do not propagate and we checked that the action had the correct
symmetries leading to the complete BV action for type IIA/IIB
supergravity.

Since in [ 32 ] we only dealt with linearized supergravity equations, we
did not discuss generalizations of Witten string field @xmath -product
for the open superstring. Similarly, it was outside the scope of [ 32 ]
to construct a full-fledged closed string field theory.

## Chapter 4 Conclusions and outlook

In this thesis I have presented my papers [ 26 , 36 , 37 , 32 ] , where
I investigated aspects of noncommutative geometry and superstring
theory.

When I started my research activity, it was already known that field
theories defined on a noncommutative space arise as a low energy
description of D-brane dynamics in the presence of a constant NS-NS
background. This had been proven for the bosonic string, the RNS
superstring and the @xmath string. Moreover, it had been shown that
extending this discussion to superstring theory in GS formalism, where
spacetime fermions are present, the (anti)commutation relations
involving the fermions are not modified by the constant NS-NS
background. These string theory results had already induced a growing
interest in noncommutative field theory and many results had been
obtained. For instance, it was already known that noncommutative field
theories with time-space noncommutativity display awkward features, such
as acausality and nonunitarity, and that these ill-defined theories
cannot be obtained as a low energy limit of string theory. Moreover, the
behavior of noncommutative field theory with respect to Poincaré
symmetry was well-known. Moyal noncommutative deformation breaks
Lorentz-invariance but preserves translation invariance. The
generalization of the string results concerning D-branes in a constant
NS-NS background had been generalized to nonconstant backgrounds
afterwards, to show that a Kontsevich-like product replaces Moyal
product in this case. The deformation is associative when the background
is a closed two-form and nonassociative otherwise. All these results are
reviewed in the first chapter of my thesis, so that my work can be put
into context.

In modern physics symmetries have such an importance that a theory is
actually defined in terms of its symmetries and its field content. If a
classical theory constructed out of the chosen fields does not contain
all the interactions that are allowed by its symmetry structure, the
missing terms will be generated at the quantum level when the theory is
renormalized.

A unifying aspect of my contributions to the field of noncommutative
geometry is the way symmetries can be implemented in noncommutative
generalizations of known ordinary theories. Since the noncommutative
generalization of a given theory is not unique, preserving its
symmetries (or at least some of them) in its noncommutative
generalization is the first criterium one should take into account in
the evaluation of the various possibilities, given the importance
symmetries have in the physics of our world.

In my paper [ 26 ] , written in collaboration with D. Klemm and S.
Penati, I have considered the very special symmetry, known as
supersymmetry, relating bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom in a
theory. This symmetry has not been observed in nature yet, however there
are hopes that it will make itself manifest at higher energies. For
people who believe that the ultimate, fundamental theory of reality is
string theory, supersymmetry is expected to be one of the
characteristics of nature at sufficiently high energy, since string
theory requires it for consistency.

Supersymmetric theories are better studied in a formalism known as
superspace. Superspace is an extension of spacetime where bosonic
coordinates are accompanied by fermionic ones. There supersymmetry is
realized in the form of generalized translations. The geometry of
superspace is not flat, since a nonvanishing torsion is present.

In [ 26 ] we studied the way supersymmetric theories can be deformed by
implementing a non(anti)commutative geometry, without supersymmetry to
be lost. We first considered four-dimensional superspace with a
Minkowski metric. We wrote down the most general algebra for bosonic and
fermionic coordinates of superspace and then required covariance with
respect to supertraslations and associativity. We also required the
reality properties of the spinors in (anti)commutative superspace to be
still valid in the deformed superspace. This was the crucial difference
with respect to the previous work [ 52 ] . We found that nontrivial
coordinate algebras are allowed that involve fermionic coordinates. We
also noted that, for consistency with respect to supersymmetry, turning
on the anticommutators between the fermions implies that also terms
depending on the fermionic coordinates appear in the fermion-boson and
boson-boson commutators. The “trivial” superspace deformation where only
bosonic coordinates are rendered noncommutative with a constant
commutator is found as a special case. However, in Minkowski signature
deformations involving nonzero fermion-fermion anticommutators are ruled
out because of spinor reality conditions together with associativity
requirements. Therefore, it is clear that more general deformations are
allowed if spinor conjugation relations can be relaxed. In [ 26 ] we
noted that this is possible when moving to a four-dimensional superspace
with Euclidean signature, that can only be defined when extended
supersymmetry is present. By applying our procedure to Euclidean @xmath
superspace, we found that deformations with constant fermion-fermion
anticommutators are allowed.

In [ 26 ] we also discussed how to construct a non(anti)commutative
@xmath product between superfields. Since our supergeometries involve
coordinate-dependent terms in the coordinate algebra, a Moyal-like
product is not associative, because of the superspace nontrivial
torsion. However, we suggested that a Kontsevich-like product can be
constructed, with the property of being associative if and only if the
supercoordinate algebra is also associative. We gave the formula for the
product up to second order in the deformation parameter and argued that
there was no objection of principle to extending Kontsevich procedure to
all orders. This was done later in [ 55 ] .

In [ 26 ] we also noted that when superspace is rendered
non(anti)commutative the supersymmetry algebra is deformed by terms
quadratic in bosonic derivatives. These terms do not affect the
coordinate algebra, but modify the supersymmetry transformation of a
general superfield. Finally, we made some speculations on how the
deformed superspaces we found could emerge from string theory,
formulated in a manifestly target-space supersymmetric way (i.e. in
Green-Schwarz [ 4 ] or Berkovits formalisms [ 30 ] ).

Indeed, it was found that deformed superspaces similar to the ones I
studied in [ 26 ] naturally arise when the open superstring in the
manifestly superPoincaré covariant formalism introduced by Berkovits [
30 ] is compactified on a CY three-fold in the presence of D-branes and
a constant R-R background [ 27 , 28 ] . The nonanticommutative
superspace found there is related to the one I studied in the @xmath
euclidean case by a change of variables and a reduction to @xmath by
identification of the two fermionic coordinates on the boundary of the
string worldsheet. Since in this superspace only one of the two Weyl
spinor supersymmetry charges are deformed by quadratic terms in bosonic
derivatives, Seiberg called it @xmath superspace. The constant R-R
background considered in [ 27 , 28 ] is allowed only in an euclidean
signature. This is the stringy counterpart of the algebraic discussion
in my paper [ 26 ] , justifying by a geometrical argument why superspace
deformations involving nonzero fermion-fermion anticommutators can only
appear in an Euclidean signature. Deformed superspaces were also found
to emerge in the uncompactified ten dimensional superstring when a
constant R-R background and D-branes are present [ 29 ] . However, since
this background is not an exact solutions to the string equations, but
only to the linearized equations, it is not obvious that this
deformation survives the zero-slope limit necessary to obtain the low
energy D-brane dynamics.

After the discovery that non(anti)commutative superspaces can be
obtained from the superstring, a lot of efforts in the study of
non(anti)commutative field theories have been done and many interesting
properties of @xmath Wess-Zumino model and super-Yang-Mills theory have
been elucidated. Different deformations of theories with extended
supersymmetry have been considered. The connection between deformed
superspaces and supersymmetric matrix models has been elucidated.

Up to now only constant R-R backgrounds have been considered. It would
be interesting to study what happens in the more general, nonconstant
case. A first step in this direction has been taken in my paper [ 32 ] ,
written in collaboration with P.A. Grassi, where superstring vertex
operators for linearly @xmath -dependent R-R field strength have been
computed. These objects are the main ingredient to generalize the string
analysis presented in [ 29 ] to the nonconstant case. Linearly @xmath
-dependent R-R backgrounds are expected to be related to a special kind
of superspace deformation, with a Lie algebraic structure where the
anticommutator between two fermions gives the bosonic coordinate. This
can be interpreted by saying that spacetime bosonic coordinates have a
fermionic substructure. In these terms, this issue was investigated in [
33 ] .

Now I would like to go back to the main theme unifying my work, the
implementation and implications of symmetries in noncommutative
theories. Up to know I have discussed how I approached the problem of
deformation of supersymmetric theories and the developments that
followed my work, in both field and string theory.

In two papers of mine [ 36 , 37 ] , I considered instead the problem of
constructing the noncommutative generalization of field theories
possessing an infinite number of conserved local symmetry charges, i.e
classically integrable. As it is well-known, in the commutative case the
underlying symmetry structure of these theories has strong implications
on their dynamics. In particular, two dimensional integrable theories
have a factorized S-matrix and particle production does not occur. Most
ordinary integrable theories in two and three dimensions have been shown
to be related to a four dimensional theory, selfdual Yang-Mills, from
which they can be obtained by dimensional reduction. The S-matrix of
selfdual Yang-Mills also displays a peculiar property, all tree-level
amplitudes beyond three-point being vanishing. This property has been
used as a definition of integrability in four dimensions. Selfdual
Yang-Mills is related to the @xmath string, characterized by an @xmath
worldsheet supersymmetry. It has been proven that tree-level @xmath
string dynamics coincides with selfdual Yang-Mills theory.

The @xmath string can be coupled to a constant NS-NS background. In the
presence of D-branes it has been shown that the low energy limit of the
brane dynamics can be described by noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills
theory. Therefore, given an ordinary integrable two-dimensional field
theory, one can first try to construct a noncommutative deformation that
preserves classical integrability, in the sense of having an infinite
number of conserved local charges (local in the sense that they are not
written in terms of integrals). Then one can check if the usual S-matrix
properties are still valid after the deformation. This is not obvious,
since noncommutativity introduces nonlocality in the theory and, in the
two-dimensional case, this necessarily affects the time coordinate,
causing in general an acausal behavior and the breakdown of unitarity.
Furthermore, one can investigate whether the theory can be obtained by
reduction from noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills, or even use this
method to construct the two-dimensional theory in the first place.

Another interesting issue is the study of solitons solutions.
Commutative integrable theories usually display this kind of solutions.
Noncommutative theories have new soliton solutions disappearing in the
commutative limit, that exist thanks to the nonlocality introduced by
Moyal product. Therefore, noncommutative integrable theories are an
interesting setting to study both kinds of solitons. Noncommutative
solitons are a field theory realization of the D-branes that are present
in the string theory from which they have emerged in the low energy
limit, thus the study of noncommutative solitons can give clues on
D-brane dynamics.

In [ 36 , 37 ] , all these issues have been studied in the special case
of the sine-Gordon model. This is an integrable two-dimensional field
theory, describing the dynamics of a scalar field selfinteracting
through an oscillating potential. Apart from the many general nice
properties related to its integrability, the sine-Gordon model also
exhibits very nice renormalization properties. Moreover, the ordinary
sine-Gordon model is related to the Thirring model through bosonization.
The relation between these two theories is a simple example of duality
relating the weak coupling limit of a theory with the strong-coupling
limit of the other. Bosonization has been studied in noncommutative
geometry and it has been shown that the ordinary abelian @xmath case is
modified in the noncommutative setting so that a free fermion is not
related to a free scalar, but to a scalar governed by a @xmath WZW
model.

In [ 34 ] , M.T. Grisaru and S. Penati have shown that an integrable
noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon model can be constructed,
where two equations govern the dynamics of a scalar (and generically
complex) field. One equation reduces to the sine-Gordon equation in the
commutative limit, the other vanishes in the commutative limit, has the
form of a conservation law and in fact gives the first of the infinite
conserved currents. This system does not seem to be overconstrained,
since the class of its localized solutions is at least as large as the
one in ordinary sine-Gordon. The doubling of the equations of motion is
related to the fact that the @xmath factor in the noncommutative group
@xmath does not decouple, in contradistinction to the ordinary case.
Since commutative sine-Gordon theory is obtained from zero curvature
conditions for gauge connections in @xmath group, in the noncommutative
case this has to be enlarged to @xmath , which causes an additional
equation of motion to appear.

In my paper [ 36 ] , written in collaboration with M.T. Grisaru, L.
Mazzanti and S. Penati, we showed that the equations describing this
noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon model can be obtained by
dimensional reduction from noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills in Yang
formulation. Unfortunately, an action cannot be obtained by an analogous
reduction procedure. However, in [ 36 ] , we found an action that gives
the correct equations of motion. We then studied tree-level scattering
amplitudes and found that acausality is present and the S-matrix is not
factorized. Therefore, it seems that in general the presence of an
infinite number of conserved currents is not sufficient for the S-matrix
to be factorized in noncommutative case. We finally discussed the
relation of our model with the noncommutative @xmath Thirring model. The
fact that dimensional reduction does not work at the level of action,
but only at the level of the equations of motion, is a sign that the
parametrization of the degrees of freedom we considered in [ 36 ] is not
the correct one.

In [ 37 ] , in collaboration with O. Lechtenfeld, L. Mazzanti, S. Penati
and A.D. Popov, we considered a different noncommutative generalization
of the sine-Gordon model, that is also obtained by dimensional reduction
from noncommutative selfdual Yang-Mills, by considering the @xmath
subgroup of @xmath . While in our first attempt to construct a
noncommutative integrable sine-Gordon model we had modified the kinetic
term of the ordinary theory to a @xmath WZW-like term, while maintaining
the usual cosine structure of the interaction term, in this new
noncommutative theory we modified also the interaction term structure,
in a way that two real scalars parametrizing the @xmath subgroup of
@xmath are coupled by a nontrivial term. Again, the theory is described
by two equations of motion. One of the two becomes trivial in the
commutative limit, while the other one gives the ordinary sine-Gordon
equation.

Solitons solutions of this model have been studied by making use of the
dressing method. Moreover, tree-level scattering amplitudes have been
computed and proven to be factorized and causal, in spite of the
presence of time-space noncommutativity. Therefore this second
noncommutative version of the sine-Gordon model has inherited the nice
classical properties of its ordinary counterpart. It would be
interesting to move on to a quantum description of the model to study
its renormalizability properties and to investigate whether
integrability survives at the quantum level.

A quite striking feature of the noncommutative sine-Gordon system we
constructed is that its tree-level amplitudes are completely independent
of the noncommutativity parameter. It would be interesting to understand
why this happens, for instance if this is a general feature of
noncommutative integrable systems or a peculiar property of the
sine-Gordon model. Another aspect that still needs to be investigated is
the relation of this @xmath theory with noncommutative fermions models.
Somehow it would be more natural to see what happens in the bosonization
of @xmath fermion models and then consider a reduction to @xmath .
Another possible development would be the study of other kinds of
duality in this system, for instance T-duality.

As I anticipated when discussing the superstring theory origin of the
deformed superspaces I introduced in [ 26 ] , the covariant formulation
for the superstring has been proven to be superior in dealing with many
string issues that were not treatable with the other known formalisms.
In particular this was true for deformed superspaces, that were shown to
arise in the presence of R-R backgrounds. These cannot be dealt with
when using the RNS formalism, while they can be treated with the GS
formalism, that however is quite clumsy because of the lack of manifest
Lorentz covariance. Because of this connection with the work I did in
the field of noncommutative geometry, I started to study this formalism.
As I previously said, to generalize the results of [ 27 , 28 , 29 ] to a
more general, nonconstant background one needs to determine the
corresponding vertex operator first. This is not an easy task in the
covariant formulation, since the great amount of manifest symmetry makes
the formalism redundant. The vertices are written in terms of
superfields that have to satisfy the linearized supergravity equations
of motion.

In my paper [ 32 ] , written in collaboration with P.A. Grassi, we
described an iterative procedure to compute the vertex operators in
terms of the physical fields only. To do this a suitable gauge fixing
must be imposed that removes the auxiliary fields from the vertices. We
used this technique to compute the vertices for linearly @xmath
-dependent R-R field strength that may be related to a Lie-algebraic
deformation of superspace, as I already said, but we also discussed
other two applications of our analysis that are a little bit out of the
path, having no direct connection to noncommutative geometry. We showed
how an off-shell formulation of the superstring vertices can be
constructed, how the corresponding equations of motion are a deformation
of the usual superfield constraints and how the gauge fixing necessary
to implement our iterative procedure can be applied to this case. The
motivation for this discussion relies in the fact that a propagating
closed string emitted from a D-brane has to be off-shell. The off-shell
vertex operators couple the R-R potential (and not the field strength)
to the worldvolume of the brane. In our discussion, we showed that the
vertices we obtain explicitly contain the R-R potential. Therefore our
analysis could be useful in the study of D-brane dynamics in the
covariant formalism. Finally, we used our framework to determine the
antifield equations of motion and to make a proposal for the kinetic
term of closed superstring field theory. Since this kinetic term is
written in superspace formulation, the first thing one should now do to
make nontrivial checks about its properties is to rewrite it in
component formulation.

To conclude, in my work I have mostly investigated the way one can
implement noncommutativity in theories with a special symmetry
structure, such as supersymmetric and classically integrable theories.
Requiring the symmetries to be preserved in the noncommutative
deformation is a strong constraint that allows to make a selection
between the many possibile noncommutative versions of the same theory.

In the case of integrable theories, I explicitly discussed the case of
the sine-Gordon theory and eventually found its noncommutative
generalization that has infinite conserved currents and also displays
all the nice features that in ordinary theories are implied by the
symmetry structure, such as factorization of the S-matrix. However, many
issues still have to be investigated, such as for instance the
connection between the noncommutative sine-Gordon system and @xmath
fermion models and the reason for the complete absence of a dependence
on the noncommutativity parameter in the tree-level amplitudes.

In the case of supersymmetric theories, I constructed superspace
deformations that preserve supersymmetry, are associative and respect
the usual spinor reality properties. The connection between the
deformations I found and superstring theory in the presence of R-R
backgrounds, described in the covariant formalism, has led me to deepen
my knowledge of this formulation of superstring theory. Even if this
might seem constructed “ad hoc”, without a strong underlying principle,
it is the first superPoincaré covariant formulation of the superstring
that works and it has already proven to very suitable to handle R-R
backgrounds and to prove general theorems about superstring amplitudes.
Since the computation of superstring vertex operators is not an easy
task in the covariant formalism, I provided a recursive technique to
compute the vertices in terms of physical fields only. This analysis of
vertex operators has many possible applications. I discussed
applications to the computation of superspace deformations in the
presence of nonconstant R-R backgrounds, to the computation of vertices
in the off-shell formulation, that are useful in the study of D-brane
dynamics, and to the construction of kinetic terms for a closed
superstring field theory. Since the covariant superstring in the
presence of NS-NS backgrounds has not been studied in detail yet, it
would be very interesting to perform an analysis of the string origin of
noncommutative geometry in this formalism. Indeed, since NS-NS and R-R
backgrounds are treated in a very “symmetric” way in this formulation of
the superstring, this setting should be very useful to study S-duality.

## Appendix A Conventions

### a.1 Superspace conventions in @xmath

In four dimensions, @xmath Minkowski superspace is described by a set of
coordinates @xmath , where @xmath are the four bosonic real coordinates,
while @xmath (and @xmath ) are complex two–component Weyl fermions. We
use conventions of Superspace [ 24 ] , with @xmath , @xmath .

The supersymmetry algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , is realized by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under supersymmetry transformations a generic superfield @xmath
transforms according to @xmath . In particular, the action on the
superspace coordinates defines supertranslations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Covariant derivatives with respect to ( A.3 ) are @xmath where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Moreover, they satisfy @xmath and anticommute with the generators of
supersymmetry transformations.

We can define left and right grassmannian derivatives according to the
following rules

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Their action on a generic superfield is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that these definitions hold independently of the nature of the
superfield V. In particular, in the case of a spinorial superfield
@xmath we have @xmath . As a consequence of the general definitions (
A.5 , A.6 ) we immediately obtain @xmath for any tensorial superfield,
whereas @xmath for any spinorial superfield.

From the identities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

the hermitian conjugation rules for left and right derivatives follow

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also introduce left and right bosonic derivatives which are
simply given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Their action on a superfield @xmath is defined as @xmath and @xmath .
Therefore, from ( A.9 ), it easily follows that @xmath for any
superfield.

As a consequence of the previous identities, left and right covariant
derivatives can be equally defined. Left covariant derivatives act on a
generic superfield from the left as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are explicitly given in ( A.4 ). Right covariant
derivatives are defined as acting from the right

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that @xmath on any tensorial superfield, whereas
@xmath . Moreover, left and right derivatives are related by hermitian
conjugation @xmath and @xmath .

Defining the right momentum operator as @xmath , it is easy to show that
the algebra of right derivatives is the standard one @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any tensor superfield. When the commutators are applied to a spinor
@xmath , a minus sign appears on the r.h.s. of the last two identities
due to the anticommutation of the spinorial derivatives with @xmath .

Following the same procedure one can equally define left and right
supersymmetry generators as @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The algebra of right generators is again given by ( A.1 ). The algebra
of the commutators on a tensor superfield is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Instead, when the commutators act on spinor objects we get a change of
sign on the r.h.s. of the last two equalities.

In euclidean signature a reality condition on spinors is applicable only
in the presence of extended supersymmetry. In the simplest case, @xmath
euclidean superspace, the two–component Weyl spinors satisfy a
symplectic Majorana condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The choice of covariant derivatives and supersymmetry
charges is the obvious generalization of the @xmath Minkowski case.

### a.2 Superspace conventions in @xmath

We describe Minkowski ten dimensional @xmath superspace by the
coordinates @xmath . Depending whether one is in type IIA or IIB case,
the spinors @xmath and @xmath have opposite or same chirality.

In ten dimensions with Minkowski signature one can use Dirac matrices
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . @xmath , @xmath are the Pauli
matrices, @xmath are eight real symmetric @xmath off-diagonal Dirac
matrices in @xmath with euclidean signature, while @xmath is the real
@xmath diagonal chirality matrix in @xmath . The chirality matrix in
@xmath with Minkowski signature is then @xmath and the charge
conjugation matrix @xmath , satisfying @xmath , is numerically equal to
@xmath .

If one uses spinors @xmath with spinor indices @xmath and @xmath , the
index structure of the Dirac matrices and the charge conjugation matrix
is

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.16)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The matrices @xmath and @xmath are numerically
equal to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The matrices @xmath used in
the text are given by @xmath and @xmath . From now on and in the text
dots are omitted. The spinors @xmath and @xmath form inequivalent
representations of @xmath . Spin indices cannot be raised or lowered
with the charge conjugation matrix, but @xmath is Lorentz invariant.

One finds that the @xmath symmetric matrices @xmath and @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which makes Fierz rearrangements very easy.

Our conventions for @xmath @xmath superspace covariant derivatives and
supersymmetry charges are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### Acknowledgements

First of all I would like to thank Silvia Penati so much for her
continuous encouragement, help and support in these many years.

I would like to thank the Department of Nuclear and Theoretical Physics
in Pavia and INFN, sezione di Pavia, for financial support. In
particular, I am very grateful to Annalisa Marzuoli, Mauro Carfora and
Sergio Ratti for their very kind help and encouragement.

I am very grateful to the Physics Department G. Occhialini, University
of Milano-Bicocca, for the very kind hospitality throughout these years
and for providing funding that supported my participation into some
schools and conferences. I would like to thank all the “baretto” friends
in particular for the funniest lunch breaks ever.

I would like to thank the C. N. Yang Institute for Theoretical Physics
at Stony Brook, U.S.A., for the very kind hospitality during my stay
within the International Doctorate Programme between the State
University of New York at Stony Brook and the University of Pavia. In
particular, I would like to thank Martin Roček for his kind help and
support during my stay there, for the many useful discussions and
especially for coming to Italy and participating into my thesis defense
as a member of the evaluating committee.

I would like to thank Pietro Antonio Grassi, Marc Grisaru, Dietmar
Klemm, Olaf Lechtenfeld, Liuba Mazzanti, Silvia Penati and Alexander
Popov for giving me the opportunity to collaborate with them and to
learn so much from them.

Very special thanks go to Dietmar Klemm and Marc Grisaru for their very
strong encouragement, help and support.

I am especially grateful to Ulf Lindström for kindly accepting to be the
external referee for this thesis, for his very careful reading of it and
for the many useful discussions, comments and suggestions.

Finally, I would like to thank my many ex officemates, Claudio
Dappiaggi, Valeria Gili, Liuba Mazzanti, Marcello Musso, Alberto
Romagnoni and Andrea Sartirana for tolerating my bad temper, loud voice,
invasive plants, my mess and very bad habit of locking one of them in
particular inside the office. Now I’m alone in my office and missing all
of you.
