##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Kondo Physics in Artificial Nano-objects
    -    2.1 Kondo Effect in Single Quantum Dot (QD)
    -    2.2 Magnetic Field Induced Kondo Tunneling through Evenly
        Occupied QD
    -    2.3 Singlet-Triplet Kondo Effect in Double Quantum Dot
    -    2.4 Dynamical Symmetry of Complex Quantum Dots
-    3 Trimer in Parallel Geometry
    -    3.1 Energy Spectrum
    -    3.2 Derivation and Solution of Scaling Equations
        -    3.2.1 @xmath Symmetry
        -    3.2.2 @xmath Symmetry
        -    3.2.3 @xmath Symmetry
    -    3.3 Conclusions
-    4 Trimer in Series
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 Even Occupation
    -    4.3 Anisotropic Kondo Tunneling through Trimer
        -    4.3.1 Generalities
        -    4.3.2 Trimer with SU(3) Dynamical Symmetry
        -    4.3.3 Summary
    -    4.4 Odd Occupation
        -    4.4.1 Towards Two-Channel Kondo Effect
        -    4.4.2 Higher Degeneracy and Dynamical Symmetries
        -    4.4.3 Summary
    -    4.5 Conclusions
-    5 Kondo Tunneling through Triangular Trimer in Ring Geometry
    -    5.1 Introduction
    -    5.2 Hamiltonian
    -    5.3 Magnetically Tunable Spin and Orbital Kondo Effect
    -    5.4 Conclusions
-    A Diagonalization of the Trimer Hamiltonian
-    B Rotations in the Source-Drain and Left-Right Spaces
-    C Effective Spin Hamiltonian
-    D @xmath Symmetry
-    E Young Tableaux Corresponding to Various Symmetries

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Background. Recently, studies of the physical properties of artificially
fabricated nano-objects turn out to be a rapidly developing branch of
fundamental and applied physics. Progress in these fields is stimulated
both by the achievements of nanotechnology and by the ambitious projects
of information processing, data storage, molecular electronics and
spintronics. The corresponding technological evolution enabled the
fabrication of various low-dimensional systems from semiconductor
heterostructures to quantum wires and constrictions, quantum dots (QD),
molecular bridges and artificial structures with large molecules built
in electric circuits [ 1 , 2 ] . This impressive experimental progress
led to the development of nanophysics, a new aspect and research
direction in quantum physics [ 3 ] . Artificial nano-objects possess the
familiar features of quantum mechanical systems, but sometimes one may
create in artificially fabricated systems such conditions, which are
hardly observable ”in natura”. For example, one-dimensional to
two-dimensional @xmath crossover may be realized in quantum networks [ 4
, 5 , 6 ] and constrictions [ 7 , 8 ] . The Kondo effect may be observed
in non-equilibrium conditions [ 9 , 10 , 11 ] , at high magnetic fields
[ 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] , and at finite frequencies [ 17 , 18 , 19 ,
20 , 21 , 22 ] . Moreover, a quantum dot in the Kondo regime can be
integrated into a circuit exhibiting the Aharonov-Bohm effect [ 23 , 24
, 25 ] .

According to the theory of Kondo effect in QD [ 26 , 27 ] , the spin
degrees of the QD are involved in Kondo resonance, and Kondo effect
takes place only if the dot has a nonzero spin in the ground state.
Resonance Kondo tunneling was experimentally observed in QD with odd
electron occupation number and spin one-half ground state [ 28 , 29 , 30
, 31 ] . But real nano-objects cannot be simply represented by a spin
@xmath moment, because low-lying spin excitations, which are always
present in few-electron systems, should be taken into account. Evenly
occupied dot usually has a singlet ground state. However, it was
predicted theoretically [ 12 ] and confirmed experimentally [ 13 ] that
Kondo tunneling can be induced by an external magnetic field in planar
QD with even occupation. This unconventional magnetic field induced
Kondo effect arises because the spectrum of the dot possesses a
low-lying triplet excitation above the singlet ground state. The Zeeman
splitting energy of a triplet in an external magnetic field may exactly
compensate the energy spacing between the two adjacent levels, and the
lowest spin excitation possesses an effective spin @xmath , thus
inducing a Kondo-like zero-bias anomaly (ZBA) in the differential
conductance. A similar scenario may be realized in vertical QDs [ 14 ,
15 , 16 , 32 ] where the Larmor (instead of the Zeeman) effect comes
into play. The influence of an external magnetic field on the orbital
part of the wave functions of electrons in vertical QDs is, in general,
more pronounced than the Zeeman effect. Hence, singlet-triplet level
crossing are induced by this magnetic field, causing the emergence of
Kondo scattering [ 32 ] .

Another device which manifests the Kondo effect in QDs with even
electron occupation is a double quantum dot. Double quantum dots (DQDs),
namely, quantum dots with two potential-wells, oriented parallel to the
lead surface were fabricated several years ago [ 33 , 34 ] . The two
wells in a DQD may be identical or have different size; the DQD may be
integrated within an electric circuit either in series or in parallel;
different gate voltages may be applied to each well. Moreover, one of
the two wells may be disconnected from the leads (side geometry) [ 35 ,
36 , 37 ] . If the tunneling between the right and left wells of the DQD
is taken into account, DQD can be treated as an artificial molecule
where the interdot tunneling results in the formation of complicated
manifold of bonding and antibonding states which modifies its degrees of
freedom [ 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 ] . The systematic treatment of the physics
of DQD coupled to metallic leads [ 35 , 36 ] is based on the mechanism
according to which the transition from a singlet state in a weak
coupling regime to a triplet state in a strong coupling regime is an
intrinsic property of nano-objects with even occupation. It is
manifested in tunneling through real and artificial molecules in which
the electrons are spatially separated into two groups with different
degree of localization. Electrons in the first group are responsible for
strong correlation effects (Coulomb blockade), whereas those in the
second group are coupled to a metallic reservoir. The necessary
precondition under which the singlet @xmath ground state changes into a
partially screened triplet @xmath Kondo state due to hybridization with
metallic leads is the existence of charge-transfer exciton in the DQD.
Unlike quantum dot with odd occupation whose Hamiltonian is mapped on
the Kondo-type @xmath -exchange Hamiltonian with a localized spin @xmath
obeying @xmath symmetry, DQD in contact with metallic leads can be
treated as a quantum spin rotator with @xmath . The effective
Hamiltonian of DQD possesses the dynamical symmetry @xmath of a spin
rotator [ 36 ] .

The Kondo physics seems to be richer in systems involving tunneling
through artificial molecules containing more than two wells. Meanwhile,
the Kondo effect was observed already in complex molecules containing
cages with magnetic ions [ 42 , 43 ] . Analogy between the Kondo effect
in real and artificial molecules in tunnel contact with metallic leads
was noted some time ago in Refs. [ 35 , 39 , 40 ] . There exists a great
variety of molecules containing magnetic rare earth (RE) ions secluded
in carbon and nitrogen based cages. Endofullerenes REC @xmath are the
most common among them [ 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 ] . In these molecules
magnetic ions are inserted in a nearly spherical carbon cage.
Lanthanocenes Ln(C @xmath H @xmath ) @xmath are sandwich-type molecules
formed by two rings of CH radicals and magnetic ion Ln=Ce, Yb in between
[ 48 , 49 , 50 ] . In these molecules the electrons in a strongly
correlated @xmath shell of Ln are coupled with loosely bound @xmath
electrons in the cage. The ground state of cerocene molecule is a spin
singlet combination @xmath of an @xmath electron and @xmath orbitals,
and the energy of the first excited triplet state @xmath is rather small
( @xmath eV). In the ytterbocene (hole counterpart of cerocene) the
ground state with one @xmath hole is a triplet, and the gap for a
singlet excitation is tiny, @xmath eV. In all these systems there is no
direct overlap between the strongly correlated @xmath electrons and the
metallic reservoir. However, these electrons can influence the tunnel
properties of the molecule via covalent bonding with outer @xmath
electrons which are coupled to the metallic reservoir. Other examples of
molecules secluding magnetic ions may be found, e.g., in [ 42 , 43 ] .

Objectives. In this thesis we develop a theory of Kondo tunneling
through triple quantum dots and sandwich-type molecules adsorbed on
metallic substrate, which are referred to as trimers . One of the most
intriguing phenomenon which arise in the theory of these systems is the
emergence of an unusual dynamical symmetry of nano-objects . Our main
purpose is to demonstrate that trimers possess dynamical symmetries
whose realization in Kondo tunneling is experimentally tangible. Such
experimental tuning of dynamical symmetries is not possible in
conventional Kondo scattering. In many cases even the very existence of
Kondo tunneling crucially depends on the dynamical spin symmetry of
trimer. We develop the general approach to the problem of dynamical
symmetries in Kondo tunneling through nano-objects and illustrate it by
numerous examples of trimer in various configurations, in parallel, in
series and in ring geometries. We show that Kondo tunneling reveals
hidden @xmath dynamical symmetries of evenly occupied trimers both in
parallel and series geometry. The possible values @xmath can be
controlled by gate voltages, indicating that abstract concepts such as
dynamical symmetry groups are experimentally realizable. We construct
the corresponding @xmath algebras, derive and solve scaling equations
and calculate the Kondo temperatures. We elucidate the role of discrete
and continuous symmetries exposed by the Kondo effect in artificial
trimer in ring geometry, i.e., triangular triple quantum dot (TTQD). In
comparison with a linear configuration of three quantum dots, a TTQD
possesses additional degrees of freedom, namely, discrete rotations. We
show that the Kondo physics of TTQD is determined by a subtle interplay
between continuous spin rotation symmetry @xmath , and discrete point
symmetry @xmath . Moreover, such ring shaped nano-object can serve both
as a Kondo-scatterer and as a peculiar Aharonov-Bohm (AB)
interferometer, since the magnetic flux affects not only the electron
phase, but also the nature of the ground and excited states of the
trimer. The main lesson to be learned is that Kondo physics in trimer
suggests a novel and in some sense rather appealing aspect of
low-dimensional physics of interacting electrons. It substantiates, in a
systematic way, that dynamical symmetry groups play an important role in
mesoscopic physics. In particular, we encounter here some ”famous”
groups which appear in other branches of physics. Thus, the celebrated
group @xmath enters also here when a trimer is subject to an external
magnetic field. And the group @xmath which plays a role in the theory of
superconductivity is found here when a certain tuning of the gate
voltages in trimer is exercised.

Structure. The structure of the Thesis is as follows. In the second
Chapter, the basic physics of Kondo effect in quantum dots is briefly
reviewed. First, the Kondo tunneling through single quantum dot with odd
electron occupation is described. Next, quantum dot with even number of
electrons, subject to an external magnetic field is considered. It is
shown that the system exhibits Kondo effect in a finite magnetic field,
when the Zeeman energy is equal to the single-particle level spacing in
the dot. Then, the Kondo physics of evenly occupied double quantum dot
(DQD) is presented. Special attention is given to the symmetry
properties of the DQD. It is shown that the DQD possesses the @xmath
dynamical symmetry of a spin rotator. Finally, we explain the concept of
dynamical symmetry and its realization in complex quantum dots.

In the third Chapter, the special case of trimer with even electron
occupation in the parallel geometry is studied. We discuss the energy
spectrum of the isolated trimer, derive renormalization group equations
and demonstrate possible singlet-triplet level crossing due to
tunneling. We show that the trimer manifests @xmath dynamical symmetry
in the Kondo tunneling regime. We expose the effective spin Hamiltonian
of the trimer and construct the corresponding @xmath algebras for the
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath dynamical symmetries. We derive scaling
equations and calculate the Kondo temperatures for the cases of @xmath
and @xmath symmetries.

In the fourth Chapter we discuss the physics of trimer in a series
geometry and point out similarities and differences between Kondo
physics in the parallel and series geometries. The scaling equations are
derived and the Kondo temperatures are calculated for the evenly
occupied trimer in the cases of the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
dynamical symmetries. The dynamical symmetries of the trimer are
summarized by a phase diagram which can be scanned experimentally by
appropriate variations of gate voltages. We discuss a novel phenomena,
namely, a Kondo effect without a localized spin . The anisotropic
exchange interaction occurs between the metal electron spin and the
trimer Runge-Lenz operator alone in an external magnetic field. The
symmetry group for such magnetic field induced anisotropic Kondo
tunneling is @xmath . We show that in the case of odd occupation, the
effective Hamiltonian of the trimer manifests generic futures of a
two-channel Kondo problem at least in the weak coupling regime.

In the fifth Chapter we concentrate on the point symmetry @xmath of
artificial trimer in a ring geometry and its interplay with the spin
rotation symmetry @xmath in the context of Kondo tunneling through
triangular artificial molecule. The underlying Kondo physics is
determined by the product of a discrete rotation symmetry group in real
space and a continuous rotation symmetry in spin space. These symmetries
are reflected in the resulting exchange Hamiltonian which naturally
involves spin and orbital degrees of freedom thereby establishing the
analogy between the Coqblin-Schrieffer model in real metals and the
physics of transport in complex quantum dots. The ensuing poor-man
scaling equations are solved and the Kondo temperature is calculated. We
show that the trimer also reveals a peculiar Aharonov-Bohm effect where
the magnetic field affects not only the electron phase but also controls
the underlying dynamical symmetry group.

The derivation of the pertinent effective spin Hamiltonians and the
establishment of group properties (in particular identification of the
group generators and checking the corresponding commutation relations)
sometimes require lengthy mathematical expressions. These are collected
in the appendices.

This work was partially presented by posters and lectures in scientific
conferences and schools (see List of Presentations). The first part of
the results was published in Refs. 1, 2 (see List of Publications). The
second part was published in Refs. 3-5. The third part was published in
Refs. 6, 7.

List of Presentations

1.   T. Kuzmenko . Kondo Effect in Artificial Molecules (lecture).
    Condensed Matter Seminar , Department of Physics, Ben-Gurion
    University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, June 20, 2005.

2.   T. Kuzmenko , K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. Kondo Effect in Molecules
    with Strong Correlations (poster). The International Conference on
    Strongly Correlated Electron Systems SCES’04 . Karlsruhe, Germany,
    July 26 - August 30, 2004.

3.   T. Kuzmenko , K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. @xmath Symmetries in Kondo
    Tunneling through Evenly Occupied Triple Quantum Dots (lecture).
    International School and Workshop on Nanotubes @xmath Nanostructures
    . Frascati, Italy, September 15-19, 2003.

4.   T. Kuzmenko , K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. Kondo Effect in Evenly
    Occupied Triple Quantum Dot (poster). International Seminar and
    Workshop on Quantum Transport and Correlations in Mesoscopic Systems
    and Quantum Hall Effect . Dresden, Germany, July 28 - August
    22, 2003.

5.   T. Kuzmenko , K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. Dynamical Symmetries in
    Kondo Tunneling Through Complex Quantum Dots (poster). International
    School of Physics ”Enrico Fermi” , Varenna, Italy, July 9–19, 2002.

6.   T. Kuzmenko , K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. @xmath Symmetry in Kondo
    Tunneling Through a Triple Quantum Dot (lecture). Correlated
    Electrons Day , Institute for Theoretical Physics, Haifa, May
    2, 2002.

List of Publications

1.  T. Kuzmenko, K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. Dynamical Symmetries in
    Kondo Tunneling through Complex Quantum Dots . Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 ,
    156602 (2002); cond-mat/0206050 .

2.  K. Kikoin, T. Kuzmenko, and Y. Avishai. Unconventional Mechanism of
    Resonance Tunneling through Complex Quantum Dots . Physica E 17 ,
    149 (2003).

3.  T. Kuzmenko, K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. Towards Two-Channel Kondo
    Effect in Triple Quantum Dot . EuroPhys. Lett. 64 , 218 (2003);
    cond-mat/0211281 .

4.  T. Kuzmenko, K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. Kondo Effect in Systems with
    Dynamical Symmetries . Phys. Rev. B 69 , 195109 (2004);
    cond-mat/0306670 .

5.  T. Kuzmenko, K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai. Kondo Effect in Molecules
    with Strong Correlations . Physica B 359-361 , 1460 (2005).

6.  Y. Avishai, T. Kuzmenko, and K. Kikoin. Dynamical and Point Symmetry
    of the Kondo Effect in Triangular Quantum Dot . To appear in Physica
    E; cond-mat/0412527 .

7.  T. Kuzmenko, K. Kikoin, and Y. Avishai, Magnetically Tunable Spin
    and Orbital Kondo Effect in Triangular Quantum Dot . Submitted to
    Phys. Rev. Lett.; cond-mat/0507488 .

## Chapter 2 Kondo Physics in Artificial Nano-objects

In this Chapter we review the basic physics of Kondo effect in single
and double quantum dots. Quantum dot with odd electron occupation in
tunnel contact with metallic leads is considered in Section 2.1 . The
Hamiltonian of the system is written down within the framework of the
Anderson model. The Haldane renormalization group procedure is described
and the effective spin Hamiltonian is obtained by means of the
Schrieffer-Wolff transformation. The expressions for the Kondo
temperature and zero-bias conductance of the dot are then derived. In
Section 2.2 the possibility of Kondo effect in evenly occupied single
quantum dots subject to an external magnetic field is discussed. The
Kondo effect in evenly occupied double quantum dot (DQD) is studied in
Section 2.3 . It is shown that DQD possesses @xmath dynamical symmetry
of a spin rotator. Finally in Section 2.4 we introduce the concept of
dynamical symmetry and its emergence in complex quantum dots.

### 2.1 Kondo Effect in Single Quantum Dot (QD)

The conventional Kondo effect appears in scattering of conduction
electrons by localized magnetic impurity [ 51 ] . The latter is
represented by its spin @xmath , which possesses the @xmath symmetry of
rotationally invariant moment. Spin scattering of conduction electrons
dynamically screens this moment, and the system transforms into a local
Fermi liquid with separate branches of charge and spin excitations [ 52
, 53 ] . According to Refs. [ 26 , 27 ] , the problem of tunneling
through a nano-object with odd electron occupation and strong Coulomb
blockade suppressing charge fluctuations can be mapped on the Kondo
scattering problem. The Kondo effect emerges in a quantum dot occupied
by an odd number of electrons at temperatures below the mean level
spacing in the dot. Under such conditions, the highest occupied level
@xmath filled by a single electron produces the Kondo effect. The other
levels, occupied by pairs of electrons with opposite spins, don’t
contribute to the Kondo screening. Therefore, a dot attached to two
metallic leads can be described in the framework of the Anderson
single-level impurity model. Figure 2.1 illustrates schematically one of
the spin-flip co-tunneling processes. The spin-up electron tunnels out
of the dot, and then it is replaced by the spin-down electron. At low
temperature, the coherent superposition of all possible co-tunneling
processes involving spin-flip results in the screening of the local
spin.

Let us consider a quantum dot (QD) occupied by one electron with energy
@xmath in the ground state. The dot in tunneling contact with the source
and drain leads is described by the Anderson Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the first term, @xmath , is the Hamiltonian of the isolated dot,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the spin index, @xmath is the Coulomb blockade energy,
and @xmath . The second term, @xmath , describes the electrons in the
source @xmath and drain @xmath electrodes,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The last term, @xmath , is the tunneling Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath @xmath are tunneling matrix elements. Here and below we
assume that @xmath are real and positive. It is convenient to perform a
canonical transformation [ 26 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a result, only the fermions @xmath contribute to tunneling, and the
tunneling Hamiltonian ( 2.4 ) takes the form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The spectrum of electrons in the leads forms a band with bandwidth
@xmath . In accordance with the Haldane renormalization group (RG)
procedure, the low energy physics can be exposed by integrating out the
high-energy charge excitations [ 54 ] . This procedure implies the
renormalization of the energy level of the dot by mapping the initial
energy spectrum @xmath onto a reduced energy band @xmath (Fig. 2.2 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the tunneling rate, @xmath is the density of electron
states in the leads, which is assumed to be constant. Iterating the
renormalization procedure ( 2.8 ), one obtains the scaling equation,
which describes the evolution of the one-electron energy state of the
dot with reducing the energy scale of the band continuum,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The processes involving charge scattering to the band edges lead to
renormalization of @xmath only in higher order in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence for @xmath there is no significant renormalization of @xmath .

The scaling invariant for equation ( 2.9 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is tuned to satisfy the initial condition @xmath .

The above Haldane RG procedure brings us to the Schrieffer-Wolf (SW)
limit [ 55 ] @xmath , where all charge degrees of freedom are quenched
for excitation energies within the interval @xmath and scaling
terminates. The excited states with two or zero electrons are higher in
energy by @xmath and @xmath @xmath , respectively, and are not important
for the low-energy dynamics of the dot. The effective spin Hamiltonian
with the two- and zero-electron states frozen out can be obtained by
means of the Schrieffer-Wolff unitary-transformation [ 55 ] applied to
the Hamiltonian ( 2.1 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the operator @xmath is found from the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition ( 2.12 ) means that the effective Hamiltonian ( 2.11 )
does not contain linear in @xmath terms, which allow the variation in
the number of electrons in the dot.

Retaining the terms to order @xmath on the right-hand side of Eq.( 2.11
), one comes to the Kondo Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the spin one-half operator of the dot,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath represents the spin states of the conduction electrons,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the vector of Pauli matrices. The antiferromagnetic
coupling constant is,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Scaling equation for the coupling constant ( 2.16 ) can be derived by
the poor-man’s scaling method [ 56 ] . The essence of the scaling
approach is that the higher energy excitations can be absorbed as a
renormalization of the coupling constant @xmath . To carry out the
scaling we divide the conduction band into states, @xmath , which are
retained, and states within @xmath of the band edge which are to be
eliminated provided the effective exchange Hamiltonian, @xmath , (the
last term of the Kondo Hamiltonian ( 2.13 )) is perturbatively
renormalized by changing the coupling constant @xmath . The lowest order
corrections to @xmath due to virtual scattering of conduction electrons
into the band edge can be represented by the second order diagrams (Fig.
2.3 ). Calculating the contribution of these diagrams one obtains,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 2.17 ) leads to the scaling equation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Integrating Eq. ( 2.18 ) from the initial band width @xmath and coupling
constant @xmath ( 2.16 ) to a new band width @xmath and renormalized
coupling constant @xmath yields,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 2.19 ) shows that the solution of the scaling equation ( 2.18 ) is
characterized by a single parameter which plays the role of a scaling
invariant [ 57 ] . This scaling invariant is called Kondo temperature,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Kondo effect can be observed by measuring the dc current induced by
a direct bias voltage @xmath applied across the dot. The corresponding
differential conductance @xmath exhibits a sharp peak at @xmath , which
is called zero-bias anomaly (ZBA) [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 ] . At finite
value of the bias @xmath the Kondo effect is suppressed [ 10 ] .
Therefore, the width of the peak of the differential conductance at zero
bias is of the order of @xmath . In the weak coupling regime @xmath the
Kondo contribution @xmath to the differential conductance can be
calculated by means of Keldysh technique [ 58 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Kondo temperature @xmath is the only energy scale which controls all
low-energy properties of the quantum dot. Eq. ( 2.21 ) shows that the
ratio @xmath depends only on the dimensionless variable @xmath [ 58 ] .
In the strong coupling regime @xmath the spin-flip scattering is
suppressed, and the system allows an effective Fermi liquid description
[ 59 ] . The zero-bias conductance then follows from the Landauer
formula, @xmath .

If a magnetic field is applied to the system, the zero-bias peak splits
into two peaks at @xmath , where @xmath is the Zeeman energy. These
peaks are observable even at @xmath [ 10 , 29 , 60 ] . However, due to a
nonequilibrium-induced decoherence, these peaks are wider than @xmath ,
and the value of the conductance at the peaks never reaches the unitary
limit @xmath [ 10 , 61 , 62 ] . In the next section we demonstrate that
quantum dots with even electron occupation may exhibit a generic Kondo
effect at certain value of the Zeeman energy @xmath .

### 2.2 Magnetic Field Induced Kondo Tunneling through Evenly Occupied
QD

The Kondo effect discussed in the previous section takes place only if
the dot has a nonzero spin in the ground state. This is always the case
for odd electron occupation @xmath . When @xmath is even, the ground
state of the spin-degenerate QD is a singlet ( @xmath ) since all
single-particle levels are occupied by pairs of electrons with opposite
spins. According to Hund’s rule, the lowest excited state of the dot is
a triplet ( @xmath ) at a distance @xmath above the ground state. The
spacing @xmath can be tuned by means of a magnetic field. Application of
a magnetic field results in a singlet-triplet transition in the ground
state of the dot, leading to a Kondo effect. This magnetic field induced
Kondo effect occurs both in vertical QDs with shell-like structure of
electronic states [ 14 , 15 , 16 ] and in planar (lateral) QDs formed by
orbitally non-degenerate electron states [ 12 ] . In the former case the
Zeeman effect, which lifts the spin degeneracy, is negligibly small in
comparison with diamagnetic shift because of a small value of the
effective @xmath -factor in semiconductor heterostructures. Magnetic
field affects mostly the orbital states, leading to singlet-triplet
level crossing. In the latter case, the Zeeman contribution dominates,
and twofold degeneracy of the ground state of an isolated dot appears
only if the Zeeman energy @xmath is equal to the single-particle level
spacing @xmath in the dot. Both types of field–induced Kondo tunneling
were observed [ 13 , 32 ] .

Let us consider a planar QD with even number of electrons, weakly
connected to the metallic electrodes, and subject to an external
magnetic field. In QDs, charge and spin excitations are controlled by
two energy scales, charging energy @xmath and single-particle level
spacing @xmath respectively, which typically differ by an order of
magnitude: @xmath meV, @xmath meV [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 ] . This
separation of energy scales allows one to change the spin state of the
dot, without changing its charge. In an applied field @xmath [ 12 ] ,
the spin-up projection of the triplet becomes degenerate with the
singlet ground state (Fig. 2.4 ). At this point, the spin-flip
transitions shown in Fig. 2.5 become possible, leading to a new type of
Kondo resonance. It was found [ 13 ] that at a certain magnetic field
the differential conductance has a peak at zero bias voltage (Fig. 2.6
).

Initially, the QD in Fig. 2.5 is treated within an Anderson-type model
with bare level operators @xmath , energies @xmath and tunneling matrix
elements @xmath with @xmath (we consider the symmetric case @xmath ).
Next, the isolated dot Hamiltonian is diagonalized in the Hilbert space
which is a direct sum of two ( @xmath ), one and three ( @xmath )
electron states, using Hubbard operators @xmath ( @xmath ) [ 63 , 64 ] .
The two particle states @xmath exhaust the lowest part of the spectrum
consisting of a singlet @xmath and triplet @xmath . The corresponding
energies are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath is the Bohr magneton and @xmath is the free
electron @xmath -factor. The energies of one and three electron states
are of order of the charging energy, @xmath . Finally, tunneling
operators in the bare Anderson Hamiltonian are replaced by a product of
number changing Hubbard operators @xmath and a combination @xmath of
lead electron operators, ( @xmath momentum, @xmath spin projection and
@xmath stand for source and drain).

With these preliminaries, the starting point is a generalized Anderson
Hamiltonian describing the QD in tunneling contact with the leads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with dispersion @xmath of electrons in the leads and @xmath . The two
states of the dot which become degenerate at @xmath , are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , one- and three-electron states can be integrated out by
means of the SW transformation [ 55 ] . The resulting exchange
Hamiltonian has a form of anisotropic Kondo Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the effective exchange constants are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spherical components of the dot spin operator @xmath are defined via
Hubbard operators connecting the @xmath and @xmath states of the dot,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conduction electron spin operators are determined by Eq. ( 2.15 ).

The scaling equations for dimensionless exchange constants @xmath @xmath
read,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

yielding the Kondo temperature,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the effective bandwidth in the SW limit, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the isotropic limit @xmath one has @xmath and Eq.( 2.29 ) reduces to
the usual expression @xmath .

### 2.3 Singlet-Triplet Kondo Effect in Double Quantum Dot

The isolated quantum dots considered above are typical examples of
artificial atoms. A double valley quantum dot with weak capacitive
and/or tunnelling coupling between its two wells may be considered as
the simplest case of artificial two-atom molecule. Its closest natural
analog is the hydrogen molecule H @xmath or the corresponding molecular
ions H @xmath for the occupation number @xmath , respectively [ 65 ] .

Let us consider the DQD with two electron occupation in a side geometry
(Fig. 2.7 ). Each valley is described by the one-electron level @xmath ,
Coulomb blockade energy @xmath , and bare level operators @xmath (
@xmath for left and right dot, respectively). The right dot is assumed
to have a smaller radius and, hence, larger capacitive energy than the
left dot, i.e., @xmath . The left dot is coupled by tunneling @xmath to
the right dot ( @xmath ) and by tunneling @xmath to the source (s) and
drain (d) leads. The spectrum of an isolated DQD consists of the singlet
ground state @xmath , the low-lying triplet exciton @xmath @xmath and
high-energy charge transfer singlet exciton @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The corresponding energies are,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath .

The DQD in tunneling contact with the leads can be described by a
generalized Anderson Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are the two-electron eigenfunctions ( 2.30 ), @xmath are the
one- and three-electron eigenstates; @xmath are number changing dot
Hubbard operators; @xmath . The Kondo effect at @xmath is unravelled by
employing a renormalization group (RG) procedure [ 54 ] in which the
energies @xmath are renormalized as a result of rescaling high-energy
charge excitations (see Eqs.( 2.9 ) and ( 2.10 )). Our attention,
though, is focused on renormalization of @xmath ( 2.31 ). Since the
tunnel constants are irrelevant variables [ 35 , 54 ] , the scaling
equations are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the conduction electron bandwidth, @xmath are the
tunneling strengths,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath being the density of states at @xmath . The
scaling invariants for equations ( 2.33 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

are tuned to satisfy the initial condition @xmath . Equations ( 2.33 )
determine two scaling trajectories @xmath for singlet and triplet
states. Note that the level @xmath is irrelevant, but admixture of the
bare exciton @xmath in the singlet state is crucial for the inequality
of tunneling rates @xmath [ 35 , 36 ] . As a result, the energy @xmath
decreases with @xmath faster than @xmath , so that the trajectory @xmath
usually intersects @xmath at a certain point @xmath . This level
crossing may occur either before or after reaching the Schrieffer-Wolff
(SW) limit @xmath where @xmath and scaling terminates [ 54 ] . When the
scaling trajectories cross near the SW boundary @xmath the singlet
ground state becomes degenerate with a triplet one (Fig. 2.8 ). As a
result, the Kondo resonance may arise in spite of the even electron
occupation of the DQD.

The above Haldane RG procedure brings us to the SW limit [ 55 ] , where
all charge degrees of freedom are quenched. By properly tuning the SW
transformation @xmath the effective Hamiltonian @xmath is of the @xmath
type [ 57 ] . However, unlike the conventional case [ 55 ] of doublet
spin @xmath we have here the degenerate singlet and triplet states
@xmath , and the SW transformation intermixes these states. To order
@xmath , then, the tunneling exchange Hamiltonian reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the (antiferromagnetic) coupling constants are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conduction electron spin operator @xmath is defined by Eq. ( 2.15 ).
@xmath is the dot spin one operator with projections @xmath , while
@xmath couples singlet @xmath with triplet @xmath . Their spherical
components are defined via Hubbard operators:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector operators @xmath and @xmath obey the commutation relations of
@xmath Lie algebra,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

(here @xmath are Cartesian indices). Besides, @xmath and the Casimir
operator is @xmath The operators @xmath and @xmath manifest the @xmath
dynamical symmetry of the DQD. This justifies the qualification of such
DQD as a spin rotator [ 35 , 36 ] .

Scaling equations for @xmath and @xmath are,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . If @xmath is the smallest energy scale, the energy
spectrum of the DQD is quasi degenerate and the system ( 2.40 ) is
reduced to a single equation for the effective integral @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the RG flow diagram has an infinite fixed point, and the solution
of Eq. ( 2.41 ) gives the Kondo temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the general case, the scaling behavior is more complicated. The flow
diagram still has a fixed point at infinity, but the Kondo temperature
turns out to be a sharp function of @xmath . In the case @xmath , @xmath
, the scaling of @xmath terminates at @xmath [ 14 , 15 , 35 , 36 ] .
Then one is left with the familiar physics of an under-screened spin one
Kondo model [ 66 ] . The fixed point is still at infinite exchange
coupling @xmath , but the Kondo temperature becomes a function of @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is determined by the DQD parameters (see the text after Eq.
( 2.34 )). The symmetry of the DQD in this case is @xmath .

### 2.4 Dynamical Symmetry of Complex Quantum Dots

In the previous sections an accidental level degeneracy is induced by an
external magnetic field (Sec. 2.2 ) and the dot-lead interaction (Sec.
2.3 ). In both cases the nano-object possesses dynamical symmetry. In
this section we present the concept of dynamical symmetry in more
details, and particularly, discuss its emergence in Complex Quantum Dots
(CQD).

The term Dynamical Symmetry implies the symmetry of eigenvectors of a
quantum system forming an irreducible representation of a certain Lie
group. The main ideas and the relevant mathematical tools can be found,
e.g., in Refs. [ 67 ] . Here they are formulated in a form convenient
for our specific purposes without much mathematical rigor. We have in
mind a quantum system with Hamiltonian @xmath whose eigenstates @xmath
form ( for a given @xmath ) a basis to an irreducible representation of
some Lie group @xmath . The energies @xmath do not depend on the
”magnetic” quantum number @xmath . For definiteness one may think of
@xmath as an angular momentum and of @xmath as its projection, so that
@xmath is just @xmath . Now let us look for operators which induce
transitions between different eigenstates. An economic way for
identifying them is through the Hubbard operators [ 63 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is natural to divide this set of operators into two subsets. The
first one contains the operators @xmath while the second one includes
operators @xmath @xmath for which @xmath and @xmath belong to a
different representation space of @xmath . A central question at this
stage is whether these operators (or rather, certain linear combinations
of them) form a close algebra. In some particular cases it is possible
to form linear combinations within each set and obtain two new sets of
operators @xmath and @xmath with the following properties: 1) For a
given @xmath the operators @xmath generate the @xmath irreducible
representation of @xmath and commute with @xmath . 2) For a given set
@xmath the operators @xmath and @xmath form an algebra (the dynamic
algebra) and generate a non-compact Lie group @xmath . The reason for
the adjective dynamic is that, originally, the operators @xmath do not
appear in the bare Hamiltonian @xmath and emerge only when additional
interactions (e.g., dot-lead tunneling) are present. In the special case
@xmath the operators in @xmath are the vector @xmath of spin operators
determining the corresponding irreducible representations, while the
operators in the set @xmath can be grouped into a sequence @xmath of
vector operators describing transitions between states belonging to
different representations of the @xmath group.

Strictly speaking, the group @xmath is not a symmetry group of the
Hamiltonian @xmath since the operators @xmath do not commute with @xmath
. Indeed, let us express @xmath in terms of diagonal Hubbard operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have mentioned above, the symmetry group @xmath of the Hamiltonian
@xmath , is generated by the operators @xmath . Remarkably, however, the
dynamics of CQD in contact with metallic leads and/or an external
magnetic field leads to renormalization of the energies @xmath in such a
way that a few levels at the bottom of the spectrum become degenerate,
@xmath . Hence, in this low energy subspace, the group @xmath which is
generated by the operators @xmath and @xmath is a symmetry group of
@xmath referred to as the dynamical symmetry group. The symbol @xmath is
due to the analogy with the Runge-Lenz operator, the hallmark of
dynamical symmetry of the Kepler and Coulomb problems. (The Coulomb
potential possesses accidental degeneracy of states with different
angular momentum @xmath . Hence, according to ( 2.46 ) the Runge-Lenz
vector is an integral of the motion. In this case one speaks about
hidden symmetry of the system.) Below we will use the term dynamical
symmetry also in cases where the levels are not strictly degenerate, but
their differences are bounded by a certain energy scale, which is the
Kondo energy in our special case. In that sense, the symmetry is of
course not exact, but rather, approximate.

Using the notions of dynamical symmetry, numerous familiar quantum
objects, such as hydrogen atom, quantum oscillator in @xmath
-dimensions, quantum rotator, may be described in a compact and elegant
way. We are interested in a special application of this theory, when the
symmetry of the quantum system is approximate and its violation may be
treated as a perturbation. This aspect of dynamical symmetry was first
introduced in particle physics [ 68 ] , where the classification of
hadron eigenstates is given in terms of non-compact Lie groups. In our
case, the rotationally invariant object is an isolated quantum dot,
whose spin symmetry is violated by electron tunneling between the dot
and leads under the condition of strong Coulomb blockade.

The special cases @xmath and @xmath or @xmath is realizable in CQD. Let
us first recall the manner in which the spin vectors appear in the
effective low energy Hamiltonian of the QD in tunneling contact with
metallic leads. When strong Coulomb blockade completely suppresses
charge fluctuations in QD, only spin degrees of freedom are involved in
tunneling via the Kondo mechanism [ 26 , 27 ] . An isolated QD in this
regime is represented solely by its spin vector @xmath . This is a
manifestation of rotational symmetry which is of geometrical origin. The
exchange interaction @xmath ( @xmath is the spin operator of the
metallic electrons) induces transitions between states belonging to the
same spin (and breaks @xmath invariance). On the other hand, the low
energy spectrum of spin excitations in CQD is not characterized solely
by its spin operator since there are states close in energy, which
belong to different representation spaces of @xmath . Incidentally,
these might have either the same spin @xmath (like, e.g , in two
different doublets) or a different spin (like, e.g. , in the case of
singlet-triplet or doublet-quartet transitions). The exchange
interaction must then contain also other operators @xmath (the
R-operators mentioned above) inducing transitions between states
belonging to different representations. The interesting physics occurs
when the operators @xmath “approximately” commute with the Hamiltonian
@xmath of the isolated dot. In accordance with our previous discussion,
the R-operators are expressible in terms of Hubbard operators and have
only non-diagonal matrix elements in the basis of the eigenstates of
@xmath . The spin algebra is then a subalgebra of a more general
non-compact Lie algebra formed by the whole set of vector operators
@xmath . This algebra is characterized by the commutation relations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with structure constants @xmath , @xmath (here @xmath are Cartesian
indices). The R-operators are orthogonal to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the general case, CQDs possess also other symmetry elements
(permutations, reflections, finite rotations). Then, additional scalar
generators @xmath arise. These generators also may be expressed via the
bare Hubbard operators, and their commutation relations with R-operators
have the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with structure constants @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ). The operators
obeying the commutation relations ( 2.47 ) and ( 2.49 ) form an @xmath
algebra. The Casimir operator for this algebra is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Various representations of all these operators via basic Hubbard
operators will be established in the following chapters, where the
properties of specific CQDs are studied.

Next, we show how the dynamical symmetry of CQD is revealed in the
effective spin Hamiltonian describing Kondo tunneling. This Hamiltonian
is derived from the generalized Anderson Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three terms on the right hand side are the dot, lead and tunneling
Hamiltonians, respectively. In the generic case, a planar CQD is a
confined region of a semiconductor secluded between drain and source
leads, with complicated multivalley structure. The CQD contains several
valleys numbered by index @xmath . Some of these valleys are connected
with each other by tunnel channels characterized by coupling constants
@xmath , and some of them are connected with the leads by tunneling. The
corresponding tunneling matrix elements are @xmath @xmath stands for
source and drain, respectively). The total number of electrons @xmath in
a neutral CQD as well as the partial occupation numbers @xmath for the
separate wells are regulated by Coulomb blockade and gate voltages
@xmath applied to these wells, with @xmath . It is assumed that the
capacitive energy for the whole CQD is strong enough to suppress charged
states with @xmath , which may arise in a process of lead-dot tunneling.

If the inter-well tunnel matrix elements @xmath are larger than the
dot-lead ones @xmath (or if all tunneling strengths are comparable), it
is convenient first to diagonalize @xmath and then consider @xmath as a
perturbation. In this case @xmath may be represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here all intradot interactions are taken into account. The kets @xmath
represent eigenstates of @xmath in the charge sector @xmath and other
quantum numbers @xmath , whereas the kets @xmath are eigenstates in the
charge sectors @xmath with quantum numbers @xmath . All other charge
states are suppressed by Coulomb blockade. Usually, @xmath and @xmath
refer to spin quantum numbers but sometimes other specifications are
required (see below).

The lead Hamiltonian takes a form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the general case, the individual dots composing the CQD are spatially
separated, so one should envisage the situation when each dot is coupled
by its own channel to the lead electron states. So, the electrons in the
leads are characterized by the index @xmath , which specifies the lead
(source and drain) and the tunneling channel, as well as by the wave
vector @xmath and spin projection @xmath .

The tunnel Hamiltonian involves electron transfer between the leads and
the CQD, and thus couples states @xmath of the dot with occupation
@xmath and states @xmath of the dot with occupation @xmath . This is
best encoded in terms of non-diagonal dot Hubbard operators, which
intermix the states from different charge sectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Before turning to calculation of CQD conductance, the relevant energy
scales should be specified. First, we suppose that the bandwidth of the
continuum states in the leads, @xmath , substantially exceeds the tunnel
coupling constants, @xmath (actually, we consider leads made of the same
material with @xmath ). Second, each well @xmath in the CQD is
characterized by the excitation energy defined as @xmath , i.e., the
energy necessary to extract one electron from the well containing @xmath
electrons and move it to the Fermi level of the leads (from now on the
Fermi energy is used as the reference zero energy level). Note that
@xmath is tunable by applying the corresponding gate voltage @xmath . We
are mainly interested in situations where the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

is satisfied at least for one well labelled by the index @xmath . Here
@xmath is a capacitive energy, which is predetermined by the radius of
the well @xmath . Eventually, this well with the largest charging energy
is responsible for Kondo-like effects in tunneling, provided the
occupation number @xmath is odd. The third condition assumed in most of
our models is a weak enough Coulomb blockade in all other wells except
that with @xmath , i.e., @xmath . Finally, we demand that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

for those wells, which are coupled with metallic leads, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are the charge transfer energies for electron tunneling from
the @xmath -well to other wells in the CQD.

The interdot coupling under Coulomb blockade in each well generates
indirect exchange interactions between electrons occupying different
wells. Diagonalizing the dot Hamiltonian for a given @xmath , one easily
finds that the low-lying spin spectrum in the charge sectors with even
occupation @xmath consists of singlet/triplet pairs (spin @xmath or 1,
respectively). In charge sectors with odd @xmath the manifold of spin
states consists of doublets and quartets (spin @xmath =1/2 and 3/2,
respectively).

The resonance Kondo tunneling is observed as a temperature dependent
zero bias anomaly in tunnel conductance [ 28 , 29 ] . According to
existing theoretical understanding, the quasielastic cotunneling
accompanied by the spin flip transitions in a quantum dot is responsible
for this anomaly. To describe the cotunneling through a neutral CQD with
given @xmath , one should integrate out transitions involving
high-energy states from charge sectors with @xmath . In the weak
coupling regime at @xmath this procedure is done by means of
perturbation theory which can be employed in a compact form within the
renormalization group (RG) approach formulated in Refs. [ 54 , 56 ] .

As a result of the RG iteration procedure, the energy levels @xmath in
the Hamiltonian ( 2.52 ) are renormalized and indirect exchange
interactions between the CQD and the leads arise. The RG procedure is
equivalent to summation of the perturbation series at @xmath , where
@xmath is the Kondo energy characterizing the crossover from a
perturbative weak coupling limit to a non-perturbative strong coupling
regime. The leading logarithmic approximation of perturbation theory
corresponds to a single-loop approximation of RG theory. Within this
accuracy the tunnel constants @xmath and @xmath are not renormalized, as
well as the charge transfer energy @xmath ( 2.56 ). Reduction of the
energy scale from the initial value @xmath to a lower scale @xmath
results in renormalization of the energy levels @xmath and generates an
indirect exchange interaction between the dot and the leads with an
(antiferromagnetic) exchange constant @xmath .

The rotational symmetry of a simple quantum dot is broken by the
spin-dependent interaction with the leads, which arises in second order
in the tunneling amplitude @xmath . In complete analogy, the dynamical
symmetry of a composite quantum dot is exposed (broken) as encoded in
the effective exchange Hamiltonian. In a generic case, there are, in
fact, several exchange constants arranged within an exchange matrix
which is non-diagonal both in dot and lead quantum numbers. The
corresponding exchange Hamiltonian is responsible for spin-flip assisted
cotunneling through the CQD as well as for singlet-triplet transitions.

The precise manner in which these statements are quantified will now be
explained. After completing the RG procedure, one arrives at an
effective (or renormalized) Hamiltonian @xmath in a reduced energy scale
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the effective dot Hamiltonian ( 2.52 ) is reduced to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

written in terms of diagonal Hubbard operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this stage, the manifold @xmath contains only the renormalized
low-energy states within the energy interval comparable with @xmath (to
be defined below). Some of these states may be quasi degenerate, with
energy differences @xmath . However, @xmath itself is a function of
these energy distances (see, e.g., [ 12 , 69 , 70 ] ), and all the
levels, which influence @xmath , should be retained in ( 2.60 ).

The effective cotunneling Hamiltonian acquires the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the spin operator of CQD in its ground state, the
operators @xmath represent the spin states of lead electrons,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vector of Pauli matrices. In the conventional Kondo
effect the logarithmic divergent processes develop due to spin reversals
given by the first term containing the operator @xmath . In CQD
possessing dynamical symmetry, all R-vectors are involved in Kondo
tunneling. In the following chapters we will show how these additional
processes are manifested in resonance Kondo tunneling through CQD. Note
that the elements of the matrix are also subject to temperature
dependent renormalization @xmath .

The cotunneling Hamiltonian ( 2.62 ) is the natural generalization of
the conventional Kondo Hamiltonian @xmath for CQDs possessing dynamical
symmetries. In many cases there are several dot spin 1 operators
depending on which pair of electrons is “active”. In this pair, one
electron sits in well @xmath and the other one sits in some well @xmath
. The other @xmath electrons are paired in singlet states. This scenario
applies if @xmath is even. The spin 1 operator for the active pair is
denoted as @xmath . (In some sense, the need to specify which pair
couples to @xmath while all other pairs are coupled to @xmath is the
analog of the seniority scheme in atomic and nuclear physics (see, e.g.,
[ 71 ] )). The cotunneling Hamiltonian for CQD contains exchange terms
@xmath . Then, instead of a single exchange term (first term on the RHS
of Eq. ( 2.62 )), one has a sum @xmath . Additional symmetry elements
(finite rotations and reflections) turn the cotunneling Hamiltonian even
more complicated. In the following chapters we will consider several
examples of such CQDs. It is seen from ( 2.62 ), that in the generic
case, both spin and R-vectors may be the sources of anomalous Kondo
resonances. The contribution of these vectors depends on the hierarchy
of the energy states in the manifold. In principle, it may happen that
the main contribution to the Kondo tunneling is given not by the spin of
the dot, but by one of the R-vectors.

Thus, we arrive at the conclusion that the regular procedure of reducing
the full Hamiltonian of a quantum dot in junctions with metallic leads
to an effective Hamiltonian describing only spin degrees of freedom of
this system reveals a rich dynamical symmetry of CQD. Strictly speaking,
only an isolated QD with @xmath is fully described by its spin 1/2
operator obeying @xmath symmetry without dynamical degrees of freedom.
Yet even the doubly occupied dot with @xmath possesses the dynamical
symmetry of a spin rotator because its spin spectrum consists of a
singlet ground state (S) and a triplet excitation (T). Therefore, an
R-vector describing S/T transitions may be introduced, and the Kondo
tunneling through a dot of this kind may involve spin excitation under
definite physical conditions, e.g., in an external magnetic field [ 12 ]
. A two-electron quantum dot under Coulomb blockade constitutes
apparently the simplest non-trivial example of a nano-object with
dynamical symmetry of a spin rotator possessing an @xmath symmetry.

Dynamical symmetries @xmath of CQDs are described by non-compact
semi-simple algebras [ 72 ] . This non-compactness implies that the
corresponding algebra @xmath may be presented as a direct sum of
subalgebras, e.g., @xmath . Therefore, the dynamical symmetry group may
be represented as a direct product of two groups of lower rank. In case
of spin rotator the product is @xmath . Generators of these subgroups
may be constructed from those of the original group. The @xmath group
possesses a single R-operator @xmath , and the direct product is
realized by means of the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both vectors @xmath and @xmath generate @xmath symmetry and may be
treated as fictitious S=1/2 spins [ 69 ] . In some situations these
vectors are real spins localized in different valleys of CQD. In
particular, the transformation ( 2.64 ) maps a single site Kondo problem
for a DQD possessing @xmath symmetry to a two-site Kondo problem for
spin 1/2 centers with an @xmath symmetry (see discussion in Refs. [ 35 ,
36 ] ). For groups of higher dimensionality ( @xmath one can use many
different ways of factorization, which may be represented by means of
different Young tableaux (see Appendix D).

Even in the case @xmath the transformation ( 2.64 ) is not the only
possible ”two-spin” representation. An alternative representation is
realized in an external magnetic field [ 36 ] . When the ground state of
S/T manifold is a singlet (the energy @xmath , the Zeeman splitting
energy of a triplet in an external magnetic field may exactly compensate
the exchange splitting @xmath . This accidental degeneracy is described
by the pseudospin 1/2 formed by the singlet and the up projection of
spin 1 triplet. Two other projections of the triplet form the second
pseudospin 1/2. The Kondo effect induced by external magnetic field
observed in several nano-objects [ 13 , 32 ] , was the first
experimental manifestation of dynamical symmetry in quantum dots.

In conclusion, we outlined in this section the novel features which
appear in effective Kondo Hamiltonians due to the dynamical symmetry of
CQD exhibiting Kondo tunneling. In the following chapters we will see
how the additional terms in the Hamiltonian ( 2.62 ) influence the
properties of Kondo resonance in various structures of CQDs.

## Chapter 3 Trimer in Parallel Geometry

This Chapter is devoted to a systematic exposure of the Kondo physics in
evenly occupied artificial trimer, i.e., triple quantum dot (TQD) in
parallel geometry. We are interested in answering questions pertaining
to the nature of the underlying symmetry of the trimer Hamiltonian and
the algebra of operators appearing in the exchange Hamiltonian. The
energy spectrum of the isolated TQD is discussed in Section 3.1 . In
Section 3.2 , the renormalization group equations are derived and
various cases of accidental degeneracy arising due to dot-lead
interaction are discussed. It is shown that the TQD manifests @xmath
dynamical symmetry in Kondo tunneling regime. The effective spin
Hamiltonians are written down and the corresponding @xmath algebras are
constracted for the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath dynamical symmetries in
Subsections 3.2.1 , 3.2.2 and 3.2.3 , respectively. The scaling
equations are derived and the Kondo temperatures are calculated for the
cases of @xmath and @xmath symmetries. The results are summarized in the
Conclusions.

### 3.1 Energy Spectrum

Double quantum dot with occupation @xmath discussed in Sec. 2.3 is the
analog of a hydrogen molecule in the Heitler-London limit [ 35 , 36 ] ,
and its @xmath symmetry reflects the spin properties of
ortho/parahydrogen. A much richer artificial object is a triple quantum
dot (TQD), which can be considered as an analog of a linear molecule RH
@xmath . The central @xmath dot is assumed to have a smaller radius
(and, hence, larger capacitive energy @xmath ) than the left @xmath and
right @xmath dots, i.e., @xmath . Fig. 3.1 illustrates this
configuration in a parallel geometry, where the ”left-right” ( @xmath )
reflection plane of the TQD is perpendicular to the ”source-drain” (
@xmath ) reflection plane of metallic electrodes.

To regulate the occupation of TQD as a whole and its constituents in
particular, there is a couple of gates @xmath applied to the @xmath
dots. The energy levels of single- and two-electron states in each one
of the three constituent dots are shown in the lower panel of Fig. 3.1 .
Here the gate voltages @xmath are applied in such a way that the
one-electron level @xmath of a @xmath -dot is essentially deeper than
those of the @xmath -dots, so that the condition ( 2.56 ) is satisfied
for the @xmath dot, whereas the inequalities ( 2.57 ) and ( 2.58 ) are
satisfied for the ”active” @xmath and @xmath dots. Tunneling between the
side dots @xmath and the central dot @xmath with amplitudes @xmath
determines the low energy spin spectrum of the isolated TQD once its
occupation @xmath is given. This system enables the exposure of much
richer possibilities for additional degeneracy relative to the DQD setup
mentioned above due to the presence of two channels @xmath .

The full diagonalization procedure of the Hamiltonian @xmath for the TQD
is presented in Appendix A . When the condition ( 2.58 ) is valid, the
low-energy manifold for @xmath is composed of two singlets @xmath , two
triplets @xmath ( @xmath ) and a charge transfer singlet exciton @xmath
with an electron removed from the @xmath -well to the ”outer” wells.
Within first order in @xmath the corresponding energies are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the charge transfer energies in Eq.( 2.58 ) (for determining
@xmath ) are @xmath ; the notation @xmath and @xmath is used
ubiquitously hereafter.

The completely symmetric configuration, @xmath should be considered
separately. In this case the singlet states form even and odd
combinations in close analogy with the molecular states @xmath in
axisymmetric molecules. The odd state @xmath and two triplet states are
degenerate:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

Consideration of these two examples provide us with an opportunity to
investigate the dynamical symmetry of CQD.

### 3.2 Derivation and Solution of Scaling Equations

We consider the case of TQD with even occupation @xmath discussed in
Refs. [ 73 , 74 ] . This configuration is a direct generalization of an
asymmetric spin rotator, i.e., the double quantum dot in a side-bound
geometry [ 35 ] . Compared with the asymmetric DQD, this composite dot
possesses one more symmetry element, i.e., the @xmath permutation,
which, as will be seen below, enriches the dynamical properties of CQD.

Following a glance at the energy level scheme ( 3.1 ), one is tempted to
conclude outright that for finite @xmath the ground state of this TQD
configuration is a singlet and consequently there is no room for the
Kondo effect to take place. A more attentive study of the tunneling
problem, however, shows that tunneling between the TQD and the leads
opens the way for a rich Kondo physics accompanied by numerous dynamical
symmetries.

Indeed, inspecting the expressions for the energy levels, one notices
that the singlet states @xmath are modified due to inter-well tunneling,
whereas the triplet states @xmath are left intact. This difference is
due to the admixture of the singlet states with the charge transfer
singlet exciton (see Appendix A ). As was mentioned in the previous
chapter, the Kondo cotunneling in the perturbative weak coupling regime
at @xmath is excellently described within RG formalism [ 54 , 56 ] .
According to general prescriptions of this theory, the renormalizable
parameters of the effective low-energy Hamiltonian in a one-loop
approximation are the energy levels @xmath and the effective indirect
exchange vertices @xmath .

#### 3.2.1 @xmath Symmetry

To apply the RG procedure to the Kondo tunneling through TQD, let us
first specify the terms @xmath and @xmath in the Anderson Hamiltonian (
2.51 ). The most interesting for us are situations where the accidental
degeneracy of spin states is realized. So we consider geometries where
the device as a whole possesses either complete or slightly violated
@xmath axial symmetry. Then the quantum number @xmath in @xmath ( 2.53 )
contains the lead index ( @xmath ) and the channel index ( @xmath ). The
two tunneling channels are not independent because of weak interchannel
hybridization in the leads. This hybridization is characterized by a
constant @xmath which is small first due to the angular symmetry, and
second due to significant spatial separation between the two channels.
The wave vector @xmath is assumed to remain a good quantum number. Then,
having in mind that in our model @xmath , the generalized Hamiltonian (
2.53 ) acquires the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The tunneling Hamiltonian ( 2.55 ) is written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume below @xmath (see Fig . 3.1 ).

The iteration processes, which characterize the two-step RG procedure
contributing to these parameters are illustrated in Fig. 3.2 . The
intermediate states in these diagrams are the high-energy states @xmath
near the ultraviolet cut-off energy @xmath of the band continuum in the
leads (dashed lines) and the states @xmath from adjacent charge sectors,
which are admixed with the low-energy states @xmath by the tunneling
Hamiltonian @xmath ( 2.55 ) (full lines). For the sake of simplicity we
confine ourselves with three-electron states in the charge sector.

In the upper panel, the diagrams contributing to the renormalization of
@xmath are shown. In comparison with the original theory [ 54 ] , this
procedure not only results in renormalization of the energy levels but
also an additional hybridization of the states @xmath via channel mixing
terms in the Hamiltonian ( 3.4 ). Due to the condition ( 2.56 ), the
central dot @xmath remains ”passive” throughout the RG procedure.

The mathematical realization of the diagrams displayed in Fig. 3.2a is
encoded in the scaling equations for the energy levels @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath are the tunnel coupling constants which are
different for different @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , and @xmath is the density of electron states in the leads,
which is supposed to be energy independent. These scaling equations
should be solved at some initial conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the index @xmath marks the bare values of the model parameters
entering the Hamiltonian @xmath ( 2.51 ).

Besides, the diagram of Fig. 3.2a generates a new vertex @xmath , where
the states @xmath are either two singlets @xmath or two triplets @xmath
. The third order Haldane iteration procedure results in a scaling
equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with an initial condition @xmath and a flow rate @xmath After performing
the Haldane procedure we formally come to the scaled dot Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the parameters @xmath and @xmath depending on the running variable
@xmath .

Due to the above mentioned dependence of tunneling rates on the index
@xmath , namely the possibility of @xmath and @xmath , the scaling
trajectories @xmath may cross at some value of the monotonically
decreasing energy parameter @xmath . The nature of level crossing is
predetermined by the initial conditions ( 3.7 ) and the ratios between
the tunneling rates @xmath . As long as the inequality @xmath is
effective and all levels are non-degenerate, the scaling equations ( 3.5
) may be approximated by Eqs. ( 2.33 ). The scaling trajectories are
determined by the scaling invariants ( 2.35 ) for equations ( 3.5 ),
tuned to satisfy the initial conditions. With decreasing energy scale
@xmath these trajectories flatten and become @xmath -independent in the
so called Schrieffer-Wolff (SW) limit, which is reached when the
excitation energies @xmath become comparable with @xmath . The
corresponding effective bandwidth is denoted as @xmath (we suppose, for
the sake of simplicity, that @xmath , so that only the states @xmath
with @xmath are relevant). The simultaneous evolution of interchannel
hybridization parameter is described by the solution of scaling equation
( 3.8 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

If this remarkable level crossing occurs at @xmath , we arrive at the
situation where adding an indirect exchange interaction between the TQD
and the leads changes the magnetic state of the TQD from singlet to
triplet . Those states @xmath , which remain close enough to the new
ground state are involved in Kondo tunneling. As a result, the TQD
acquires a rich dynamical symmetry structure instead of the trivial
symmetry of spin singlet predetermined by the initial energy level
scheme ( 3.1 ). Appearance of the enhancement of the hybridization
parameter @xmath ( 3.10 ) does not radically influence the general
picture, provided the flow trajectories cross far from the SW line , due
to a very small hybridization @xmath . However, we are interested just
in cases when the accidental degeneracy occurs at the SW line. Various
possibilities of this degeneracy are considered below.

The flow diagrams leading to a non-trivial dynamical symmetry of TQD
with @xmath are presented in Figs. 3.3 , 3.5 , 3.6 . The horizontal axis
on these diagrams corresponds to the dimensionless energy scale @xmath
for lead electrons, where the vertical axes represent the energy levels
@xmath . The dashed line @xmath establishes the SW boundary for these
levels.

Before turning to highly degenerate situations, where the system
possesses specific @xmath symmetry, it is instructive to consider the
general case, where all flow trajectories @xmath are involved in Kondo
tunneling in the SW limit. This happens when the whole octet of spin
singlets and triplets forming the manifold ( 3.1 ) remains within the
energy interval @xmath in the SW limit. The level repulsion effect does
not prevent the formation of such multiplet, provided @xmath is small
enough and the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is valid. At this stage, the SW procedure for constructing the effective
spin Hamiltonian in the subspace @xmath should be applied. This
procedure excludes the charged states generated by @xmath to second
order in perturbation theory (see, e.g., [ 57 ] ).

The effective cotunneling Hamiltonian can be derived using
Schrieffer-Wolf procedure [ 55 ] (see Appendix C ). To simplify the SW
transformation, one should first rationalize the tunneling matrix @xmath
in the Hamiltonian ( 3.4 ). This @xmath matrix is diagonalized in the
@xmath space by means of the transformation to even/odd combinations of
lead electron @xmath -states and similar symmetric/antisymmetric
combinations of @xmath electrons in the dots. The form of this
transformation for symmetric TQD can be found in Appendix B . Like in
the case of conventional QD [ 26 ] , this transformation eliminates the
odd combination of @xmath electron wave functions from tunneling
Hamiltonian.

It should be emphasized that this transformation does not exclude the
odd component from @xmath in case of TQD in a series geometry [ 75 ] .
The same is valid for the Hamiltonians ( 3.3 ), ( 3.4 ) with @xmath : in
this case the rotation in @xmath space conformally maps the Hamiltonian
@xmath ( 2.51 ) for TQD in parallel geometry onto that for TQD in
series. Both these cases will be considered in Chapter 4 .

Unlike the case of DQD studied in Refs. [ 35 , 36 ] , where the spin
operators are the total spin @xmath and a single R-operator, describing
S/T transitions, the TQD is represented by several spin operators
corresponding to different Young tableaux (see Appendix D). To order
@xmath , then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here we recall that @xmath , @xmath , and the effective exchange
constants are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The vector operators @xmath and the permutation operator @xmath manifest
the dynamical symmetry of TQD in a subspace @xmath . The permutation
operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

commutes with @xmath and @xmath .

The spherical components of these vectors are defined via Hubbard
operators connecting different states of the octet,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In addition to the spin operator ( 2.63 ) for conduction electrons, new
spin operators are required,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

An extra symmetry element (l-r permutation) results in more complicated
algebra which involves new R-operator @xmath and the permutation
operator @xmath interchanging @xmath and @xmath components of TQD.

One can derive from the generic Hamiltonian ( 3.12 ) more symmetric
effective Hamiltonians describing partly degenerate configurations
illustrated by the flow diagrams of Figs. 3.3 , 3.5 , 3.6 . These are
the cases when the level crossing occurs in the nearest vicinity of the
SW line in the flow diagram. It is important to distinguish between the
cases of generic and accidental symmetry. In the former case the device
possesses intrinsic @xmath and @xmath symmetry, i.e., the left and right
dots are identical, the corresponding tunnel parameters are equal, and
left and right leads also mirror each other, namely, @xmath . In the
latter case the gate voltages violate @xmath symmetry, e.g., they make
@xmath , @xmath , etc. The level degeneracy is achieved due to
competition between the @xmath interdot tunneling and the lead-dot
tunneling without changing the symmetry of the Hamiltonian.

The basic spin Hamiltonian ( 3.12 ) acquires a more compact form, when a
TQD possesses generic or accidental degeneracy. In these cases the
operators ( 3.15 ) form close algebras, which predetermine the dynamical
symmetry of Kondo tunneling. We start the discussion of the pertinent
@xmath symmetries with the most degenerate configuration (Fig. 3.3 ),
where the TQD possesses generic @xmath axial symmetry, i.e., the left
and right dots are completely equivalent. Then the energy spectrum of an
isolated TQD is given by Eqs.( 3.2 ). The four-electron wave functions
are calculated in Appendix ( A ). Such TQD is a straightforward
generalization of the so called T-shaped DQD introduced in Refs. [ 35 ,
36 , 76 , 77 , 78 ] . It is clear, that attachment of a third dot simply
adds one more element to the symmetry group @xmath , namely the @xmath
permutation @xmath , which is parity sensitive.

To reduce the Hamiltonian ( 3.12 ) into a more symmetric form, we
rewrite the Hubbard operators in terms of new eigenstates @xmath ,
recalculated with taking account of the generic degeneracy ( 3.2 ) and
@xmath mixing @xmath . In assuming that the latter coupling parameter is
the smallest one, it results in insignificant additional remormalization
@xmath of the states @xmath and @xmath . Besides, it intermixes the
triplet states and changes their nomenclature from left/right to
even/odd. The corresponding energy levels are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The flow trajectories for two pairs of states @xmath and @xmath diverge
slowly with decreasing @xmath . If this divergence is negligible in the
scale of @xmath , then three nearly coincident trajectories @xmath cross
the fourth trajectory @xmath at some point, since the inequality @xmath
with @xmath is valid ( @xmath ). If this level crossing happens near the
SW line, we arrive at a case of complete degeneracy of the renormalized
spectrum, and the whole octet @xmath is involved in the dynamical
symmetry (Fig. 3.3 ). The fine structure of the flow diagram in the
region of avoided level crossing is shown in the inset.

Since the tunneling occurs in even and odd channels independently, the
parity is conserved also in indirect SW exchange. As a result, the
effective spin Hamiltonian ( 3.12 ) acquires the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath and the lead operators @xmath @xmath are defined in
Appendix B . The operators @xmath , @xmath are defined analogously to
@xmath , @xmath in Eq.( 3.15 ), and the vector operators @xmath @xmath ,
@xmath are defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The spherical components of the operators @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The spin operators for the electrons in the leads are introduced by the
obvious relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

instead of ( 2.63 ). Now the operator algebra is given by the closed
system of commutation relations which is a generalization of the @xmath
algebra,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operators @xmath are orthogonal to @xmath , and the Casimir
operators in this case are @xmath This justifies the qualification of
such TQD as a double spin rotator which is obtained from the spin
rotator considered in Refs. [ 35 , 36 ] by a mirror reflection. The
symmetry of such TQD is @xmath

Four additional vertices appear in the effective spin Hamiltonian ( 3.18
) at the second stage of Haldane-Anderson scaling procedure [ 56 ] . As
a result, the exchange part of the Hamiltonian ( 3.18 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The coupling constants in the Hamiltonian ( 3.23 ) are subject to
renormalization. Their values at @xmath are taken as initial conditions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for solving the scaling equations. These can be written in the following
form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath ), @xmath and @xmath It should be noted that the
terms proportional to @xmath arise in Eqs.( 3.25 ) since the dot
Hamiltonian (the first term in Eq.( 3.18 )) is not proportional to the
unit matrix, and thus it does not commute with the exchange terms ( 3.23
). As can be seen from Eq.( 3.17 ), the deviation from the unit matrix
is proportional to @xmath .

Solution of Eqs. ( 3.25 ) yields the Kondo temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The limiting value of this relation for independent @xmath , @xmath
channels is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here and below the coupling constants @xmath in all equations for @xmath
are taken at @xmath . We see that avoided crossing effect in the case of
slightly violated @xmath symmetry of TQD turns the Kondo temperature to
be a function of the level splitting ( 3.17 ). A similar situation has
been noticed in previous studies of DQD [ 35 , 36 ] and planar QD with
even occupation [ 12 ] , where @xmath turned out to be a monotonically
decreasing function of S/T splitting energy @xmath with a maximum at
@xmath . Now the Kondo temperature is a function of two parameters,
@xmath

Looking at Fig. 3.3 (which corresponds to @xmath ) we notice that for
large enough @xmath , when the inequality ( 3.11 ) is violated, @xmath ,
the symmetry of TQD is reduced to @xmath symmetry of S/T manifold with
the Kondo temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additional S/T splitting induced by the gate voltage ( @xmath ) results
in further decrease of @xmath as a function of @xmath . The asymptotic
form of the function @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In the limit of @xmath the singlet state should be
excluded from the manifold, and the symmetry of the TQD with spin one in
this case is @xmath The general shape of @xmath surface is presented in
Fig. 3.4 . Thus the Kondo effect for the TQD with mirror symmetry is
characterized by the stable infinite fixed point characteristic for the
underscreened spin one dot, similar to that for DQD [ 35 , 36 ] .

#### 3.2.2 @xmath Symmetry

Now we turn to asymmetric configurations where @xmath , @xmath . In this
case the system loses the @xmath symmetry, and it is more convenient to
return to the initial variables used in the generic Hamiltonian ( 3.12
).

When the Haldane renormalization results in an accidental degeneracy of
two singlets and one triplet, @xmath (Fig. 3.5 ), the TQD acquires an
@xmath symmetry of a manifold @xmath . In this case the SW Hamiltonian (
3.12 ) transforms into

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The spherical components of the
vector operators @xmath and @xmath are given by the following
expressions,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The group generators of the @xmath algebra are the @xmath -vectors
@xmath from ( 3.15 ) and the operators intermixing @xmath - and @xmath
-states, namely the vector @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a scalar @xmath interchanging @xmath variables of degenerate
singlets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The commutation relations ( 2.47 ), ( 2.49 ) in this particular case
acquire the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operators @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal to @xmath in accordance
with ( 2.48 ). Besides, @xmath and the Casimir operator is @xmath

Like in the case of double @xmath symmetry studied above, the second
step of RG procedure generates additional vertices in the exchange part
of the interaction Hamiltonian ( 3.30 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath . The scaling properties of the system are
determined by a system of 12 scaling equations with initial conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see Eq. 3.13 for definitions) specifically

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the terms proportional to @xmath arise because the second term in
the Hamiltonian ( 3.30 ) contains non-diagonal terms.

From equations ( 3.37 ), one deduces the Kondo temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly to the previous case, this equation transforms into the usual
exponential form when the @xmath and @xmath channels are independent,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon increasing @xmath , the symmetry reduces from @xmath to @xmath .
The same happens at small @xmath but with increasing @xmath . In the
latter case the energy @xmath is quenched, and at @xmath Eq. ( 3.38 )
transforms into @xmath (cf. [ 73 ] ). On the other hand, upon decreasing
@xmath the symmetry @xmath is restored at @xmath . The Kondo effect
disappears when @xmath changes sign (the ground state becomes a
singlet).

#### 3.2.3 @xmath Symmetry

The next asymmetric configuration is illustrated by the flow diagram of
Fig. 3.6 .

In this case, the manifold @xmath is involved in the dynamical symmetry
of TQD. The relevant symmetry group is @xmath . It is generated by six
vectors and three scalars. These are spin operators @xmath @xmath and
R-operator @xmath (see Eq. 3.15 ) plus three vector operators @xmath and
three scalar operators @xmath involving @xmath permutation. Here are the
expressions for the spherical components of these vectors via Hubbard
operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath now involve the @xmath
permutations for the triplet states. They are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The (somewhat involved) commutation relations of @xmath algebra for
these operators and various kinematic constraints are presented in
Appendix D . The SW transformation results in the effective Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The spherical
components of the vector operators @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is easy to see that @xmath and @xmath .

Like in the case of @xmath symmetry, the tunneling terms @xmath generate
additional vertices in the renormalized Hamiltonian @xmath . The number
of these vertices and the corresponding scaling equations is too wide to
be presented here. We leave the description of RG procedure for @xmath
group for the next chapter (as well as the case of TQD with odd
occupation), where the case of @xmath is considered. In that situation
the scaling equations describing the Kondo physics of TQD with @xmath
symmetry are more compact.

### 3.3 Conclusions

The basic physics for all @xmath symmetries is the same, and we
summarize it here. The TQD in its ground state cannot be regarded as a
simple quantum top in the sense that beside its spin operator other
vector operators @xmath are needed (in order to fully determine its
quantum states), which have non-zero matrix elements between states of
different spin multiplets @xmath . These ”Runge-Lenz” operators do not
appear in the isolated dot Hamiltonian (so in some sense they are
”hidden”). Yet, they are exposed when tunneling between the TQD and
leads is switched on. The effective spin Hamiltonian which couples the
metallic electron spin @xmath with the operators of the TQD then
contains new exchange terms, @xmath beside the ubiquitous ones @xmath .
The operators @xmath and @xmath generate a dynamical group (usually
@xmath ).

We have analyzed several examples of TQD with even occupation in the
parallel geometry (Fig. 3.1 ). Our analysis demonstrates the principal
features of Kondo effect in CQD in comparison with the conventional QD
composed of a single well. These examples teach us that in Kondo
tunneling through CQD, not only the spin rotation but also the
”Runge-Lenz” type operators @xmath and @xmath are involved. Physically,
the operators @xmath describe left-right transitions, and different
Young schemes give different spin operators in the effective
co-tunneling Hamiltonians (see Appendix E ).

## Chapter 4 Trimer in Series

In this Chapter we expose the physics of Kondo tunneling through
sandwich-type molecules adsorbed on metallic substrate. In Sec. 4.1 we
introduce the system of our study and demonstrate the correspondence
between the low-energy tunnel spectra of chemisorbed lanthanocene
molecule and an artificial trimer, i.e., TQD in series geometry. In Sec.
4.2 we concentrate on the case of even occupation. The scaling equations
are derived and the Kondo temperatures are calculated for the evenly
occupied trimer in the cases of the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
dynamical symmetries. The dynamical-symmetry phase diagram is displayed
and the possibility of its experimental realization is outlined. The
anisotropic Kondo effect induced by an external magnetic field is
discussed in Sec. 4.3 . It is shown that the symmetry group for such
magnetic field induced Kondo tunneling is @xmath . The case of odd
occupation is considered in Sec. 4.4 . When the ground state of the
trimer is a doublet, the effective spin Hamiltonian of the trimer
manifests a two-channel Kondo problem albeit only in the weak coupling
regime. Analysis of the Kondo effect in cases of higher spin degeneracy
of the trimer ground state is carried out in relation with dynamical
symmetries. In the Conclusions we underscore the main results obtained.

### 4.1 Introduction

In this Chapter we extend the theory of single-electron tunneling
developed in Chapter 3 for complex quantum dots to the case of
sandwich-type molecules adsorbed on metallic substrate. The geometry of
the nano-objects under investigation is: metallic subsrate (MS) -
molecule - nanotip of scanning tunnel microscope (STM). The specific
objects of our studies are lanthanocene molecules Ln(C @xmath H @xmath
@xmath where the magnetic ion Ln=Ce, Yb (central ion) is secluded in a
cage of carbon–containing radicals and only these radicals are in direct
tunnel contact with MS and STM. Ce is known as a mixed-valent ion in
many molecular and crystalline configurations. This means that the
covalent bonding, i.e., hybridization between strongly correlated
4f-electron and weakly interacting molecular @xmath -orbitals @xmath C
@xmath H @xmath in cerocene molecule Ce(C @xmath H @xmath @xmath
characterized by the parameter @xmath , is noticeable. Besides, the
difference between the ionization energy @xmath of 4f-electron and the
ionization energy @xmath of an electron in molecular @xmath -orbital is
large enough, so that @xmath . As is shown in [ 48 , 49 , 50 ] , the
direct consequence of this inequality is unusual electronic and spin
structure of the ground state and low-energy excitations in Ce(C @xmath
H @xmath @xmath . Instead of purely ionic bonding @xmath a mixed valence
state arises with admixture of configuration @xmath to the ground state
spin singlet. Due to the Pauli principle, such admixture is forbidden in
a triplet state. As a result, the energy difference between the ground
state singlet and excited triplet is controlled by the small parameter
@xmath .

This scenario reminds the mechanism of singlet-triplet splitting in
asymmetric DQD (Sec. 2.3 ) and exactly coincides with that for TQD with
small central dot, whose properties are studied in Chapter 3. The singly
occupied central dot with strong Coulomb blockade plays the same part as
magnetic ion (Ce or Yb) in lantanocene molecules. Two side dots in TQD
play the same role as two molecular rings C @xmath H @xmath in formation
of low energy spin spectrum. Only a pair of the highest occupied
molecular orbitals (HOMO) is involved in formation of this spectrum. All
other states may be treated as molecular excitons, which are quenched
within the scale of @xmath above the ground state. As a result, the
orbital degrees of freedom are irrelevant in the Kondo regime. The
similarity between the configurations ”STM–Ce(C @xmath H @xmath @xmath
–metallic adsorbent” and source – TQD –drain” is illustrated by Figs.
4.1 and 4.2 . The only essential condition for modelling both systems by
the same Hamiltonian ( 4.1 ) and treating them as a trimer in contact
with metallic leads is the inequality @xmath , i.e., the demand that the
tunnel contact with the reservoir does not destroy the coherent quantum
mechanical state of a trimer.

It was mentioned already in Chapter 3 that a TQD with leads @xmath and
@xmath representing independent tunneling channels can be mapped onto a
TQD in a series by means of geometrical conformal transformation.
Indeed, if the inter-channel tunneling amplitude @xmath in the
Hamiltonian ( 3.3 ) vanishes, one may apply a rotation in source-drain
space separately to each channel and exclude the odd @xmath combination
of lead states both in the @xmath - and @xmath -channel [ 26 ] . Since
now each lead is coupled to its own reservoir, and one arrives at the
series configuration shown in Fig. 4.2 .

It is virtually impossible to conceive an additional transformation
after which the odd combination of lead states is excluded from the
tunneling Hamiltonian [ 75 ] . As a result, the challenging situation
arises in case of odd occupation @xmath , where the net spin of TQD is
@xmath , and the two leads play part of two channels in Kondo tunneling
Hamiltonian. Unfortunately, despite the occurrence of two electron
channels in the spin Hamiltonian, the complete mapping on the
two-channel Kondo problem is not attained because there is an additional
cotunneling term @xmath ( @xmath is determined by ( 3.16 )) which turns
out to be relevant, and the two-channel fixed point cannot be reached
(see Sec. 4.4 ). And yet, from the point of view of dynamical symmetry
the series geometry offers a new perspective which we analyze in the
present chapter for the cases of even and odd occupation.

### 4.2 Even Occupation

Consider then a trimer in series (Fig. 4.2 ) with four electron
occupation @xmath . The Hamiltonian of the system can be written in the
form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath are the four- and three-electron eigenfunctions (
A.5 ) and ( A.9 ), respectively; @xmath @xmath are the four- and
three-electron energy levels, respectively (five electron states cost
much energy and are discarded); @xmath are number changing dot Hubbard
operators. The tunneling amplitudes @xmath ( @xmath ) depend explicitly
on the respective @xmath particle quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath . Note
that direct tunneling through the TQD is suppressed due to electron
level mismatch and Coulomb blockade, so that only cotunneling mechanism
contributes to the current.

After a SW transformation the generic Hamiltonian ( 3.12 ) simplifies in
this case to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

(the notation @xmath is used for the electron states both in the leads
and in the TQD). The antiferromagnetic coupling constants are defined by
( 3.13 ). The vectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the dot operators (
3.15 ), @xmath is the permutation operator ( 3.14 ), and the components
of the vectors @xmath , @xmath are determined in Eqs. ( 2.63 ) (with
@xmath ) and ( 3.16 ). The vector operators @xmath @xmath , @xmath and
the permutation operator @xmath manifest the dynamical symmetry of the
TQD.

We now discuss possible realization of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath symmetries arising in the TQD with @xmath [ 74 , 79 ] . Due to
the absence of interchannel mixing, the avoided crossing effect does not
arise in the series geometry. As a result, the cases of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath symmetry are characterized by the same flow diagram of Figs.
3.3 , 3.5 and 3.6 but without avoided crossing effects shown in the
insets.

Let us commence the analysis of the Kondo effect in the series geometry
with the case @xmath where @xmath and @xmath (Fig. 3.3 ). In this case
the exchange part of the Hamiltonian ( 4.2 ) is a simplified version of
the Hamiltonian ( 3.23 ) with the boundary conditions ( 3.24 ). The
scaling equations are the same as ( 3.25 ) with @xmath . Solving them
one gets Eq.( 3.27 ) for the Kondo temperature.

When @xmath (Fig. 3.5 ), the TQD possesses the @xmath symmetry. In this
case the interaction Hamiltonian has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the same as in Eq.( 3.30 ) with @xmath determined by Eq.( 3.31
). Respectively, the effective Hamiltonian for the Anderson scaling is a
reduced version of the Hamiltonian ( 3.35 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with the boundary conditions ( 3.36 ) for @xmath .

The scaling equations have the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Of course, Eqs.( 4.5 ) for the Kondo temperature yield the limiting
value ( 3.39 ).

When @xmath (Fig. 3.6 ), the TQD possesses the @xmath symmetry. In this
case the Anderson RG procedure adds three additional vertices in the
exchange part of the basic SW Hamiltonian ( 3.42 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The boundary conditions for solving the scaling equations are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The system of scaling equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

is now solvable analytically, and the Kondo temperature is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath .

Like in the cases considered above, the Kondo temperature and the
dynamical symmetry itself depend on the level splitting. On quenching
the @xmath state (increasing @xmath ), the pattern is changed into a
@xmath symmetry of two degenerate triplets with a mirror reflection
axis. Changing the sign of @xmath one arrives at a singlet regime with
@xmath .

When the lowest renormalized states in the SW limit are two triplets
@xmath and @xmath , the TQD possesses the @xmath symmetry with mirror
reflection axis. The corresponding co-tunneling spin Hamiltonian has the
form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath symmetry is generated by
the spin one operators @xmath with projections @xmath , and the
left-right permutation operator @xmath ( 3.14 ).

The system of scaling equations for the Hamiltonian ( 4.10 ) is,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath . From Eqs.( 4.11 ) we obtain the Kondo temperature,
provided @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The results of calculations described in this section are summarized in
Fig. 4.3 . The central domain of size @xmath describes the fully
symmetric state where there is left-right symmetry. Other regimes of
Kondo tunneling correspond to lines or segments in the @xmath plane.
These lines correspond to cases of higher conductance (ZBA). On the
other hand, at some hatched regions, the TQD has a singlet ground state
and the Kondo effect is absent. These are marked by the vertically
hatched domain. Both the tunneling rates which enter the ratio @xmath
and the relative level positions which determine the parameter @xmath
depend on the applied potentials, so the phase diagram presented in Fig.
4.3 can be scanned experimentally by appropriate variations of @xmath
and @xmath This is a rare occasion where an abstract concept like
dynamical symmetry can be felt and tuned by experimentalists. The
quantity that is measured in tunneling experiments is the zero-bias
anomaly (ZBA) in tunnel conductance @xmath [ 28 , 29 ] . The ZBA peak is
strongly temperature dependent, and this dependence is scaled by @xmath
. In particular, in a high temperature region @xmath , where the scaling
approach is valid, the conductance behaves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

As it has been demonstrated above, @xmath in CQD is a non-universal
quantity due to partial break-down of dynamical symmetry in these
quantum dots. It has a maximum value in the point of highest symmetry
@xmath , and depends on the parameters @xmath in the less symmetric
phases (see, e.g., Eqs. 3.27 , 3.29 , 3.39 , 4.9 . 4.12 ). Thus,
scanning the phase diagram means changing @xmath .

These changes are shown in Fig. 4.4 which illustrates the evolution of
@xmath with @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and 0.7 corresponding to a
symmetry change from @xmath , @xmath to @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath
, respectively. It is clear that the conductance measured at given
@xmath should follow variation of @xmath in accordance with ( 4.13 ).

### 4.3 Anisotropic Kondo Tunneling through Trimer

#### 4.3.1 Generalities

In all examples of CQDs considered above the co-tunneling problem is
mapped on the specific spin Hamiltonian where both @xmath and @xmath
vectors are involved in resonance cotunneling. There are, however, more
exotic situations where the effective spin Hamiltonian is in fact a
”Runge-Lenz” Hamiltonian in the sense that the vectors @xmath alone are
responsible for Kondo effect. Actually, just this aspect of dynamical
symmetry in Kondo tunneling was considered in the theoretical papers [
12 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] and observed experimentally in Refs. [ 13 , 32 ] ,
in which the Kondo effect in planar and vertical QDs induced by external
magnetic field @xmath has been studied. In this section we lay down the
theoretical basis for this somewhat unusual kind of Kondo effect.

Consider again the case of TQD in series geometry with @xmath . In the
previous sections the variation of spin symmetry was due to the
interplay of two contributions to indirect exchange coupling between the
spins @xmath . One source of such an exchange is tunneling within the
CQD (amplitudes @xmath ) and another one is the tunneling between the
dots and the leads (amplitudes @xmath ). An appropriate tuning of these
two contributions results in accidental degeneracy of spin states
(elimination of exchange splitting), and various combinations of these
accidental degeneracies lead to the rich phase diagram presented in Fig.
4.3 . A somewhat more crude approach, yet more compatible with
experimental observation of such interplay is provided by the Zeeman
effect. This mechanism is effective for CQD which remains in a singlet
ground state after all exchange renormalizations have taken place. The
negative exchange energy @xmath may then be compensated by the Zeeman
splitting of the nearest triplet states, and Kondo effect arises once
this compensation is complete [ 12 ] . From the point of view of
dynamical symmetry, the degeneracy induced by magnetic field means
realization of one possible subgroup of the non-compact group @xmath
(see Eq. 2.64 and corresponding discussion in Section 2.4 ). The
transformation @xmath for DQD in magnetic field was discussed in Ref. [
36 ] .

#### 4.3.2 Trimer with SU(3) Dynamical Symmetry

In similarity with DQD, the Kondo tunneling may be induced by external
field @xmath in the non-magnetic sector of the phase diagram of Fig. 4.3
. A very peculiar Kondo tunneling is induced by an external magnetic
field @xmath in the non-magnetic sector of the phase diagram of Fig. 4.3
close to the @xmath line. In this case, a remarkable symmetry reduction
occurs when the Zeeman splitting compensates negative @xmath . Then we
are left with the subspace of states @xmath , and the interaction
Hamiltonian has the form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that the anisotropic Kondo Hamiltonian ( 4.14 ) is quite
unconventional. There are several different terms responsible for
transverse and longitudinal exchange involving the R-operators which
generate both S @xmath /T and S @xmath /S @xmath transitions.

The operators ( 4.16 ) obey the following commutation relations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

These operators generate the algebra @xmath in the reduced spin space
@xmath specified by the Casimir operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, in this case the TQD possesses @xmath symmetry. These @xmath
operators may be represented via the familiar Gell-Mann matrices @xmath
( @xmath ) for the @xmath group,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As far as the RG procedure for the ”Runge-Lenz” exchange Hamiltonian (
4.14 ) is concerned, the poor-man scaling procedure is applicable also
for the @xmath operators. The scaling equations have the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We cannot demonstrate analytical solution of this system,
but the numerical solution shows that stable infinite fixed point exists
in this case like in all previous configurations.

Another type of field induced Kondo effect is realized in the symmetric
case of @xmath . Now the Zeeman splitting compensates negative @xmath .
Then the two components of the triplets, namely @xmath cross with the
singlet state energy @xmath , and the symmetry group of the TQD in
magnetic field is @xmath as in the case considered above.

#### 4.3.3 Summary

It has been demonstrated that the loss of rotational invariance in
external magnetic field radically changes the dynamical symmetry of TQD.
We considered here two examples of symmetry reduction, namely @xmath and
@xmath . In all cases the Kondo exchange is anisotropic, which, of
course, reflects the axial anisotropy induced by the external field.
These examples as well as the @xmath reduction considered earlier [ 35 ,
36 ] describe the magnetic field induced Kondo effect owing to the
dynamical symmetry of complex quantum dots. Similar reduction @xmath
induced by magnetic field may arise also in more complicated
configurations, and in particular in the parallel geometry. The immense
complexity of scaling procedure adds nothing new to the general pattern
of the field induced anisotropy of Kondo tunneling, so we confine
ourselves with these two examples.

Although the anisotropic Kondo Hamiltonian was introduced formally at
the early stage of Kondo physics [ 80 , 81 ] , it was rather difficult
to perceive how such Hamiltonian is derivable from the generic
Anderson-type Hamiltonian. It was found that the effective anisotropy
arises in cases where the pseudo-spin degrees of freedom (like a
two-level system) are responsible for anomalous scattering. Another
possibility is the introduction of magnetic anisotropy in the generic
spin Hamiltonian due to spin-orbit interaction (see Ref. [ 82 ] for a
review of such models). One should also mention the remarkable
possibility of magnetic field induced anisotropic Kondo effect on a
magnetic impurity in ferromagnetic rare-earth metals with easy plane
magnetic anisotropy [ 83 ] . This model is close to our model from the
point of view of effective spin Hamiltonian, but the sources of
anisotropy are different in the two systems. In our case the interplay
between singlet and triplet components of spin multiplet is an eventual
source both of the Kondo effect itself and of its anisotropy in external
magnetic field. Previously, the manifestation of @xmath symmetry in
anisotropic magnetic systems were established in Refs. [ 84 , 85 ] . It
was shown, in particular, that this dynamical symmetry predetermines the
properties of collective excitations in anisotropic Heisenberg
ferromagnet. In the presence of single-ion anisotropy the relation
between the Hubbard operators for @xmath and Gell-Mann matrices @xmath
were established. It worth also mentioning in this context the @xmath
algebraic structure of superconducting and antiferromagnetic coherent
states in cuprate High-T @xmath materials [ 86 ] .

### 4.4 Odd Occupation

We now turn our attention to investigation of the dynamical symmetries
of TQD in series with odd occupation @xmath , whose low-energy spin
multiplet contains two spin 1/2 doublets @xmath and a spin quartet
@xmath with corresponding energies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

There are also four charge-transfer excitonic counterparts of the spin
doublets separated by the charge transfer gaps @xmath and @xmath from
the above states (see Appendix A ).

Like in the four-electron case, the scaling equations ( 2.33 ) may be
derived with different tunneling rates for different spin states (
@xmath for the quartet and @xmath for the doublets).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the scaling trajectories cross in a unique manner: This
is the complete degenerate configuration where all three phase
trajectories @xmath intersect [ @xmath ] at the same point @xmath This
happens at bandwidth @xmath (Fig. 4.5 ) whose value is estimated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This level crossing may occur either before or after reaching the SW
limit @xmath where scaling terminates [ 55 ] . Below we discuss the
Kondo physics arising in the cases: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.4.1 Towards Two-Channel Kondo Effect

When @xmath , the lowest renormalized state in the SW limit is a doublet
@xmath . Following an RG procedure and a SW transformation, the spin
Hamiltonian in this case reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The spin 1/2 operator @xmath acts on @xmath (Eq.( A.9 )), whereas the
lead electrons spin operators @xmath and @xmath are determined in Eqs. (
2.63 ) (with @xmath ) and ( 3.16 ). The exchange coupling constants are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian ( 4.23 ) then encodes a two-channel Kondo physics, where
the leads serve as two independent channels and @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath .

A poor-man scaling technique is used to renormalize the exchange
constants by reducing the band-width @xmath . The pertinent fixed points
are then identified as @xmath [ 56 ] . Unlike the situation encountered
in the single-channel Kondo effect, third order diagrams in addition to
the usual single-loop ones should be included (see Fig. 5 in Ref. [ 66 ]
and Fig. 9 in Ref. [ 87 ] ). With @xmath and @xmath the three RG
equations for @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the symmetry plane @xmath , Eqs. ( 4.25 ) reduce to a couple of RG
equations for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to @xmath . These are the well-known equations for the
anisotropic two-channel Kondo effect [ 66 ] . With @xmath , @xmath (
@xmath ) and @xmath , the solution of the system ( 4.26 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scaling trajectories in the sector @xmath and in the symmetry plane
with @xmath are shown in Fig. 4.6 .

Although the fixed point (1/2, 1/2, 0) remains inaccessible if @xmath ,
one may approach it close enough starting from an initial condition
@xmath . Realization of this inequality is a generic property of TQD in
series shown in Fig. 4.2 . A similar scenario was offered in [ 88 , 89 ]
for a QD between two interacting wires.

According to general perturbative expression for the dot conductance [
58 ] , its zero-bias anomaly is encoded in the third order term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the temperature @xmath replaces the bandwidth @xmath in the
solution ( 4.27 ). Let us present a qualitative discussion of the
conductance @xmath (or in an experimentalist friendly form, @xmath )
based on the flow diagram displayed in Fig. 4.6 . (Strictly speaking,
the RG method and hence the discussion below, is mostly reliable in the
weak-coupling regime @xmath ). Varying @xmath implies moving on a curve
@xmath in three-dimensional parameter space (Fig. 4.6 ), and the
corresponding values of the exchange parameters determine the
conductance according to equation ( 4.28 ). Note that if, initially,
@xmath the point will remain on a curve @xmath located on the symmetry
plane. By varying @xmath it is possible to tune the initial condition
@xmath from the highly asymmetric case @xmath to the fully symmetric
case @xmath . For a fixed value of @xmath the conductance shoots up
(logarithmically) at a certain temperature @xmath which decreases toward
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath . The closer is @xmath to @xmath , the
closer is the behavior of the conductance to that expected in a generic
two-channel situation. Thus, although the isotropic two-channel Kondo
physics is unachievable in the strong-coupling limit, its precursor
might show up in the intermediate-coupling regime.

The conductance @xmath as function of @xmath for several values of
@xmath and the same value of @xmath is displayed by the family of curves
in Fig. 4.7 . For @xmath displayed in curve @xmath , @xmath and for
@xmath it is very similar to what is expected in an isotropic
two-channel system. Alternatively, holding @xmath and changing gate
voltages @xmath enables an experimentalist to virtually cross the
symmetry plane. This is equivalent to moving vertically downward on Fig.
4.7 . At high temperature the curves almost coalesce and the conductance
is virtually flat. At low temperature (still above @xmath ) the
conductance exhibits a sharp minimum. This is summarized in Fig. 4.8 .

#### 4.4.2 Higher Degeneracy and Dynamical Symmetries

If the degenerate point ( 4.22 ) occurs in the SW crossover region,
i.e., if @xmath , the SW procedure involves all three spin states (Fig.
4.5 ), and it results in the following cotunneling Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spin 1 operator and @xmath is the R-operator
describing S/T transition similar to that for spin rotator [ 36 ] . The
coupling constants are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a somewhat unexpected situation where Kondo tunneling in a
quantum dot with odd occupation demonstrates the exchange Hamiltonian of
a quantum dot with even occupation. The reason for this scenario is the
specific structure of the wave function of TQD with @xmath . The
corresponding wave functions @xmath (see Appendix A ) are vector sums of
states composed of a ”passive” electron sitting in the central dot and
singlet/triplet (S/T) two-electron states in the @xmath dots.
Constructing the eigenstates @xmath using certain Young tableaux (see
Appendix D), one concludes that the spin dynamics of such TQD is
represented by the spin 1 operator @xmath corresponding to the @xmath
triplet, the corresponding R-operator @xmath and the spin 1/2 operator
@xmath of a passive electron in the central well. The latter does not
enter the effective Hamiltonian @xmath ( 4.29 ) but influences the
kinematic constraint via Casimir operator @xmath . The dynamical
symmetry is therefore @xmath , and only the @xmath subgroup is involved
in Kondo tunneling.

The scaling equations have the form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath @xmath . From Eqs. ( 4.31 ) we obtain the Kondo
temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

An additional dynamical symmetry arises in the case when @xmath . In
this case the ground state of TQD is a quartet S=3/2, and we arrive at a
standard underscreened Kondo effect for @xmath quantum dot as an
ultimate limit of the above highly degenerate state.

#### 4.4.3 Summary

To conclude this section, it might be useful here to underscore the
following points: (1) In a TQD (Fig. 4.2 ), the two-channel (left-right
leads) Kondo Hamiltonian ( 4.23 ) emerges in which the impurity is a
real spin and the current is due solely to co-tunneling. The
corresponding exchange constant @xmath is a relevant parameter: by
taking even and odd combinations, the system is mapped on an anisotropic
two-channel Kondo problem where @xmath determines the degree of
anisotropy. (2) Although the generic two-channel Kondo fixed-point is
not achievable in the strong coupling limit, inspecting the conductance
@xmath as function of temperature (Fig. 4.7 ) and gate voltage (Fig. 4.8
) suggests an experimentally controllable detection of its precursor in
the weak and intermediate coupling regimes. Apparently, genuine
multichannel Kondo regime with finite fixed point may be achieved for
configurations with more than two terminals. (3) There exists a scenario
of level degeneracy in which TQD with half-integer spin behaves as a dot
with integer spin in Kondo tunneling regime.

### 4.5 Conclusions

We have analyzed the occurrence of dynamical symmetries in collective
phenomena, which accompany quantum tunneling through chemisorbed
sandwich-type molecules and complex quantum dots in configurations
having a form of linear trimer. These symmetries emerge when the trimer
is coupled with metallic electrodes under the conditions of strong
Coulomb blockade in one of its three constituents and nearly degenerate
low energy spin spectrum.

As a prototype of complex molecules, where the magnetic ion is
sandwiched between two molecular radicals, we have chosen lanthanocene
molecule Ln(C @xmath H @xmath @xmath (Ln=Ce, Yb), following P. Fulde’s
proposal [ 90 ] . This molecule is characterized by anomalously soft
spectrum of singlet-triplet excitations. Artificial ”Fulde molecule” in
a form of linear triple dot (Fig. 4.2 ) with even electron occupation
mimics the low-energy spectrum of cerocene. Fulde et. al. [ 48 , 49 ]
considered the interplay between two spin states (singlet and triplet)
and singlet charge exciton as a predecessor of genuine Kondo
singlet/triplet pairs, which arise in classical Kondo effect for a local
spin immersed into a Fermi sea. We have shown that the Fulde trimer as a
whole may be attached to a Fermi basin (metallic layer or electrodes).
As a result, the pseudo Kondo S/T pairs becomes a new source of Kondo
scattering/tunneling with quite sophisticated structure of a
”scatterer”. This structure is elegantly described in terms of
non-compact dynamical symmetry groups with complicated @xmath algebras.
Application of an external magnetic field results in additional
accidental degeneracies. Due to the loss of spin-rotational symmetry the
effective cotunneling Hamiltonian acquires spin anisotropy, and the
dynamical symmetry of a trimer is radically changed. Although the main
focus in this Chapter is related to the study of triple quantum dots,
the generalization to other quantum dot structures is indeed
straightforward.

The difference between series and parallel geometries of TQD coupled to
the leads by two channels exists only at non-zero interchannel mixing in
the leads, @xmath . One may control the dynamical symmetry of Kondo
tunneling through TQD by varying the gate voltage and/or lead-dot
tunneling rate. In the case of odd electron occupation ( @xmath ) when
the ground-state of the isolated TQD is a doublet and higher spin
excitations can be neglected, the effective low-energy Hamiltonian of a
TQD in series manifests a two-channel Kondo problem albeit only in the
weak coupling regime [ 75 ] . To describe the flow diagram in this case,
one should go beyond the one-loop approximation in RG flow equations [
66 ] . The nominal spin of CQD does not necessarily coincide with that
involved in Kondo tunneling. A simple albeit striking realization of
this scenario in this context is the case of TQD with @xmath , which
manifests itself as a dot with integer or half-integer spin (depending
on gate voltages).

Since we were interested in the symmetry aspect of Kondo tunneling
Hamiltonian, we restricted ourselves by derivation of RG flow equations
and solving them for obtaining the Kondo temperature. In all cases the
TQDs possess strong coupling fixed point characteristic for spin 1/2
and/or spin 1 case. We did not calculate the tunnel conductance in
details, because it reproduces the main features of Kondo-type zero bias
anomalies studied extensively by many authors (see, e.g., [ 12 , 14 , 15
, 16 , 69 , 70 ] ). The novel feature is the possibility of changing
@xmath by scanning the phase diagram of Fig. 4.3 . Then the zero bias
anomaly follows all symmetry crossovers induced by experimentally
tunable gate voltages and tunneling rates.

The main message of this Chapter is that symmetry enters the realm of
mesoscopic physics in a rather non-trivial manner. Dynamical symmetry in
this context is not just a geometrical concept but, rather, intimately
related with the physics of strong correlations and exchange
interactions. The relation with other branches of physics makes it even
more attractive. The groups @xmath play an important role in Particle
Physics as well as in model building for high temperature
superconductivity (especially @xmath ). The role of the group @xmath in
Particle Physics cannot be overestimated and its role in Nuclear Physics
in relation with the interacting Boson model is well recognized. This
work extends the role of these Lie groups in Condensed Matter Physics.

## Chapter 5 Kondo Tunneling through Triangular Trimer in Ring Geometry

In this Chapter we consider a ring-like triangular trimer, i.e.,
triangular triple quantum dot (TTQD), and focus on its symmetry
properties, which influence the Kondo tunneling. The basic concepts are
introduced in Sec. 5.1 . In Sec. 5.2 we construct the Hamiltonian of the
TTQD both in three- and two-terminal geometry and expose its energy
spectrum. In Sec. 5.3 we focus on the modification of the symmetry of
TTQD in an external magnetic field. It is shown that TTQD in a magnetic
field demonstrates unique combination of Kondo and Aharonov-Bohm
features. The poor-man scaling equations are solved and the Kondo
temperatures are calculated for the cases of @xmath and @xmath
symmetries. The conductance of a TTQD strongly depends on the underlying
dynamical symmetry group. We show that the interplay between continuous
spin-rotational symmetry @xmath , gauge symmetry @xmath and discrete
symmetry @xmath of triangle may result in sharp enhancement or complete
suppression of tunnel conductance as a function of magnetic flux through
the TTQD. In Conclusions we summarize the results obtained.

### 5.1 Introduction

In the previous chapters we studied tunneling through linear trimers in
parallel and serial configurations, where the dots are ordered linearly
either parallel or perpendicular to the metallic leads. Meanwhile,
modern experimental methods allow also fabrication of quantum dots in a
ring geometry. This ring may have a form of closed gutter [ 91 , 92 ] or
be composed by several separate dots coupled by tunnel channels. In the
latter case the simplest configuration is a triangle. Triangular triple
quantum dot (TTQD) was considered theoretically [ 93 ] and realized
experimentally very recently [ 94 ] , in order to demonstrate the
ratchet effect in single electron tunneling. To achieve this effect the
authors proposed a configuration, where two of the three puddles are
coupled in series with the leads (source and drain), while the third one
has a tunnel contact with one of its counterparts and only a capacitive
coupling with the other. From the point of view of Kondo effect such
configuration can be treated as an extension of a T-shape quantum dot [
35 , 36 , 76 , 77 , 78 ] . Triangular trimers of Cr ions on a gold
surface were also studied [ 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 ] . The electronic and
magnetic structure of these trimers is described in terms of a
three-site Kondo effect. The orbital symmetry of triangle is discrete.
It results in additional degeneracies of the spectrum of trimer, which
may be the source of non-Fermi-liquid fixed point [ 98 , 99 ] .

In this Chapter we concentrate on the point symmetry of ring-like TTQD
and its interplay with the spin rotation symmetry in a context of Kondo
tunneling through this artificial molecule. Indeed, the generic feature
of Kondo effect is the involvement of internal degrees of freedom of
localized ”scatterer” in the interaction with continuum of electron-hole
pair excitations in the Fermi sea of conduction electrons. These are
spin degrees of freedom in conventional Kondo effect, although in some
cases the role of pseudospin may be played by configuration quantum
numbers, like in two-level systems and related objects [ 82 ] . TTQD may
be considered as a specific Kondo object, where both spin and
configuration (orbital) excitations are involved in cotunneling on an
equal footing [ 100 , 101 ] .

To demonstrate this interplay, we consider a fully symmetric TTQD
consisting of three identical puddles with the same individual
properties (energy levels and Coulomb blockade parameters) and inter-dot
coupling (tunnel amplitudes and electrostatic interaction). Like in the
above mentioned triangular ratchet [ 93 , 94 ] , we assume that the TTQD
in the ground state is occupied by one electron and Coulomb blockade is
strong enough to completely suppress double occupancy of any valley
@xmath . This means that the only mechanism of electron transfer through
TTQD is cotunneling, where one electron leaves the valley @xmath into
the metallic leads, whereas another electron tunnels from the reservoir
to the same valley @xmath or to another valley @xmath . In the former
case only the spin reversal is possible, whereas in the latter case not
only the spin is affected but also the TTQD is effectively ”rotated”
either clockwise or anti-clockwise (see Fig. 5.1 ).

Discrete rotation in real space and continuous rotation in spin space
may be encoded in terms of group theory. The group @xmath characterizes
the symmetry of a triangle, and the group @xmath describes the spin
symmetry. As a result, the total symmetry of TTQD is determined by the
direct product of these two groups. One may use an equivalent language
of permutation group @xmath for description of the configurations of
TTQD with an electron occupying one of three possible positions in its
wells. The discrete group @xmath is characterized by three
representations @xmath or three Young tableaux @xmath . Here @xmath and
@xmath are one-dimensional representations with symmetric and
antisymmetric basis functions, respectively, and @xmath is the
two-dimensional representation with basis functions, which are symmetric
or antisymmetric with respect to mirror reflections. In the
configuration shown in Fig. 5.2 a, the perfect triangular symmetry
characterizes both the triple dot and three leads, whereas in the
configuration illustrated by Fig. 5.2 b, the permutation symmetry
between the sites (2,3) and (1,3) is broken, while the system remains
invariant relative to (1,2) permutation.

Since the TTQD has a ring geometry, it is sensitive to an external
magnetic field directed perpendicular to its plane, because the electron
acquires additional gauge phase as it tunnels between the wells. The
phase is determined by the magnetic flux through the ring. In a
two-terminal geometry (Fig. 5.2 b), the Aharonov-Bohm (AB) effect is
possible due to the interference between the channels (s13d) and (s23d).
Since the magnetic flux in this case is separated between two rings, the
AB oscillations should have more complicated character than in a
text-book AB interferometer. The @xmath symmetry of an electron in an
external magnetic field also influences the Kondo resonance because it
changes the total symmetry of TTQD (breaks the chiral symmetry). In this
Chapter we show that the interplay between continuous @xmath symmetry,
discrete @xmath symmetry and gauge @xmath symmetry can be described in
terms of dynamical symmetry group approach [ 35 , 36 , 37 , 73 , 74 ]
discussed in Chapters 3 and 4.

It should be stressed that the interplay between the Kondo tunneling and
AB interference differs from the effects considered recently in the
context of mesoscopic quantum interferometer containing a Kondo impurity
on one of its arms [ 102 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106 ] . Unlike the
Fano-like effects which take place in the latter case, the coherent TTQD
as a whole plays part in the physics of an AB interferometer and a
resonance Kondo-scatterer.

### 5.2 Hamiltonian

A symmetric TTQD in a contact with source and drain leads (Fig. 5.2 ) is
described by the Anderson Hamiltonian for lead electrons @xmath and dot
electrons @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term, @xmath , is the Hamiltonian of the isolated TTQD,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the spin index, @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath are
intra-dot and inter-dot Coulomb blockade parameters @xmath , and @xmath
is the inter-dot tunneling parameter. The second term, @xmath ,
describes the electrons in the leads labelled by the same indices @xmath
as the dots in the case of Fig. 5.2 a. In the case of Fig. 5.2 b @xmath
for source and drain electrodes respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The last term, @xmath , is the tunneling Hamiltonian between the dot and
the leads. It has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

in the 3-terminal geometry (Fig. 5.2 a) and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

in the 2-terminal geometry (Fig. 5.2 b). We assume that in the latter
case the mean-free path for electrons near the ”tip” of the source
electrode exceeds the size of this tip. The 2-terminal device has the
symmetry of isosceles triangle with one mirror reflection axis @xmath .

First we consider TTQD with three leads (Fig. 5.2 a) whose ground state
corresponds to a single electron occupation @xmath and assume that all
three channels are equivalent with @xmath so that the tunnel contact
preserves the rotational symmetry of TTQD, which is thereby imposed on
the itinerant electrons in the leads. It is useful to re-write the
Hamiltonian in the special basis which respects the @xmath symmetry,
employing an approach widely used in the theory of Kondo effect in bulk
metals [ 107 , 108 ] . The Hamiltonian @xmath is diagonal in the basis

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
                 (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath form bases for two irreducible
representations of the group @xmath . Only a symmetric representation
@xmath of the @xmath group arises in this case. The antisymmetric state
@xmath cannot be constructed due to the well known frustration property
of triangular cells. The spin states with @xmath are spin doublets (
@xmath ), so the Hamiltonian of the isolated TTQD in this charge sector
has six eigenstates. They correspond to a spin doublet @xmath with fully
symmetric ”orbital” wave function @xmath and two degenerate doublets
@xmath . The corresponding single electron energies are,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Anderson Hamiltonian ( 5.1 ) rewritten in the variables ( 5.6 ) and
( 5.7 ) may be expressed by means of Hubbard operators @xmath , with
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath stands for an empty TTQD, @xmath belong to the single
electron charge sector, and @xmath are the eigenvectors of two-electron
states. The eigenstates @xmath for @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , the indices @xmath denote spin singlet and spin triplet
configurations of two electrons in TTQD, and the inequality @xmath is
used explicitly. The irreducible representation @xmath contains
two-electron eigenfunction, which is odd with respect to permutations
@xmath . The tunnel matrix elements are redefined accordingly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A peculiar feature of ring configuration is an explicit dependence of
the order of levels within the multiplets ( 5.8 ) and ( 5.10 ) on the
sign of the tunnel integral @xmath . For @xmath the doublet @xmath is a
ground state, provided @xmath . In the case of @xmath the lowest levels
are the doublets @xmath . The orbital degeneracy of the states @xmath is
a manifestation of rotation/permutation degrees of freedom of the TTQD.
In the next section we will show that these discrete rotations are
explicitly involved in Kondo tunneling.

### 5.3 Magnetically Tunable Spin and Orbital Kondo Effect

To describe the influence of an external magnetic field @xmath
(perpendicular to the TTQD plane) on the dot spectrum, one may treat the
TTQD as a three-site cyclic chain with nearest-neighbor hopping
integrals @xmath connecting these sites. The spectrum of this ”chain” is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This equation is the same as ( 5.8 ) with negative @xmath , where @xmath
correspond respectively to @xmath . A perpendicular magnetic field
modifies this spectrum. If the Zeeman splitting is weak, the only effect
of the magnetic field is reflected by an additional phase acquired by
the tunneling integral @xmath . This phase is determined by the magnetic
flux @xmath through the triangle, so that the spectrum of the TTQD
becomes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figure 5.3 illustrates the evolution of @xmath induced by @xmath .
Variation of @xmath between zero and @xmath (the value of @xmath
corresponding to the quantum of magnetic flux @xmath through the
triangle) results in multiple crossing of the levels @xmath . The
periodicity in @xmath of the energy spectrum is @xmath since each
crossing point (Fig. 5.3 ) may be considered as an orbital doublet
@xmath by regauging phases @xmath in Eq. ( 5.6 ).

The accidental degeneracy of spin states induced by the magnetic phase
@xmath introduces new features into the Kondo effect. In the
conventional Kondo problem, the effective low-energy exchange
Hamiltonian has the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the spin
operators for the dot and lead electrons, respectively [ 56 ] . Here,
however, the low-energy states of TTQD form a multiplet characterized by
both spin and orbital quantum numbers. The effective exchange
interaction reflects the dynamical symmetry of the TTQD [ 35 , 36 , 37 ,
73 , 74 ] . As was mentioned in Sec. 2.4 , the corresponding dynamical
symmetry group is identified not only by the operators which commute
with the Hamiltonian but also by operators inducing transitions between
different states of its multiplets. Hence, it is determined by the set
of dot energy levels which reside within a given energy interval (its
width is related to the Kondo temperature @xmath ). Since the position
of these levels is controlled in this case by the magnetic field, we
arrive at a remarkable scenario: Variation of a magnetic field
determines the dynamical symmetry of the tunneling device. Generically,
the dynamical symmetry group which describes all possible transitions
within the set @xmath is @xmath . However, this symmetry is exposed at
too high energy scale @xmath , while only the low-energy excitations at
energy scale @xmath are involved in Kondo tunneling. It is seen from
Fig. 5.3 that the orbital degrees of freedom are mostly quenched, but
the ground state becomes doubly degenerate both in spin and orbital
channels around @xmath , @xmath .

Let us compare two cases: @xmath , (the ground state is a spin doublet
@xmath ), and @xmath , (the ground state is both orbital and spin
doublet @xmath ). It is useful at this point to generalize the notion of
localized spin operator @xmath (employing Pauli matrices @xmath ) to
@xmath ( @xmath ), in terms of the eigenvectors ( 5.6 ). Similar
generalization applies for the spin operators of the lead electrons:
@xmath with @xmath defined in ( 5.7 ). First, when @xmath , the rotation
degrees of freedom are quenched at the low-energy scale. The only
vector, which is involved in Kondo co-tunneling through TTQD is the spin
@xmath . Applying SW procedure [ 55 ] , the effective exchange
Hamiltonian reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The exchange vertices @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath as in the conventional SW transformation of the
Anderson Hamiltonian. On the other hand, @xmath due to the inequality
@xmath . Thus, two out of three available exchange channels in the
Hamiltonian ( 5.13 ) are irrelevant. As a result, the conventional Kondo
regime emerges with the doublet @xmath channel and a Kondo temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Second, when @xmath , the doublet @xmath is quenched at low energy, and
the Kondo effect is governed by tunneling through the TTQD in the state
@xmath whose symmetry is @xmath . This scenario of orbital degeneracy is
different from that of occupation degeneracy studied in double quantum
dot systems [ 109 ] . The 15 generators of @xmath include four spin
vector operators @xmath with @xmath and one pseudospin vector @xmath
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its counterpart for the lead electrons is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to @xmath symmetry of the ground state, the SW Hamiltonian acquires
a rather rich structure,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.18)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coupling constants are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, spin and orbital degrees of freedom of TTQD interlace in the
exchange terms. The indirect exchange coupling constants arise due to
co-tunneling processes with virtual excitations of states with zero and
two electrons. These constants include both diagonal ( @xmath ) and
non-diagonal ( @xmath ) terms describing reflection and transmission
co-tunneling amplitudes. (Our representation of spin operators and
therefore the form of spin Hamiltonians ( 5.13 ),( 5.18 ) differs from
that used in [ 98 , 99 ] and in [ 110 , 111 ] .)

The interplay between spin and pseudospin channels naturally affects the
scaling equations obtained within the framework of Anderson’s ”poor man
scaling” procedure [ 56 ] . The system of scaling equations has the
following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , and the scaling variable is @xmath . Analysis of solutions
of the scaling equations ( 5.20 ) with initial values of coupling
parameters listed in Eq. ( 5.19 ), shows that the symmetry-breaking
vertices @xmath and @xmath are irrelevant, but the vertex @xmath , which
is negative at the boundary @xmath evolves into positive domain and
eventually enters the Kondo temperature. The latter is given by the
following equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see from ( 5.21 ) that both spin and pseudospin exchange constants
contribute on an equal footing. Unlike the isotropic Kondo Hamiltonian
for @xmath discussed in Refs. [ 98 , 99 ] , the non-Fermi-liquid regime
is not realized for @xmath with @xmath ( 5.18 ). The reason of this
difference is that starting with the Anderson Hamiltonian ( 5.1 ) with
finite @xmath , one inevitably arrives at the anisotropic SW exchange
Hamiltonian for any @xmath . As a result, two out of three orbital
channels become irrelevant. However @xmath is enhanced due to inclusion
of orbital degrees of freedom. Moreover, this enhancement is
magnetically tunable. It follows from ( 5.12 ) that the crossover @xmath
occurs three times within the interval @xmath and each level crossing
results in enhancement of @xmath from ( 5.15 ) to ( 5.21 ) and back
(lower panel of Fig. 5.3 ). These field induced effects may be observed
by measuring the two-terminal conductance @xmath through TTQD (the third
contact is assumed to be passive). Calculation by means of Keldysh
technique (at @xmath ) similar to that of Ref. [ 58 ] show sharp maxima
in @xmath as a function of magnetic field, following the maxima of
@xmath (Fig. 5.4 ).

So far we have studied the influence of the magnetic field on the
ground-state symmetry of the TTQD. In a two-lead geometry (Fig. 5.2 b)
the field @xmath affects the lead-dot hopping phases thereby inducing
the AB effect. (The necessary condition for AB effect is that the
electron coherence length in the source should exceed the size of the
electrode ”tip”.) The symmetry of the device is thereby reduced since it
looses two out of three mirror reflection axes. The orbital doublet
@xmath splits into two states, but still, the ground state is @xmath .
In a generic situation, the total magnetic flux is the sum of two
components @xmath . In the chosen gauge, the hopping integrals in Eqs. (
5.2 ), ( 5.5 ) are modified as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the exchange Hamiltonian now reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Applying poor man scaling RG procedure on the Hamiltonian (
5.22 ) yields the scaling equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eqs.( 5.25 ) give the Kondo temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conductance at @xmath reads [ 58 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It was verified that the resulting conductance @xmath ( 5.27 ) obeys the
Byers-Yang theorem (periodicity in each phase) and the Onsager condition
@xmath . We choose to display the conductance along two lines @xmath in
parameter space of phases, namely, @xmath and @xmath (figure 5.5 left
and right panels, respectively).

The Byers-Yang relation implies respective periods of @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath . Experimentally, the magnetic flux is of course applied on
the whole sample as in figure 1b, and the ratio @xmath is determined by
the specific geometry. Strictly speaking then, the conductance is not
periodic in the magnetic field unless @xmath and @xmath are
commensurate.

The shapes of the conductance curves presented here are distinct from
those pertaining to a mesoscopic AB interferometer with a single
correlated QD and a conducting channel [ 103 , 106 , 112 ] (termed as
Fano-Kondo effect [ 103 ] ). For example, @xmath in Fig. 3 of Ref. [ 103
] (calculated in the strong coupling regime) has a broad peak at @xmath
with @xmath . On the other hand, @xmath displayed in Fig. 5.3 (pertinent
to Fig. 5.2 a and obtained in the weak coupling regime), is virtually
flux independent except near the points @xmath ( @xmath integer) at
which the @xmath symmetry is realized and @xmath is sharply peaked. The
phase dependence is governed here by interference effects on the level
spectrum of the TTQD. The three dots share an electron in a coherent
state controlled by the strong correlations, and this coherent TTQD as a
whole is a vital component of the AB interferometer. As a result, in the
setup of Fig. 5.2 b, the conductance vanishes identically on the curve
@xmath . The AB oscillations arise as a result of interference between
the clockwise and anticlockwise ”effective rotations” of TTQD in the
tunneling through the {13} and {23} arms of the loop (Fig. 5.2 b),
provided the dephasing in the leads does not destroy the coherence of
tunneling through the two source channels. (Interplay between two chiral
states results in @xmath Kondo effect in carbon nanotubes in axial
magnetic field [ 113 , 114 ] .) On the other hand, in the calculations
performed on Fano-Kondo interferometers, @xmath remains finite [ 103 ] .
Incidentally, there should be a Fano effect due to the renormalization
of electron spectrum in the leads induced by the lead-dot tunneling
similar to that in chemisorbed atoms [ 115 ] but that is beyond the
scope of this Thesis.

### 5.4 Conclusions

To conclude, we have shown that the Kondo and AB effects in TTQD expose
peculiar symmetries in the physics of strongly correlated electrons.
Dynamical symmetry is a universal tool, which allows to derive the
effective spin Hamiltonians describing low-energy cotunneling with spin
reversal through TTQD. This artificial molecule possesses both the
continuous rotation symmetry in spin space and discrete rotation
symmetry in real space. This discrete symmetry is imposed on the whole
system both in the case of molecular trimer Cr @xmath on the metallic
surface and in the three-terminal device - equilateral TTQD in its
center (Figs. 5.1 , 5.2 a). The tunnel problem is mapped on the
Coqblin-Schrieffer (CS) model of magnetic impurity with ”orbital”
degrees of freedom [ 107 , 108 ] . Like in the latter case, the symmetry
of the Kondo center is @xmath . The parameter @xmath characterizes
additional orbital degeneracy in the conventional CS model. It describes
the pseudospin operator of finite clockwise/anti-clockwise rotations of
TTQD in the process of electron cotunneling.

Abstract concepts like dynamical symmetries are shown to be directly
related to experimentally tunable parameters. The conductance is
sensitive to an external magnetic field both in three- and two-terminal
geometry even in the weak coupling regime at @xmath . In the former
case, the conductance can be enhanced due to change of the dynamical
symmetry caused by field-induced level crossing (Fig. 5.3 ). In the
latter case, the conductance can be completely suppressed due to
destructive AB interference in source-drain cotunneling amplitude (Fig.
5.5 ). These results promise an interesting physics at the strong
coupling regime as well as in cases of doubly and triply occupied TTQD.
It would also be interesting to generalize the present theory for
quadratic QD [ 116 ] , which possesses rich energy spectrum with
multiple accidental degeneracies.

## Appendix A Diagonalization of the Trimer Hamiltonian

Here we describe the diagonalization procedure of the Hamiltonian of the
isolated TQDs occupied by four and three electrons (Fig. 4.2 ). The dot
Hamiltonian has the form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

( a ) Four electron occupation:
The Hamiltonian ( A.1 ) can be diagonalized by using the basis of
four-electron wave functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath . The Coulomb interaction quenches the
states with two electrons in the central dot and we do not take them
into account. The states ( A.2 ) form a basis of two triplet and three
singlet states. In this basis, the Hamiltonian ( A.1 ) is decomposed
into triplet and singlet matrices,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath We are interested in the limit @xmath
( @xmath ). So the secular matrix may be diagonalized in lowest order of
perturbation theory in @xmath . The eigenfunctions corresponding to the
energy levels ( 3.1 ) are,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.5)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

In the completely symmetric case, @xmath @xmath @xmath , the
eigenfunctions corresponding to the energies ( 3.2 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .
( b ) Three electron occupation:
In this case the Hamiltonian ( A.1 ) can be diagonalized by using the
basis of three–electron wave functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The three-electron states @xmath of the TQD are
classified as a ground state doublet @xmath , low-lying doublet @xmath
and quartet @xmath excitations, and four charge-transfer excitonic
doublets @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ). In the framework of second order
perturbation theory with respect to @xmath ( 2.58 ), the energy levels
@xmath are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The eigenfunctions corresponding to the energy levels ( A.8 ) are the
following combinations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.9)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are determined by Eq.( 4.21 ).

## Appendix B Rotations in the Source-Drain and Left-Right Spaces

In the generic case, the transformation which diagonalizes the tunneling
Hamiltonian ( 3.4 ) has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath @xmath In a symmetric case @xmath , this
transformation simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and only the even @xmath combination survives in the tunneling
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

So the odd combination @xmath may be omitted.

If, moreover, the whole system ”TQD plus leads” possesses @xmath
symmetry, @xmath , the second rotation in @xmath -space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

transforms @xmath into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath .

## Appendix C Effective Spin Hamiltonian

The spin Hamiltonian of the TQD with @xmath occupation in series
geometry (Fig. 4.2 ) is derived below. The system is described by the
Hamiltonian ( 4.1 ). The Schrieffer-Wolff transformation [ 55 ] for the
configuration of four electron states of the TQD projects out three
electron states @xmath and maps the Hamiltonian ( 4.1 ) onto an
effective spin Hamiltonian @xmath acting in a subspace of four-electron
configurations @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath stands for the electron or hole states whose energies are
secluded within a layer @xmath around the Fermi level. @xmath and the
notation @xmath is used. The effective Hamiltonian with three–electron
states @xmath frozen out can be obtained by retaining the terms to order
@xmath on the right-hand side of Eq.( C.1 ). It has the following form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The constraint @xmath is valid. Unlike the conventional case of doublet
spin @xmath we have here an octet @xmath , and the SW transformation
intermixes all these states . The effective spin Hamiltonian ( C.3 ) to
order @xmath acquires the form of Eq.( 4.2 ).

## Appendix D @xmath Symmetry

The operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath @xmath (see Eqs.( 3.15 ),( 3.40 ),( 3.41 )) obey the commutation
relations of the @xmath Lie algebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath are Cartesian indices, @xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the structural constants, @xmath , @xmath
( @xmath , @xmath ). Their non-zero components are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The following relations hold,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, the vector operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
scalar operators @xmath @xmath generate the algebra @xmath in a
representation specified by the Casimir operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix E Young Tableaux Corresponding to Various Symmetries

A TQD with ”passive” central dot and ”active” side dots reminds an
artificial atom with inner core and external valence shell. The
many-electron wave functions in this nano-object may be symmetrized in
various ways, so that each spin state of @xmath electrons in the TQD is
characterized by its own symmetrization scheme. One may illustrate these
schemes by means of the conventional graphic presentation of the
permutation symmetry of multi-electron system employing Young tableau [
117 ] . For instance, triplet state of two electrons which is symmetric
with respect to the electron permutation is labelled by a row of two
squares, whereas the singlet one which is antisymmetric with respect to
the permutation is labelled by a column of two squares. Having this in
mind we can represent the singlet and triplet four electron states of
the TQD ( A.5 ) by the four tableaux shown in Fig. E.1 . The tableaux
@xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath ) correspond to the singlet and
triplet states in which the right (left) dot contains two electrons
(grey column in Fig. E.1 ) whereas electrons in the left (right) and
central dots form singlet and triplet, respectively.

The Young tableaux corresponding to various @xmath symmetries discussed
in Chapters 3 and 4 can be obtained by combining the appropriate
tableaux (Fig. E.2 ). The highest possible symmetry @xmath is
represented by four tableaux @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath since
all singlet and triplet states are degenerate in this case. The symmetry
@xmath occurs when two triplets @xmath and @xmath are close in energy
and these are represented by the couple of Young tableaux in the second
line. Following this procedure, the @xmath symmetry can be described in
terms of two triplets @xmath , @xmath diagrams and one singlet @xmath
diagram. Moreover, @xmath symmetry is represented by two singlet @xmath
, @xmath diagrams and one triplet @xmath diagram and, finally, one
triplet and one singlet tableaux correspond to the @xmath symmetry.