# Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Cosmology and gravitational waves

It can be safely said that the advent of general relativity signaled the
commencement of modern cosmology. The latter aims at a global
description of the observable universe (i.e., the Universe). Based on
observations at very large scales and some or other theory of
gravitation cosmologists try to propose simple and plausible world
models (i.e., models whose mathematical complexity is kept at a
reasonable minimum and do not run into conflict with observational
data). At present there are four main sources of observational data: the
light from the faraway galaxies, whose redshifts seem to indicate that
the Universe is expanding in an accelerated fashion; the abundance of
light elements at cosmic scales and clusters thereof; the mass
distribution of galaxies and clusters; and the anisotropies of the
cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB). These are usually
interpreted in favor of the @xmath CDM model, a flat
Friedman-Robertson-Walker universe that began expanding from an initial
phase of very high density and temperature (Big Bang), and today @xmath
of its energy would be in the form of a cosmological constant, @xmath ,
and the rest in the form of cold (non-relativistic) matter.

The future detection of gravitational waves (GWs henceforth) is expected
to provide us with invaluable information about the instant of their
decoupling from other fields, i.e., about @xmath seconds after the Big
Bang. Likewise, GWs are a direct prediction of the Einstein’s field
equations whence it would entail a very strong evidence in favor of
general relativity. Regrettably, the weak interaction of the
gravitational field with matter -that renders GWs so valuable from a
cosmological viewpoint- hinders their detection.

GWs can be found originated at single sources or in a background similar
to the CMB. Of the first kind are, for instance, the GWs from supernovae
burst and the periodic signals from spherically asymmetric neutron stars
or quark stars; of the second kind are those GWs originated at the decay
of cosmic strings and the relic GWs.

This thesis is mainly concerned with relic GWs ¹ ¹ 1 From chapter 2 on,
we refer to relic GWs just as GWs for the sake of simplicity. , i.e.,
the GWs generated by parametric amplification of the quantum vacuum
during the expansion of the Universe which form a background whose
spectrum depends on the scale factor. The CMB is a remnant of the
radiation that once dominated the expansion of the Universe and brings
us information of the decoupling between radiation and non-relativistic
matter (i.e., dust). In the same way the spectrum of the relic GWs can
provide us with prime information about the evolution of the scale
factor, i.e., about the history of the Universe.

Even in the absence of any observed spectrum, some valuable information
can be extracted from the existing bounds over it [ 1 ] . The presence
of the relic GWs at the instant of the radiation–dust decoupling
produces temperature fluctuations via the Sachs-Wolfe effect and,
consequently, temperature anisotropies in the CMB. As these
anisotriopies have been measured, a bound over the spectrum of relic GWs
present at this instant follows. GWs passing by us transversely to our
line of sight to a pulsar of well measured period will cause the arrival
times of the pulses to shift. Many years of observation of the pulses
arriving from a number of stable millisecond pulsars lead to another
bound over the spectrum of the relic GWs. The theory of primordial
nucleosyntesis predicts rather successfully the cosmic abundance of
light elements. If at nucleosyntesis time, the contribution of relic GWs
to the total energy were too large, the neutrons would have been more
avaliable resulting in an overproduction of helium. These restrictions
over the GWs spectrum translates into constraints on the free parameters
of the universe models (see top panel of Fig. 1.1 ).

We assume throughout that GWs are negligibly damped by the cosmic
medium; this is in keeping with common lore and well supported by
different studies [ 2 ] .

### 1.2 Gravitational waves detection

Because of insufficient technological means no direct detection of GWs
has been possible so far. Nevertheless, some indirect evidences of their
existence have been found. Binary systems (i.e., two stars orbiting
their common center of mass) have an energy loss due to the emission of
gravitational radiation that can be modelled by means of the general
relativity. The observational data of the variation of the rotational
period of the binary pulsar @xmath confirmed the predictions of the
theory [ 3 , 4 ] . Recently, a similar but more precise indirect proof
of the existence of GWs has been obtained from the data of the variation
of the orbital period of the double pulsar @xmath [ 5 ] .

The gravitational waves detection is a very topical subject and great
effort is under way in that direction. There are two common types of
detectors: resonant mass detectors and laser interferometers [ 6 ] .

The first kind of detectors operates as the GWs produces a stress over a
resonant bar (stretching or compressing it) and the vibrational
amplitude or phase of the antenna experiments changes that can be
measured. By making the antenna’s quadrupole modes resonant at the
wave’s frequency, the detector keeps a “memory” of the excitation,
allowing extra time to detect the signal. The sensitivity of this kind
of antenna can be improved by increasing its mass (thus, increasing the
force the GWs exert on it), by making it equally sensitive in all
directions and polarizations and by lowering the thermal motion of
molecules in the detector (thermal noise). Today there are seven
cryogenic resonant-bar detectors in operation and three proposed
resonant spheres. Analyzing the experimental results of the resonant
bars EXPLORER and NAUTILUS, Astone et al. showed that the number of
coincident detections is greatest when both of them are pointing into
the center of our galaxy [ 7 ] . This conclusion, if not a direct
detection of the GWs, can be considered a further indirect evidence of
their existence.

The laser interferometer detectors use test masses which are widely
separated and freely suspended (as pendulums reduce the effects of
thermal noise); laser interferometry provides a means of sensing the
motion of these masses produced as they interact with a gravitational
wave. This technique is based on the Michelson interferometer and is
particularly suited to the detection of gravitational waves as they have
a quadrupole nature. Waves propagating perpendicular to the plane of the
interferometer will result in one arm of the interferometer being
increased in length while the other arm is decreased and vice versa. The
induced change in the length of the interferometer arms results in a
small change in the intensity of the light observed at the
interferometer output [ 6 ] . Nowadays there are four laser
interferometers taking data at their level of sensitivity: TAMA300 [ 8 ]
, GEO600 [ 9 ] , VIRGO [ 10 ] and LIGO [ 11 ] (whose arms have a length
of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath meters, respectively).

Ground based detectors have a minimum frequency of detection bounded by
seismic noise and atmospheric effects. Ground-based interferometers are
also obviously limited in length to a few kilometers, restricting their
coverage to events such as supernova core collapses and binary neutron
star mergers. As a partial solution to these limitations, LISA - Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna aimed at a launch in 2014 [ 12 ] - has been
proposed by an American/European team; it consists of an array of three
drag free spacecraft at the vertices of an equilateral triangle of
length of side @xmath km. Proof masses inside the spacecraft (two in
each spacecraft) form the end points of three separate but not
independent interferometers. Each single two-arm Michelson type
interferometer is formed from a vertex (actually consisting of the proof
masses in a ‘central’ spacecraft), and the masses in two remote
spacecraft. In the low-frequency band of LISA, sources are well known
and signals are stable over long periods (many months to thousands of
years). The primary sources for LISA are expected to be compact galactic
binaries, supermassive black holes binaries, and extreme mass ratio
inspirals. Other space based laser interferometers with a better
sensitivity than LISA are being proposed: the Advanced Laser
Interferometer Antenna (ALIA) and the Big Bang Observer (BBO) [ 13 ] .

It is quite common, when tackling the subject of the GWs detection, to
define the dimensionless parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the frequency of the wave, @xmath is the energy
density of the GWs and @xmath . This parameter gives a measure of the
intensity of the GWs signal and can be compared with the sensitivity of
the GWs detectors (see bottom panel of Fig. 1.1 ).

### 1.3 Outline of the thesis

In chapter 2 , we review the mechanism of amplification of the relic GWs
and their power spectrum. In chapter 3 , we obtain the relic GWs
spectrum in a universe scenario consisting in a De Sitter stage of
expansion followed by a radiation dominated stage and a dust dominated
stage (three-stage model). Later, we obtain the spectrum in a four-stage
model in which and additional era (dominated by a mixture of radiation
and mini black holes) between the De Sitter and the radiation one. We
compare both models and found bounds on the free parameters of the
four-stage scenario. In chapter 4 , the spectrum of GWs is obtained in a
scenario with an accelerated era of expansion dominated by dark energy
right after the De Sitter-radiation-dust dominated eras. Although the
spectrum is formally equal to those of the three–stage model of chapter
3 , it evolves differently. The possibility of the existence of a second
dust era if the accelerated era comes to an end in some future time is
also considered. In chapter 5 , working in the De
Sitter-radiation-dust-dark energy scenario and assuming the GWs entropy
is proportional to the number of GWs within the event horizon (being
@xmath the proportionality constant), we test the cosmological
generalized second law of thermodynamics. An upper bound to the constant
@xmath is found. In chapter 6 , we leave the consideration of GWs to
extend the study of the generalized second law of thermodynamics of the
previous chapter to a universe dominated by dark energy. It turns out
that the generalized second law is fulfilled in both phantom and
non–phantom dark energy models provided the dark energy fluids have an
entropy given by Gibbs’ equation. Finally, the Summary discusses and sum
up the main results of this work. Except where otherwise stated, we use
the units such that @xmath .

Before proceeding into the main body of the thesis it is sobering and
expedient to recall the viewpoint of Willem de Sitter regarding
cosmology research [ 15 ] :

  “It should not be forgotten that all this talk about the Universe
  involves a tremendous extrapolation, which is a very dangerous
  operation”.

## Chapter 2 The amplification mechanism of gravitational waves

### 2.1 The wave equation

The existence of wave-like solutions of the linearized vacuum field
equations, i.e., GWs, was first predicted by Einstein in 1916 when he
realized of the propagation effects inherent in the gravitational field
equations [ 16 ] . The GWs equation to linear order was obtained by
Lifshitz who considered perturbations that not interfered with their own
propagation (as they carry little energy and momentum) [ 17 ] . He
proceeded by introducing a small perturbation in the background FRW
metric, @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and by evaluating the Einstein equations for the
perturbation to linear order in @xmath in a general coordinates system
for which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Three kinds of solutions to the equations for the perturbation follow:
scalar solutions, which represent density perturbations; vectorial
solutions, which represent rotational perturbations; and tensorial
solutions, which represent sourceless weak GWs.

We focus our attention on the latter kind by considering a flat FRW
universe with background metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath , the cosmic and conformal time, respectively,
are related through the scale factor by @xmath .

Additionally to the conditions set by equation ( 2.1 ), we impose the
gauge conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the semi-colon denotes covariant derivative with respect to the
background metric ( 2.2 ). From them, it is possible to show that the
perturbation has two independent components only (i.e., the wave has
just two polarizations) and that the wave equation simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the upper dot and the commas indicate partial derivatives respect
to time and spatial coordinates, respectively.

Introducing the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a combination of plane-waves solutions @xmath that
contain the two polarizations of the wave mentioned above and fulfill

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

into equation ( 2.4 ) leads to the evolution equation for the temporal
part of the wave

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Or, in terms of the conformal time

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the prime indicates derivative with respect to @xmath .

In the equations of above we have used the comoving wave-number @xmath ,
which is related with the wave-length and the frequency of the wave by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 2.8 ) can be suitably simplified by using the ansatz @xmath .
This yields the so called Lifshitz’s equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

It parallels the time independent Schrödinger equation where the terms
@xmath and @xmath play the role of the energy and the potential,
respectively. It can be also interpreted as the equation of an harmonic
oscillator parametrically excited by the term @xmath . When @xmath ,
i.e., for high frequency waves, expression ( 2.10 ) becomes the equation
of an harmonic oscillator whose solution is a free wave, and
consequently the amplitude of @xmath decreases adiabatically as @xmath
in an expanding universe. In the opposite regime, @xmath , the general
solution to ( 2.10 ) is a linear combination of the pair of solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the universe is expanding, @xmath will grow faster than @xmath and
will soon dominate. In this case, the amplitude of @xmath will remain
constant as long as @xmath . If at some future time this condition is no
longer satisfied, the wave will have an amplitude larger than it would
in accordance with the adiabatic behavior. This phenomenon is called
“superadiabatic” or “parametric” amplification of gravitational waves [
18 ] .

GWs that fulfill the condition @xmath ( @xmath ) are considered to be
well inside (outside) of the Hubble radius [ 19 ] , i.e., their wave
lengths are shorter (longer) than @xmath , where @xmath is the Hubble
function, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be traced to the fact that the ratio between @xmath and the
term @xmath is always constant for a perfect fluid with an equation of
state of barotropic type, @xmath , and tends to zero as soon as @xmath .

### 2.2 Gravitational waves creation

In the previous subsection we have seen how the GWs may undergo
“parametric” amplification. This approach is based on the idea that the
amplitude of each GW is enlarged during the expansion of the universe.
Usually the initial amplitude is assumed to be the vacuum one, @xmath [
20 ] . The rationale behind this is the following. One assimilates the
quantum zero-point fluctuations of vacuum with classical waves of
certain amplitudes and arbitrary phases; consequently it is permissible
to equalize @xmath with the energy density of the gravitational waves,
@xmath times @xmath . Thereby the initial vacuum amplitude of GWs is
given by @xmath [ 18 ] .

A different approach can be developed by realizing that Lifshitz’s
equation ( 2.10 ) is not invariant under conformal transformations of
the metric [ 21 , 22 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a real, continuous, finite and non vanishing function,
except when @xmath . With this in mind, the “parametric” amplification
may be interpreted as spontaneous GWs creation due to the action of the
expansion of the Universe over the initial vacuum.

#### 2.2.1 A simple example: the quantum pendulum

The ideal pendulum, a weight hanging from a string of length @xmath ,
pedagogically illustrates the phenomena of particle creation from the
initial vacuum. The pendulum oscillates around its equilibrium position
with frequency @xmath . If the string is wound around a reel, the length
of the string can vary as well as the oscillation frequency.

Being the pendulum initially at the minimum energy configuration, we
increase the length of the string by lowering the bob, in a time
interval @xmath , from an initial value @xmath to a final value @xmath .
Classically, the pendulum (initially at rest) will be also at rest in
the final state and the change of potential energy will equal the
friction work.

From a quantum mechanic point of view, the initial minimum energy
configuration of the system corresponds to the state with energy @xmath
and number of quanta @xmath . If the time spent in lowering the bob is
much longer than the initial and final periods of oscillation, i.e.,
@xmath (the adiabatic case), the bob undergoes more than one complete
oscillation during the process. In this case the final energy is @xmath
and the number of quanta in the final state is @xmath . The potential
energy obtained is partly dissipated by the reel, as in the classical
approach, but also by the change of the energy from the initial to the
final state.

By contrast, if the time spent in lowering the bob is much shorter than
the initial and final periods of oscillation, i.e., @xmath , things fare
differently. The final energy of the oscillator will be half the energy
of the initial state @xmath and the final vacuum energy will be @xmath
(see Ref [ 1 ] for details). Consequently, the final number of quanta
@xmath will differ from zero. Note that these quanta are created because
of the sudden change in the vacuum state.

In the case of the GWs, we must replace the pendulum equation for
equation ( 2.10 ). The role of the variable length @xmath is now played
by the term @xmath . If @xmath varies slowly compared with the wave
number @xmath , the initial vacuum state will evolve into the final
vacuum state and no GW will be generated. But if @xmath evolves fast
enough, the final state will not be the vacuum one and GWs will be
spontaneously generated.

#### 2.2.2 Bogoliubov coefficients

In Minkowski spacetime, a scalar field @xmath of mass @xmath obeys the
Klein-Gordon equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the metric. The field @xmath can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of the family of modes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are positive-frequency defined with respect to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This set of modes forms a privileged family: it defines creation and
annihilation operators @xmath and @xmath , respectively, representing
real particles for all inertial observers, as the quantum vacuum defined
by the modes is invariant under Poincaré transformations.

In curved spacetime, the equation obeyed by the scalar field reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dimensionless parameter and @xmath is the Ricci
scalar. The term @xmath accounts for the coupling between the scalar and
the gravitational field.

When @xmath and @xmath , equation ( 2.18 ) is conformally invariant. In
this case if the spacetime considered can be transformed conformally in
the Minkowski one, it is possible to define a new field that obeys
equation ( 2.14 ) and privileged modes can be chosen in order to define
a vacuum state. However, generally, there is no privileged family of
modes as the Poincaré group is no longer a symmetry.

In general, given a complete collection of modes @xmath the field can be
expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the annihilation and creation
operators associated to the quantum vacuum state of the family, @xmath .
The field can also be expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of a different complete collection of modes, @xmath , with a
different vacuum state, @xmath .

The Bogoliubov transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the coefficients of Bogoliubov, relates both
families of modes. From equations ( 2.19 )-( 2.21 ), it is readily seen
that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As the creation/annihilation operators satisfy the commutation relation
@xmath , the Bogoliubov coefficients must fulfill

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator number of particles of the first family, @xmath , acts upon
the quantum vacuum state of the second family according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the quantum vacuum state of the second family contains @xmath
particles of the first family. An entirely similar relation holds for
the first family vacuum state and the second family number of particles
operator.

The GWs equation ( 2.8 ) formally coincides with the equation of a
massless decoupled field in a spatially flat FRW spacetime. Its
solutions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The modes @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath contains both polarizations of the wave, and the functions
@xmath are solutions to ( 2.10 ). As the family of modes that quantify
the field is complete, the modes @xmath must be orthogonal, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, therefore, @xmath obeys the further condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the spatially flat FRW universe contains a perfect fluid with
equation of state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath constant, the Einstein equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be solved to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the initial values
of the scale factor, the Hubble function and the conformal time and
@xmath . For simplicity, we define @xmath and Lifshitz’s equation
reduces to the Bessel equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions can be written in terms of Hankel functions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are integration constants.

Henceforward, we shall work in the Heisenberg picture, the quantum
states are functions of time meanwhile the operators are time
independent. Initially the universe will be in some state from which the
number of GWs operator will be defined. As the scale factor evolves, the
quantum state evolves too and the constant operator acts upon this state
which is no longer the initial one.

In this scenario, it seems problematic to choose the appropriate vacuum
state or to define real particles. A possible solution to this problem
rests on the concept of adiabatic vacuum.

#### 2.2.3 The adiabatic vacuum approximation

This approximation rests on the idea that the creation of particles by a
slow change in the initial state is minimal [ 22 ] .

Solutions to the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath are expressed as a linear combination of basis functions
which can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are functions of @xmath and its derivatives up to the
derivative of order @xmath , which is bounded as @xmath [ 23 ] . If we
introduce the adiabatic parameter @xmath by replacing @xmath for @xmath
(at the end we can let @xmath ), the adiabatic behavior (slow expansion
limit) of equation ( 2.36 ) can be examined when @xmath , and, in this
limit, the above expression can be considered a power-series expansion
in @xmath to order @xmath .

Equations ( 2.10 ) and ( 2.36 ) share the same form. Thus, we can define
the adiabatic vacuum of order @xmath by taking @xmath in equation ( 2.27
) as an exact solution to ( 2.10 ) whose WKB approximation is precisely
@xmath in ( 2.37 ). To this order, the operators @xmath in ( 2.26 )
correspond exactly to physical particles when @xmath or when @xmath .

Note that in this limit, the modes @xmath tend to the positive-frequency
Minkowski modes. Hence, the constants in equation ( 2.35 ) turn out to
be @xmath and @xmath , thereby

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2.4 The creation mechanism

Let us assume that the spatially flat FRW universe considered above goes
through a succession of stages, and that, in a generic stage @xmath ,
the Universe is dominated by a perfect fluid of barotropic index @xmath
. The transitions between the different stages can be considered
instantaneous or, more accurately, much shorter than the duration of
each stage.

The scale factor, in this scenario, is given by equation ( 2.33 ) with a
different @xmath in each era and the subindex @xmath denoting the
beginning of the @xmath -stage (i.e., the end of the ( @xmath )-stage).
Note that the scale factor must be continuous at each transition @xmath
as no discontinuities must be present in the FRW metric. In each stage
the solution to Lifshitz’s equation ( 2.10 ) is ( 2.39 ) with @xmath
replaced by @xmath .

The modes of two consecutive stages (namely the ( @xmath )-stage and the
@xmath -stage) are related by a Bogoliubov transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the functions @xmath and @xmath must be also continuous at @xmath
(further details about the continuity of @xmath and the validity of the
sudden transition approximation are given in the Appendix), it is
possible to obtain the expression of the Bogoliubov coefficients in
terms of known quantities [ 24 , 25 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The adiabatic approximation sets a bound over the GWs that can be
created in this transition. The limit of slow expansion, @xmath , can be
relaxed by assuming that there is no creation of waves for @xmath . This
bound can be fixed as the frequency associated to the characteristic
time in which takes place the transition. Modes whose period at the
instant @xmath are shorter than this transition time experiment an
adiabatic expansion thereby they still represent the quantum vacuum
state, i.e., for them, @xmath and @xmath . Meanwhile modes whose period
at the transition @xmath is larger than this characteristic time do not
represent the quantum vacuum state any longer, and @xmath . This
characteristic time is usually chosen as the inverse of the Hubble
parameter at the transition, @xmath . Then, the adiabatic bound for the
frequencies at @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have taken into account the redshift.

Assuming that each created GW has an energy @xmath (the factor @xmath
comes from the two polarization states), it is possible to express the
energy density of GWs created at the transition @xmath with frequencies
in the range @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the power spectrum. As the energy density is a
locally defined quantity, @xmath loses its meaning for metric
perturbations whose wave length @xmath exceed the Hubble radius @xmath .
Integrating over the frequency, we get the total energy density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The adiabatic cutoff amounts to a renormalization of the quantum field
theory. This upper bound ensures that the energy density does not
diverge at high frequencies. The adiabatic bound plays the same role
that the extraction of the energy of the vacuum in the quantum field
theories in Minkowski spacetime.

To relate the @xmath functions of two non-consecutive stages, we must
make use of the total Bogoliubov coefficients which can be found
recursively from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subindex @xmath denotes the previous transition to the @xmath
-th one [ 24 ] .

Equations ( 2.46 ) and ( 2.47 ) readily follow from the Bogoliubov
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the modes of the @xmath stage, @xmath , are related with @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.49)
  -- -- -- --------

(note there is @xmath transitions between both eras). After simplifying
we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will employ Eqs. ( 2.46 ) and ( 2.47 ) in the following chapters.

## Chapter 3 Quantum mini black holes and the gravitational waves
spectrum

In this chapter we consider in detail the power spectrum of relic GWs
assuming the Universe went through an expansion era dominated by
radiation and mini black holes (MBHs) intermediate between the
conventional inflationary (De Sitter) era and the radiation dominated
era [ 26 ] . The existence of that era is justified in subsection 3.2 .
In subsection 3.1 we recall the derivation of the power spectrum of the
conventional three-stage scenario.

### 3.1 Three-stage spatially flat FRW scenario

Here we apply the fundamental equations found in the previous chapter to
a spatially flat FRW scenario consisting in an initial De Sitter stage,
followed by a radiation dominated era and a dust era that includes the
present time. The power spectrum predicted for this scenario is well
known in the literature, see Refs. [ 24 ] and [ 27 ] - [ 29 ] . The
scale factor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The initial state is the vacuum associated with the modes of the
inflationary stage @xmath , which are a solution to Lifshitz’s equation
( 2.10 ) compatible with the condition ( 2.29 ). Taking into account
that @xmath in this era (De Sitter), the modes read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is an arbitrary constant phase and @xmath is the
Hankel function of order @xmath . The proper modes of the radiation era
( @xmath ) are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is again a constant phase.

The “parametric” amplification in this first transition was first
developed by Grishchuk [ 21 ] and Starobinsky [ 29 ] . Following the
quantum approach, the two families of modes are related by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

From equations ( 2.41 ) and ( 2.42 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have neglected an irrelevant phase. Considering the adiabatic
quantum approximation, the modes whose frequency at the transition are
larger than the characteristic time scale ( @xmath ) get exponentially
suppressed. Thus, the coefficients are @xmath and @xmath for GWs with
@xmath and ( 3.5 ) when @xmath .

In the dust era ( @xmath and @xmath ) the solution for the modes is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and it is related to the radiation ones by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for @xmath where @xmath is the Hubble
function evaluated at the radiation-matter transition @xmath .

In order to relate the modes of the inflationary era to the modes of the
dust era, we make use of the total Bogoliubov coefficients @xmath and
@xmath , given by equations ( 2.46 ) and ( 2.47 ). For @xmath , we find
that @xmath and @xmath ; in the range @xmath , the coefficients are
@xmath and @xmath , and finally for @xmath we obtain that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus the number of GWs at the present time, @xmath , created from the
initial vacuum state is @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and zero
for @xmath , where we have used the present value of the frequency,
@xmath .

The present power spectrum of GWs predicted by this model is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spectrum ( 3.10 ) is shown in figure 3.1 tagged as @xmath for
different choices of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Below we compare the predictions of the three-stage model of above, for
the frequency ranges and powers, with the four-stage model that includes
the “MBHs+rad” era.

### 3.2 GWs in a FRW universe with an era of mini black holes and
radiation

#### 3.2.1 Mini black holes in the very early Universe

As is well known, MBHs can be created by quantum tunnelling from the hot
radiation with a rate of nucleation given by [ 30 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the temperature of the radiation, @xmath is a parameter
close to the Planck mass, and @xmath is a numerical factor which depends
on the number of spin fields accessible to the system (i.e., @xmath for
the standard model, @xmath for the supersymmetric standard model, @xmath
for the supersymmetric SU(5) and @xmath for the SU(5)).

Thus, the number of MBHs per unit comoving volume at time @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the time of formation of a MBH which would have just
evaporated at time @xmath . And the density of MBHs is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass a MBH would have by time @xmath if formed at
time @xmath .

The MBHs nucleated by quantum tunnelling will be strongly peaked around
an initial mass given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the instant of the MBH formation and @xmath is the
temperature of the radiation. Assuming that during the formation of the
MBHs the expansion of the Universe is dominated by the hot radiation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath is the number of relativistic particles species, and using
the Friedman equations, one has that @xmath . Consequently, the initial
mass of MBHs will increase as @xmath . The evolution of the mass of the
MBH from this point onward will depend on its interactions with the
surrounding radiation and with the other MBHs [ 31 ] .

If the total number of MBHs in a comoving volume is constant, the
relative velocity between two neighbor MBHs due to the expansion is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the MBHs number density. The velocity required for a MBH
to escape the gravitational attraction of its neighbor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass of typical MBH. Given that during this period
@xmath , it is straightforward to conclude that @xmath . Therefore, the
collisions between neighbor MBHs are not frequent enough to
significantly affect the mass spectrum of MBHs.

Even though the MBHs form at the same temperature as their surroundings,
one might imagine that cooling of the radiation due to Hubble expansion
would cause the MBH to begin to evaporate freely immediately after
formation. Therefore, their mass would evolve according to [ 32 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of particle species for the black hole to
evaporate into.

But the MBH evaporation can be delayed if it begins absorbing radiation
after its formation so that its mass increases. Comparing the average
time of interaction between the MBHs and the surrounding radiation,
@xmath , with the characteristic time of expansion of the Universe (the
inverse of the Hubble factor, @xmath ), it is straightforward to
demonstrate that, although these interactions are not frequent enough to
consider an evolution different from ( 3.18 ) for all the particle
models of interest, the energy density of the MBHs can become comparable
or even exceed that of the radiation for sufficiently high temperatures
[ 31 ] .

Further, it is also natural to assume that the MBHs are surrounded by an
atmosphere of particles in quasi thermal equilibrium with them [ 33 ] .
The MBH emits quanta in a perfectly thermal manner and these quanta
might create a thermal atmosphere surrounding tightly the MBH. The vast
majority of the quanta emitted are prevented from escape the MBH
gravitational potential whether because they have a large angular
momentum or because, having an adequately small angular momentum, they
tend to have such large wave lengths that when trying to escape they
scatter of the MBH spacetime curvature and are driven back towards the
horizon. Thus the absorption and emission of particles from the
atmosphere to the MBH and vice versa prevents the MBH to evaporate
freely. Therefore, we have that @xmath .

Even assuming the MBHs begin to evaporate freely since they are created,
except in the SU(5) model, @xmath will be comparable to the radiation
density in a time span of two to one hundred times the Planck time from
the instant the nucleation starts [ 31 , 34 ] . It is reasonable to
expect that, at this point, a steady state would be achieved where the
total energy density is shared between the black holes and the radiation
whence @xmath and, consequently, the total pressure is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant @xmath lies in the interval @xmath . If the density
of MBHs is large enough to dominate the expansion of the Universe, then
@xmath . In the opposite case, the Universe expansion is dominated by
the radiation, @xmath . From the Einstein equations and ( 3.19 ) one
finds that @xmath during the “MBHs+rad” era. The MBHs eventually
evaporate in relativistic particles after some time span which can be
fairly large if MBHs have a thermal atmosphere.

Interestingly, the evaporation of MBHs when the age of the Universe was
about @xmath Planck times may explain why the cosmic baryon-number to
photon ratio is of the order of @xmath . Lindley argued that that small
figure can be obtained if the Universe’s expansion was dominated by
black holes of a few hundred Planck mass at the mentioned epoch [ 35 ] .
This looks feasible in the scenario contemplated here.

#### 3.2.2 Power spectrum of the four-stage scenario

In this subsection we obtain the power spectrum of the GWs assuming the
following eras in succession: an initial De Sitter era, an era dominated
by MBHs and radiation, the conventional radiation-dominated era and the
dust era.

The scale factor of this four-stage scenario is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . As in the previous
section, the sudden transition approximation is assumed.

The shape of @xmath can be found by solving Lifshitz’s equation ( 2.10 )
in each era. For the De Sitter era, @xmath is given by ( 3.2 ) as above.
For the “MBHs +rad ” era the solution of ( 2.10 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and it is related to the modes of inflation by the
Bogoliubov transformation ( 3.4 ) with @xmath replaced by @xmath . By
evaluating the Bogoliubov coefficients from ( 2.41 ) and ( 2.42 ), we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the small argument limit (i.e., @xmath ) the Hankel functions can be
approximated by [ 36 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the coefficients dominant term is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath and @xmath @xmath when @xmath .

The solution for the radiation era is again ( 3.3 ) with @xmath . The
coefficients that relate ( 3.3 ) with @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath and @xmath @xmath when @xmath

The modes of the dust era are given by ( 3.6 ), with @xmath , and they
are related to the modes of the radiation era by the coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath and @xmath @xmath when @xmath

The total coefficients relating the initial vacuum state with the modes
of the radiation state can be evaluated from ( 2.46 ) and ( 2.47 ). In
this case, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, consequently, the total coefficients dominant term is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have made use of ( 3.24 ) in order to approximate the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath .

Finally, the total coefficients relating the inflationary modes with the
modes of the dust era evaluated from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

are found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are now in position to calculate the current spectrum of GWs. Taking
into account that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , the GWs power spectrum can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing the power of @xmath in ( 3.10 ) and ( 3.34 ) for @xmath , we
conclude that the four-stage scenario leads to a higher number of GWs
created at low frequencies than the three-stage scenario. This fact can
be explained intuitively with the classical amplification approach. In
the three-stage scenario the GWs are parametrically amplified as long as
@xmath . For @xmath , @xmath vanishes and there is no further
amplification. On the other hand, in the four-stage scenario the GWs
with @xmath are amplified until the instant @xmath by identical term
@xmath than in the three-stage scenario and from @xmath to @xmath by the
term @xmath . Consequently they have a larger amplitude in the radiation
era.

Figure 3.1 shows the spectrum ( 3.34 ) for @xmath and @xmath . As is
apparent the four-stage scenario gives rise to a much lower power
spectrum than the three-stage scenario assuming that in each case the
spectrum has the maximum value allowed by the CMB bound. The higher the
MBHs contribution to the energy density, the lower the final power
spectrum.

Thus, if LISA fails to detect a spectrum at the level expected by the
three-stage model, rather than signaling that the recycle model of
Khoury et al. [ 37 ] ¹ ¹ 1 Khoury et al. have proposed an alternative
brane-world cosmological scenario which addresses the cosmological
horizon, flatness and monopole problems an generates a nearly
scale-invariant spectrum of density perturbations without invoking an
inflationary period. In that model, the spectrum of GWs is strongly blue
in comparison with these of the standard big-bang inflationary model.
should supersede the standard big-bang inflationary model it may
indicate a “MBHs+radiation” era between inflation and radiation
dominance truly took place. Likewise, once the spectrum is successfully
measured we will be able to learn from it the proportion of MBHs and
radiation in the mixture phase.

In this four-stage cosmological scenario, the Hubble function @xmath
decreases monotonically, while the energy density of the GWs for @xmath
can be approximated by @xmath thereby it increases with expansion [ 24 ]
. Obviously this scenario will break down before @xmath becomes
comparable to the energy density of matter and/or radiation since from
that moment on the linear approximation on which our approach is based
ceases to be valid. In the two next subsections constraints on the
parameters of the model are imposed so that this does not happen.

#### 3.2.3 Free parameters of the four-stage scenario

At this stage it is expedient to evaluate the parameters occurring in (
3.34 ). The redshift @xmath , relating the present value of the scale
factor with the scale factor at the transition radiation-dust, may be
taken as @xmath [ 38 ] . The Hubble factor @xmath is connected to the
energy density at the inflationary era by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have restored momentarily the fundamental constants. In any
reasonable model the energy density at that time must be larger than the
nuclear density ( @xmath ) and lower than the Planck density ( @xmath )
[ 28 ] , therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the expression for the scale factor at the “MBHs+rad” era in terms
of the proper time, one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the time span of the “MBHs+rad” era which depends on the
evaporation history of the MBHs.

However, the “MBHs+rad” era span @xmath should be longer than the
duration of the transition at @xmath (as the transition is assumed
instantaneous) in calculating the spectrum of GWs. To evaluate the
adiabatic vacuum cutoff for the frequency we have considered that the
transition between whatever two successive stages has a duration of the
same order as the inverse of the Hubble factor. This places the
additional constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, @xmath can be evaluated from the evolution of the Hubble factor
until the present time

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The current value of the Hubble factor is estimated to be @xmath [ 39 ]
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only free parameters considered here are @xmath @xmath and @xmath ,
with the restrictions @xmath , ( 3.36 ) and ( 3.38 ). The two first free
parameters depend on the assumption made on the MBHs, although it is
possible to obtain rigorous constraints on @xmath and @xmath from the
density of the GWs.

#### 3.2.4 Restrictions on the “MBHs+rad” era from the cosmic microwave
background

It is obvious that @xmath cannot be arbitrarily large, in fact the GWs
are seen as linear perturbations of the metric. The linear approximation
holds only for @xmath , @xmath being the total energy density of the
Universe. Several observational data place constraints on @xmath . The
regularity of the pulses of stable millisecond pulsars sets a constraint
at frequencies of order @xmath [ 40 ] . Likewise, there is a certain
maximum value for @xmath compatible with the primordial nucleosynthesis
scenario. But the most severe constraints come from the high isotropy
degree of the CMB. We will focus on the latter constraint. The observed
thermal fluctuations are usually analyzed by decomposing them into
spherical harmonics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are expansion coefficients and @xmath and @xmath are
spherical polar angles on the sky. Defining the power spectrum by @xmath
, it is conventional to plot @xmath versus @xmath . Figure 3.2 shows the
first published results of the WMAP experiment regarding the CMB
temperature anisotropies as well as the @xmath CDM model (solid line)
that fits the data rather well.

Metric perturbations with frequencies between @xmath and @xmath @xmath
at the last scattering surface can produce thermal fluctuations in the
CMB due to the Sachs-Wolfe effect [ 42 ] . These fluctuations cannot
exceed the observed value of @xmath [ 43 ] .

A detailed analysis of the CMB bound yields [ 1 , 44 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . The CMB bound for the
spectrum ( 3.34 ) evaluated at @xmath Hertz reads ² ² 2 It is necessary
to multiply ( 3.34 ) for @xmath in order to obtain the right units.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and consequently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We next consider different values for @xmath and @xmath .

(i) When @xmath , the relation ( 3.44 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

see Fig. 3.3 . From it we observe that:

1.  For @xmath , the condition ( 3.45 ) is satisfied if @xmath and
    conflicts with ( 3.38 ), which in the most favorable case is @xmath
    for @xmath . For @xmath , there is no compatibility with the
    observed CMB anisotropy when @xmath . Thus, this range of @xmath is
    ruled out.

2.  For @xmath , one obtains @xmath from the condition ( 3.45 ). @xmath
    is always larger than @xmath in the range considered, e.g. @xmath .
    Taking into account ( 3.38 ) one obtains that the condition ( 3.45 )
    is satisfied for @xmath .

(ii) When @xmath (the extreme case in which the expansion is entirely
dominated by the MBHs) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

see figure 3.3 . Inspection of ( 3.46 ) and Fig. 3.3 reveals that:

1.  For @xmath , one obtains @xmath which is totally incompatible with
    condition ( 3.38 ), @xmath for @xmath in the most favorable case.
    Thus, the region @xmath is ruled out as predicts an excess of
    anisotropy in the CMB.

2.  For @xmath , one obtains @xmath from the condition ( 3.46 ). @xmath
    is always larger than @xmath for @xmath in the range considered,
    e.g. @xmath . Conditions ( 3.38 ) and ( 3.46 ) are both satisfied in
    this range for @xmath .

We may conclude by saying that the condition ( 3.44 ) leads to different
allowed ranges for @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath considered,
although their interpretation is rather similar. For @xmath @xmath the
condition of minimum duration of the  “MBHs+rad” era ( 3.38 ) and the
upper bound given by the CMB anisotropy are incompatible. However, for
@xmath @xmath these two conditions are compatible for @xmath .

### 3.3 Conclusions

We have calculated the power spectrum of GWs in a universe that begins
with an inflationary phase, followed by a phase dominated by a mixture
of MBHs and radiation, then a radiation dominated phase (after the MBHs
evaporated), and finally a dust dominated phase. The spectrum depends
just on three free parameters, namely @xmath the Hubble factor at the
transition inflation- “MBHs+rad” era, @xmath , the cosmological time
span of the “MBHs+rad” era, and the power @xmath , being @xmath the
scale factor of the “MBHs+rad” era with @xmath .

The upper bound on the spectrum of GWs obtained from the CMB anisotropy
places severe constraints on @xmath and @xmath . For each value of
@xmath considered, there is a minimum value of @xmath , @xmath ,
compatible with the CMB anisotropy. There is a range of @xmath , @xmath
, for which @xmath satisfies the CMB upper bound.

The four-stage scenario predicts a much lower power spectrum of GWs than
the conventional three-stage scenario. If LISA fails to detect the GWs
spectrum at the level predicted by the three-stage scenario, a possible
explanation might be that the “MBHs+rad” era took place. Likewise, once
the spectrum is successfully measured we will be able to learn from it
the proportion of MBHs and radiation in the mixture phase as well as the
time span of this era.

## Chapter 4 Gravitational waves and present accelerated expansion

In this chapter we show how the power spectrum as well as the
dimensionless density parameter of the GWs created from the initial
vacuum state may help present (and future) observers ascertain whether
the expansion phase they are living in is accelerated or not and if
accelerated, which law follows the scale factor [ 45 ] . The latter
would facilitate enormously to discriminate the nature of dark energy
between a large variety of proposed models (cosmological constant,
quintessence fields, interacting quintessence, tachyon fields, Chaplygin
gas, etc) [ 46 ] . To this end we calculate the power spectrum and
energy density of the GWs when the transitions to the dark energy era
and second dust era are considered. Obviously, the latter power spectrum
lies at the future and depending on the model under consideration it may
take very long for the Universe to enter the second dust era.

### 4.1 Accelerated expansion and decaying dark energy

Nowadays the observational data regarding the apparent luminosity of
supernovae type Ia, together with the discovery of CMB angular
temperature fluctuations on degree scales and measurements of the power
spectrum of galaxy clustering, strongly suggests that the Universe is
nearly flat and that its expansion is accelerating at present [ 39 , 47
] . In actual fact the debate now focuses on when the acceleration did
really commence, if it is just a transient phenomenon or it is to last
forever, and above all the nature of the dark energy.

In Einstein gravity the accelerated expansion is commonly associated to
a sufficiently high negative pressure which might be provided by a
cosmological constant @xmath (vacuum energy), whose equation of state is
@xmath , with @xmath . The observational data seems to indicate that the
cosmological constant contributes about the @xmath of the energy of the
Universe, meanwhile the remaining @xmath comes from non-relativistic
matter (i.e., dust). Thus, the question arises: “Why are the vacuum and
matter energy densities of precisely the same order today?”, which is
known in the literature as the coincidence problem [ 48 ] .

A possible answer to this question considers that the acceleration of
the Universe is associated to a sort of dynamical energy, the so–called
dark energy, that violates the strong energy condition and clusters only
at the largest accessible scales [ 46 ] . In such a case the present
state of the Universe would be dominated by dark energy and since it
redshifts more slowly with expansion than dust, the contribution of the
latter is bound to become negligible at late times.

In an attempt to evade the particle horizon problem posed by an
everlasting accelerated expansion to string/M type theories [ 49 ] ,
some models propose dark energy potentials such that the current
accelerated phase would be just transitory and sooner or later the
expansion would revert to the Einstein–De Sitter law @xmath , thereby
slowing down (second dust era) [ 50 ] . The possibility that dark energy
could be unstable is in fact suggested by the remarkable qualitative
analogy between the presence of dark energy today and the properties of
a different type of dark energy - the inflaton field - postulated in the
inflationary scenario of the early Universe -see e.g., [ 51 ] . This
analogy has two main points. On one hand, it makes natural that a form
of matter with negative pressure could have dominated the Universe in a
distant past, since a similar form of matter dominates the Universe
today. On the other hand, as the dark energy in the early Universe was
unstable and decayed aeons ago, one might be tempted to ask whether the
nature of dark energy observed today would be any different.

For our purposes, we shall assume a simplified model of decaying dark
energy in which the usual dust dominated stage is followed by an
accelerated era where the adiabatic index @xmath of the fluid that
dominates that era is a constant that lies in the range @xmath .
Posteriorly, the dark energy decays in a time span much lower than the
duration of the accelerated era and the Universe resumes the decelerated
expansion dominated by the cold dark matter. Models with dark energy
whose evolution mimics that of dust can be also taken in consideration
in our description as they are formally equivalent to the model of
above.

### 4.2 Bogoliubov coefficients in the decaying dark energy scenario

In this section we evaluate the coefficients of Bogoliubov in the
simplified model previously suggested, a spatially flat FRW scenario
initially De Sitter, then dominated by radiation, followed by a dust
dominated era, an accelerated expansion era dominated by dark energy,
and finally a second dust era.

The scale factor in terms of the conformal time reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , the subindexes @xmath correspond to sudden
transitions from inflation to radiation era, from radiation to first
dust era, from first dust era to dark energy era and from the latter to
the second dust era, respectively; @xmath is the Hubble factor at the
instant @xmath . The present time @xmath lies in the range @xmath , it
is to say in the dark energy dominated era.

GWs which are inside the Hubble radius have a wave number @xmath lower
than @xmath . Figure 4.1 sketches the evolution of @xmath in this
scenario. During the inflationary and dark energy eras @xmath increases
with @xmath , and decreases in the other eras. As a consequence, @xmath
results higher than @xmath . Choosing @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in such
a way that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

we have that @xmath is also higher than @xmath . We assume that @xmath
is lower than @xmath throughout.

The scale factor ( 4.1 ) formally coincides with these of the standard
three-stage model given by ( 3.1 ) until the instant @xmath . Thus, the
Bogoliubov coefficients @xmath and @xmath are equal to those of equation
( 3.5 ) in the range @xmath and they are @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
respectively. Analogously, @xmath and @xmath coincides with those of (
3.8 ) for @xmath and are @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

In the dark energy era the solution to Lifshitz’s equation ( 2.10 )
reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The Bogoliubov transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

relates the dust and dark energy modes.

Using the well-known relation for Hankel functions [ 36 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

valid when @xmath and @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath is the Hubble
function evaluated at @xmath and @xmath . The transition between the
first dust era to the dark energy era has a time span of the order
@xmath . This is much shorter than the period of the waves we are
considering and therefore it may be assumed instantaneous when
calculating the coefficients. As a consequence, the time span from this
transition till today, @xmath , must be larger than @xmath , otherwise
the transition first dust era-dark energy era would be too close to the
present time for our formalism to apply. This condition places a lower
bound on the value of the redshift @xmath . When @xmath the condition is
@xmath , @xmath when @xmath , @xmath when @xmath , and @xmath when
@xmath . This bound is compatible with the accepted values for @xmath
(see e.g., [ 52 ] ). Henceforward we will consider @xmath larger than
@xmath and no larger than @xmath .

The solution to Lifshitz’s equation in the second dust era (i.e., the
one following the dark energy era) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The Bogoliubov coefficients relating the modes of the dark energy era
with the modes of the second dust era are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Likewise, the continuity of @xmath at @xmath implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath is the Hubble
function evaluated at the transition time @xmath .

### 4.3 Power spectrums

In this section we evaluate the total coefficients and calculate the
current power spectrum as well as the power spectrum in the second dust
era. We find that the current power spectrum coincides with those of the
three-stage model of section 3.1 but it evolves differently. We also
find two possible shapes for the power spectrum in the second dust era,
whether condition ( 4.2 ) is fulfilled or not.

#### 4.3.1 Current power spectrum

To evaluate the present power spectrum one must bear in mind that @xmath
which implies the wave lengths of the perturbations created at the
transition dust era-dark energy era are larger than the present Hubble
radius @xmath [ 53 ] . One must also consider the possibility that
@xmath , it is to say

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath and assuming @xmath [ 38 ] this condition implies @xmath ,
@xmath when @xmath and @xmath when @xmath . The values for @xmath
considered by us are larger than @xmath and no lower than @xmath ,
consequently we can safely assume @xmath .

For @xmath , we find that @xmath , @xmath ; in the range @xmath , the
coefficients are @xmath and @xmath , and finally for @xmath we obtain [
27 , 24 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, the number of GWs at the present time @xmath created from the
initial vacuum state is @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and zero
for @xmath , where we have used the present value of the frequency,
@xmath .

In summary, the current power spectrum of GWs in this scenario is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

While this power spectrum is not at variance with the power spectrum of
the conventional three-stage scenario evaluated at section 3.1 , it
evolves differently. The power spectrum in the dark energy scenario at
@xmath formally coincides with Eq. ( 4.10 ) but with @xmath substituted
by @xmath throughout, and from then up to now waves with @xmath @xmath
cease to contribute to the spectrum as soon as their wave length exceeds
the Hubble radius. By contrast, in the three-stage scenario waves are
continuously being added to the spectrum. As we shall see in section 4.4
, this implies that the evolution of the energy density of the
gravitational waves in the three-stage scenario differs from the
scenario in which the Universe expansion is dominated by dark energy.

#### 4.3.2 Power spectrum in the second dust era

Here we evaluate the power spectrum at some future time @xmath larger
than @xmath for which the waves created at the transition dust era-dark
energy era ( @xmath ) are considered in the spectrum by the first time
(see Figure 4.1 ). Let @xmath and @xmath be the Bogoliubov coefficients
relating the modes of the inflationary era to the modes of the second
dust era. Because of condition ( 4.2 ) we must consider two
possibilities with two different power spectrums.

@xmath If condition ( 4.2 ) is not fulfilled, then @xmath and the power
spectrum can be obtained from the following total coefficients. In the
range @xmath the total coefficients are @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath ,
the coefficients are @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
defined in Eq. ( 3.5 ). For @xmath , @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is
defined in Eq. ( 4.9 ) and the dominant term of @xmath coincides with
@xmath .

When @xmath , except for @xmath and @xmath , all the coefficients
obtained in the previous section must be considered when evaluating
@xmath and @xmath , therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, for @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Accordingly, the power spectrum reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.14)
  -- -- -- --------

@xmath If condition ( 4.2 ) is fulfilled, then @xmath . As in the
previous case, in the range @xmath the total coefficients are @xmath and
@xmath . For @xmath , the coefficients are @xmath and @xmath . In the
range @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Again, for @xmath , the total coefficients are given by Eq. ( 4.11 )
while for @xmath they obey Eq. ( 4.13 ). The power spectrum in this case
is

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.15)
  -- -- -- --------

The power spectrum governed by Eq.( 4.15 ) is plotted in Fig. 4.2 for
different choices of the free parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath as well as the power spectrum assuming the three-stage model,
i.e., non-accelerated phase and no second dust era.

The shape of the power spectrum given by ( 4.15 ) in the range @xmath is
the same in both cases as in this range all the coefficients are present
in the evaluation of the total coefficients. It is interesting to see
how markedly this spectrum differs from the one arising in the
three-stage model (dot-dashed line) at low frequencies.

##### Topological defects

Up to now we assumed that at the end of the dark energy era the Universe
will evolve as if it became dominated by dust once again. Nevertheless
if the expansion achieved in the accelerated phase were large enough,
either cosmic strings, or domain walls, or a cosmological constant will
take over instead. We will not consider, however, cosmic strings (whose
equation of state is @xmath ) for, as pointed out by Maia [ 24 ] , it
seems problematic to define an adiabatic vacuum in an era dominated by
these topological defects since the creation–annihilation operators,
@xmath , @xmath , fail to satisfy the commutation relations (i.e.,
condition ( 2.29 )) in the range of frequencies where one should expect
GWs amplification. In short, our approach, as it is, does not apply to
this case.

As for domain walls (topological stable defects of second order with
equation of state @xmath and energy density that varies as @xmath -see
e.g., [ 51 , 54 ] ), once the dark energy evolved as pressureless matter
at @xmath the scale factor may be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

so long as @xmath . That is to say, for @xmath the expansion of the
Universe is again accelerated whereby @xmath resumes growing. The GWs
will be leaving the Hubble radius as soon as @xmath becomes smaller than
their wave length, and eventually none of them will contribute to the
spectrum.

Finally, we consider the existence of a positive cosmological constant
@xmath . (Recall that @xmath and @xmath ). Once the dark energy
dynamically mimicked dust the Universe will become dominated by a very
tiny cosmological constant. The corresponding scale factor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again, the expansion is accelerated and GWs will leave the Hubble
radius and, in the long run, none of them will contribute to the
spectrum.

### 4.4 Energy density of the gravitational waves

Now we are in position to evaluate the energy density of the GWs in
terms of the conformal time by integrating the power spectrum @xmath
obtained in the previous section. As we shall see, the evolution of the
energy density strongly depends on the free parameters of the model.

Its current value, evaluated from Eq. ( 4.10 ), can be approximated by [
27 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in this section, we return to conventional units.

To study the evolution of @xmath from this point onward we first
consider that @xmath . In this case, @xmath evolves as ( 4.18 ) with
@xmath and @xmath substituted by @xmath and @xmath , respectively, till
some instant @xmath in the range @xmath . When @xmath the GWs with
@xmath must no longer be considered in evaluating @xmath as their wave
length exceed the Hubble radius. Consequently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , the gravitational waves created at the transition dark
energy era-second dust era begin contributing to @xmath thereby,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath corresponds to Eq.( 4.19 ) evaluated at @xmath . For @xmath
where @xmath is defined by the condition @xmath (see Figure 4.1 ), the
gravitational waves which left the Hubble radius at @xmath reenter it,
therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath corresponds to Eq.( 4.4 ) evaluated at @xmath . For @xmath
, with @xmath defined by @xmath (see Figure 4.1 ), the gravitational
waves created at the transition first dust era-dark energy era have wave
lengths shorter than the Hubble radius for first time, and from that
point on the density of gravitational waves can be approximated by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath corresponds to Eq.( 4.4 ) evaluated at @xmath .

In the case that @xmath , Eq. ( 4.18 ) dictates the evolution of @xmath
between @xmath till @xmath . Then, from @xmath till @xmath , @xmath
obeys Eq. ( 4.4 ) (note that @xmath cannot be defined in this case) and
from @xmath onwards @xmath obeys Eq. ( 4.4 ).

A natural restriction on @xmath is that it must be lower than the total
energy density of the flat FRW universe

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for the Planck mass.

It seems reasonable to consider @xmath as it corresponds to the grand
unification energy scale of inflationary models [ 1 , 51 , 55 ] . The
redshift @xmath , relating the present value of the scale factor with
the scale factor at the transition radiation era-first dust era, may be
taken as @xmath [ 38 ] , and the current value of the Hubble factor
@xmath is estimated to be @xmath [ 39 , 56 ] . It then follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid in the second dust era (see Eq. ( 4.1 )) with @xmath and @xmath to
evaluate @xmath (only defined if @xmath ) and @xmath , respectively. In
our model, there are only three parameters, namely @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath .

We are now in position to evaluate the evolution of the dimensionless
density parameter @xmath . Its current value is [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in our description boils down to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is much lower than unity for any choice of @xmath and @xmath in
the above intervals. At later times @xmath evolves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used @xmath . It is obvious that @xmath is a decreasing
function of @xmath . For @xmath we shall distinguish the two cases
mentioned in the previous section.

When condition ( 4.2 ) is fulfilled, the evolution of @xmath is given by
Eq. ( 4.27 ) till @xmath . Then, @xmath changes in shape from @xmath
till @xmath , as we have seen. Consequently

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is a decreasing function of @xmath . Finally, from @xmath on, @xmath
evolves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

As follows from ( 4.24 ) and ( 4.29 )-( 4.31 ), in each case, the first
term redshifts with expansion while the second term of @xmath grows with
@xmath (recall that @xmath ). Conditions @xmath and @xmath become just
@xmath and @xmath , which are true in either case whatever the choice of
parameters. Finally, from Eq. ( 4.31 ) we may conclude that at some
future time larger than @xmath the condition @xmath will no longer be
fulfilled and the linear approximation in which our approach rests will
cease to apply.

In the opposite case, when condition ( 4.2 ) is not fulfilled, @xmath
also grows following Eq. ( 4.27 ) till @xmath , in the interval @xmath
it grows according to Eq. ( 4.30 ), and according to Eq. ( 4.31 ) from
@xmath onwards. Our conclusions of the first case regarding the
evolution of @xmath during these time intervals still hold true.

The behavior of the density parameter @xmath differs from one scenario
to the other. In the three-stage model (inflation, radiation, dust)
@xmath remains constant during the dust era [ 27 ] . In a four-stage
model, with a dark energy era right after the conventional dust era,
@xmath sharply decreases in a @xmath dependent way during the fourth
(accelerated) era since long wave lengths are continuously exiting the
Hubble sphere [ 53 ] , see Fig. 4.3 .

By contrast, if a second dust era followed the accelerated (dark energy)
era, @xmath would grow in this second dust era because long wave lengths
would continuously be entering that sphere, see Fig. 4.4 . This
immediately suggests a criterion to be used by future observers to
ascertain whether the era they are living in is still our accelerated,
dark energy-dominated, era or a subsequent non-accelerated era. By
measuring @xmath at conveniently spaced instants they shall be able to
tell. Further, if that era were the accelerated one and the @xmath
measurements were accurate enough they will be able to find out the
value of the parameter @xmath occurring in the expansion law given by
Eq. ( 4.1 ). The lower @xmath , the higher the slope of @xmath in the
second dust era.

One may argue, however, that these observers may know more easily from
supernova data. Nonetheless, if this epoch lies in the faraway future it
may well happen that by then the ability of galaxies to generate stars
(and hence enough supernovae) has seriously gone down and as a result
this prime method might be unavailable or severely impaired. At any
rate, even if there were plenty of supernova, the simple gravitational
wave method just outlined could still play a complementary role.

### 4.5 Conclusions

In this chapter we studied the power spectrum and the energy density
evolution of the relic gravitational waves generated at the big bang by
considering the transitions between successive stages of the Universe
expansion. In particular, we considered the effect of the present phase
of accelerated expansion as well as a hypothetical second dust phase
that may come right after the present one. As it turns out, the power
spectrum at the current accelerated era, Eq. ( 4.10 ), formally
coincides with the power spectrum of the conventional three-stage
scenario. As a consequence, measurements of @xmath will not directly
tell us if the Universe expansion is currently accelerated (as we know
from the high redshift supernove data) or non-accelerated. However, the
density parameter of the gravitational waves evolves differently during
these two phases: it stays constant in the decelerated one and goes down
in the accelerated era in a @xmath dependent manner. Therefore, the
present value of @xmath may not only confirm us the current acceleration
but also may help determine the value the parameter @xmath -see Fig. 4.3
- and hence give us invaluable information about the nature of dark
energy.

In the faraway future measurements of @xmath , if sufficiently accurate,
will be able to tell if the Universe is still under accelerated
expansion (driven by dark energy) or has entered a hypothetical
decelerated phase (second dust era) suggested by different authors [ 50
] . This may also be ascertained by measuring the density parameter of
the gravitational waves at different instants to see whether it
decreases or increases.

## Chapter 5 Gravitational waves entropy and the generalized second law

In this chapter we study the evolution of the entropy associated to the
GWs as well as the generalized second law (GSL) of gravitational
thermodynamics in the present era of accelerated expansion of the
Universe. In spite of the fact that the entropy of matter and relic
gravitational waves inside the event horizon diminish, the mentioned law
is fulfilled provided the expression for the entropy density of the
gravitational waves satisfies a certain condition [ 57 ] . Section 5.1
gives the power spectrum of the GWs at the beginning of the present era
of accelerated expansion. In section 5.2 , the entropy of the GWs is
defined and its evolution during that era is found. Finally, in section
5.3 an upper bound on the entropy density of the GWs is obtained by
straightforward application of the GSL.

### 5.1 Gravitational waves in the dark energy era

As explained in the previous chapter, the current era of cosmic
acceleration is believed to be dominated by the dark energy. For our
purposes in this chapter, we shall assume the Universe is currently
dominated by a form of everlasting dark energy of constant @xmath lying
in the range @xmath (i.e., phantom energy and cosmological constant
dominated universes are excluded). The dependence of the scale factor on
the conformal time is formally equal to the scale factor in ( 4.1 ),
without the second dust era, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath . Again, the subindexes @xmath correspond to
sudden transitions from De Sitter era to radiation era, from radiation
to dust era, and from dust era to dark energy era, respectively, and
@xmath is the Hubble factor at the instant @xmath . The Hubble factor
during the current dark energy era obeys

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The evolution of the quantity @xmath in terms of the conformal time
@xmath is sketched in Fig. 5.1 .

The modes solution to the gravitational wave equation during the De
Sitter era are related with those of the final dark energy era by a
Bogoliubov transformation with coefficients @xmath and @xmath , which
are formally equal to those found in subsection 4.3.1 . At the beginning
of the dark energy era, @xmath , the power spectrum was

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

During the radiation and dust eras @xmath decreases with @xmath and
increases during the De Sitter and dark energy eras. Consequently, as we
explained before, GWs are continuously leaving the Hubble radius during
the accelerated dark energy era [ 45 , 53 ] . At some instant @xmath ,
defined by @xmath , the third term in ( 5.3 ) ceases to contribute to
the power spectrum since the wave lengths of the corresponding GWs
exceed the size of the horizon. Finally, at @xmath , defined by @xmath ,
all GWs have their wave length longer than the Hubble radius and the
power spectrum vanishes altogether.

### 5.2 GWs entropy and its evolution in the dark energy era

There are different expressions in the literature for the entropy
density of gravitational waves -see e.g., [ 58 , 59 , 60 ] . All of them
are based on the assumption that the gravitational entropy is associated
with the amount of GWs inside the horizon. In this section, we review
the expressions discussed in [ 59 ] . Next, we adopt the proposal of
Nesteruk and Ottewill [ 60 ] to find the evolution to the GWs entropy
during the dark energy era.

#### 5.2.1 Entropy of the GWs

Branderberger et al. defined the nonequilibrium entropy of cosmological
perturbations in two ways [ 59 ] . One of them is based in the
microcanonical ensemble [ 61 ] while the other is a formula for the
entropy that can be associated with the stochastic distribution
describing the state of the classical gravitational field. Both
descriptions are in agreement.

We shall now summarize the second approach concerning GWs. When the
metric perturbations are sufficiently large, the GWs field can be
treated as a classical field. The entropy source in this case is the
lack of information about the exact field configuration. If a classical
field @xmath and its canonical momentum @xmath are known at all points
at the instant @xmath , the state of the system is completely specified
and consequently its entropy is zero. But, if all we know about the
system is the probability of finding it in a state @xmath , @xmath ,
i.e., @xmath , the entropy can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the functional integral measure for a scalar field.

When the initial state of the system is Gaussian and the time evolution
preserves its Gaussian character, the probability distribution @xmath
can be expressed in terms of the two point correlations functions @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath stands for the ensemble average of
@xmath (wich coincides with the space average of @xmath for a spatially
homogeneous stochastic process). In this the case, the entropy per unit
volume can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Fourier transformed of @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

The correlation functions of the GWs field can be expressed in terms of
the Bogoliubov coefficients (see [ 59 ] for more details). Finally, the
entropy density reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of GWs created from the initial vacuum with a
given wave number @xmath . The above expression is valid in the
classical limit, i.e., @xmath .

In [ 60 ] , Nesteruk and Ottewill proposed a definition of the entropy
of GWs based on the idea that the number of generated GWs describes the
capacity of the gravitational field to create matter and is associated
with the gravitational entropy. Their proposal assume the entropy
density is proportional to the GWs number density, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number density of gravitational waves, and @xmath is
an unknown positive–definite constant of proportionality. We shall now
make use of this definition to evaluate the GWs entropy and to study its
evolution in the scenario of the previous section.

#### 5.2.2 GWs entropy in the dark energy era

We are interested in the evolution of @xmath during the dark energy era.
The number density of GWs created from the initial vacuum state is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the term in square brackets is the density of states and, as we
have seen, @xmath is the number of GWs created. We can obtain @xmath by
inserting Eq. ( 5.3 ) into Eq. ( 5.8 ) and integrating over the
frequency.

At the beginning of the dark energy era the GWs number density is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the number density at the transition radiation era–dust era.

For @xmath , i.e. @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The density number given by Eq. ( 5.11 ) decreases with the scale factor
because of two effects: @xmath the evolution of the volume considered,
which grows as @xmath , and @xmath the exit of those waves whose wave
length becomes longer than the Hubble radius, which appears in the term
in square brackets. As @xmath approaches @xmath , this term tends to
zero. From this instant (defined as @xmath ) on, the number density
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

As time goes on, the term in brackets tends to zero and at the instant
@xmath , @xmath vanishes.

Consequently, the entropy density, proportional to the number density,
decreases during the dark energy era not just because of the variation
of the volume considered but also because of the disappearance of the
GWs from the Hubble volume.

The GWs entropy inside the event horizon is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radius of the event horizon and @xmath the cosmic
time. For the horizon to exist @xmath must not diverge. For expansions
of the general form @xmath where @xmath , the horizon exists and can be
expressed as @xmath . Since it is of the order of magnitude of the
Hubble radius, @xmath , we will neglect @xmath and use both terms
interchangeably.

Making use of Eq. ( 5.2 ) and Eqs. ( 5.11 )-( 5.12 ) , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.14)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.15)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The GWs entropy is a decreasing function of the scale factor and
consequently of conformal time. The next section explores whether this
entropy descent can be compensated by an increase of the entropy of the
other contributors, namely, matter and horizon.

### 5.3 The generalized second law

In this section, we study the implications the GSL of thermodynamics has
over the GWs entropy during the dark energy era.

By extending the GSL of black hole spacetimes [ 62 ] to cosmological
settings, several authors have considered the interplay between ordinary
entropy and the entropy associated to cosmic event horizons [ 63 , 64 ]
. According the GSL of gravitational thermodynamics the entropy of the
horizon plus its surroundings (in our case, the entropy in the volume
enclosed by the horizon) cannot decrease. Consequently, we must evaluate
the total entropy to see its evolution during the present dark energy
era.

The cosmological event horizon has an associated entropy that may be
interpreted analogously to the entropy of the black hole [ 65 ] . An
observer living in an accelerated FRW universe has a lack of information
about the regions outside its event horizon (see figure 5.2 ). The area
of the horizon, @xmath , represents a measure of this lack of
information. As in the case of the black hole horizon, we define the
entropy of the cosmological horizon as @xmath .

Thus, the entropy of the horizon in our case reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and increases with expansion. (Bear in mind that @xmath , i.e., the dark
energy behind the acceleration is not of “phantom” type [ 66 ] ).

Here we assume that the entropy of the dark energy field responsible for
the acceleration does not vary.

The non-relativistic matter fluid entropy must be also considered. If
the latter consists in particles of mass @xmath and each of them
contributes @xmath to the matter entropy, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the entropy of the non-relativistic fluid. Here, we made use of the
conservation equation @xmath with @xmath the energy density of matter.
From ( 5.17 ), it is apparent that @xmath decreases with expansion.

In virtue of the above equations, the GSL, @xmath , where the prime
indicates derivation with respect to @xmath , can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , and

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

For @xmath , both conditions are of the type @xmath , @xmath being an
increasing function of @xmath . Therefore, if the condition holds true
at the beginning of the dark energy era, @xmath , it will hold for
@xmath .

By setting @xmath in Eq. ( 5.18 ), a restriction over the unknown
constant @xmath of proportionality follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

implying that for the GSL to be satisfied the above upper bound must be
met. In this case the event horizon soon comes to dominate the total
entropy and steadily augments with expansion. So, even though the
entropy of matter and GWs within the horizon decrease during the present
dark energy era, the GSL is preserved provided Eq. ( 5.20 ) holds. Note
that since the authors of Ref. [ 60 ] left the constant @xmath
unspecified restriction ( 5.20 ) turns to be all the more important: it
is the only knowledge we have about how large @xmath may be.

Obviously, our conclusions hang on the expression adopted for the
entropy density of the gravitational waves. Here we have chosen ( 5.7 )
since, on the one hand, it is the simplest one based on particle
production in curved spacetimes [ 22 ] , and on the other hand, @xmath
cannot fail to be an increasing function of @xmath . We believe, that
any sensible expression for @xmath should not run into conflict with the
GSL, and that the latter may impose restrictions on the parameters
entering the former.

As mentioned above, we have left aside models of late acceleration
driven by dark energy of “phantom type” (i.e., @xmath ) [ 66 ] . In this
case, owing to the fact that the dominant energy condition is violated,
the event horizon decreases with expansion. We shall focus our attention
on this issue in the next chapter.

### 5.4 Conclusions

The number of gravitational waves inside the cosmological event horizon
in a four-stage model with scale factor given by ( 5.1 ) is a decreasing
function of time in the present dark energy era. The GWs entropy in the
horizon is associated with the amount of GWs inside it. Consequently,
the GWs entropy in the horizon decreases with time.

In order to study the GSL in this scenario, we must consider all the
possible contributions to the total entropy: the entropy of the horizon
itself (which is proportional to the horizon area and, consequently, it
increases with time), the entropy of the dark energy field (which is
zero as we assume the field is in a specified state) and the entropy of
ordinary matter (which is proportional to the number of particles of
ordinary matter present inside the horizon and is a decreasing function
of time). If we assume the relation between the GWs entropy and the
number of GWs is ( 5.7 ), the GSL imposes a bound over the constant
@xmath of proportionality.

## Chapter 6 The generalized second law in universes dominated by dark
energy

In this chapter we leave the main subject of the thesis, the spectrum of
GWs, to explore the thermodynamics of dark energy taking into account
the existence of the observer s event horizon in accelerated universes.
Here we shall not consider GWs as we will focus our attention on one
single stage of expansion. Thus, there is no transitions between
different stages and no GWs creation.

As we shall see, phantom and non -phantom dark energies satisfy the
generalized second law of gravitational thermodynamics whether the
equation of state parameter is constant or not. Phantom energy
transcends the holographic principle, non–phantom energy complies with
it [ 68 ] .

### 6.1 Phantom dark energy

As mentioned before, nowadays there is an ample consensus on the
observational side that the Universe is undergoing an accelerated
expansion likely driven by some unknown fluid, the DE, with the
distinguishing feature of violating the strong energy condition, @xmath
[ 39 , 46 , 47 , 69 ] . The strength of this acceleration is presently a
matter of debate mainly because it depends on the theoretical model
employed when interpreting the data. While a model independent analysis
suggests it to be below the De Sitter value [ 70 ] it is certainly true
that the body of observational data allows for a wide parameter space
compatible with an acceleration value larger than De Sitter s [ 66 ] .
If eventually this proves to be the case, the fluid driving the
expansion would violate not only the strong energy condition but the
dominant energy condition, @xmath , as well. In general, fluids of such
characteristics, dubbed phantom fluids, face some theoretical
difficulties on their own such as quantum instabilities [ 71 ] .
Nevertheless, phantom models have attracted much interest, among other
things because in their barest formulation they predict the Universe to
end from an infinite expansion in a finite time ( big rip ), rather than
in a big crunch, preceded by the ripping apart of all bound systems,
from galaxy clusters down to atomic nuclei [ 66 ] . While this scenario
might look weird, given our incomplete understanding of the physics
below @xmath and the scarcity of reliable observational data, it should
not be discarded right away; on the contrary we believe it warrants some
further consideration.

Recently, it has been demonstrated that if the expansion of the Universe
is dominated by phantom fluid, black holes will decrease their mass and
eventually disappear altogether [ 72 ] . At first sight this means a
threat for the second law of thermodynamics as these collapsed objects
are the most entropic entities of our world. This short consideration
spurs us to explore the thermodynamic consequences of phantom -dominated
universes. In doing so one must take into account that ever accelerating
universes have a future event horizon (or cosmological horizon). Since
the horizon implies a classically unsurmountable barrier to our ability
to see what lies beyond it, it is natural to attach an entropy to the
horizon size (i.e., to its area) for it is a measure of our ignorance
about what is going on in the other side. However, this has been proved
in a rigorous manner for the De Sitter horizon only [ 65 ] which, in
addition, has a temperature proportional to the Hubble expansion rate.
Nevertheless, following previous authors [ 63 , 64 , 73 ] here we
conjecture that this also holds true for non-stationary event horizons.

Phantom expansions of pole-like type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

as proposed by Caldwell [ 66 ] , arise when the equation of state
parameter @xmath . Current cosmological observations hint that @xmath
may be as low as @xmath [ 39 , 47 ] . In what follows it will be useful
to bear in mind that @xmath .

From the above equation for the scale factor it is seen that the Hubble
expansion rate augments

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

whereby the radius of the observer’s event horizon

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

decreases with time, i.e., @xmath , and vanishes altogether at the big
rip time @xmath . Consequently the horizon entropy,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

diminishes with time, @xmath . This is only natural since for spatially
flat FRW phantom-dominated universes one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

as these fluids violate the dominant energy condition. Then the question
arises, “will the generalized second law (GSL) of gravitational
thermodynamics, @xmath , be respected?” According to the GSL the entropy
of matter plus fields inside the horizon plus the entropy of the event
horizon cannot decrease with time. For the interplay between ordinary
matter (and radiation) and the cosmological event horizon, see Refs. [
57 , 63 , 64 , 73 ] .

### 6.2 Phantom and non-phantom dark energy with constant @xmath

In this section we study the evolution of the phantom DE with constant
@xmath , next we compare it with the entropy of the non–phantom DE with
constant w and, finally, we examine the GSL in both models.

In the previous chapter we assumed that the dark energy has no entropy
associated with it, which would be a reasonable choice if the dark
energy is given by a scalar field in a pure state. But this is far from
being the more natural assumption. Henceforward, we shall see both
phantom and non–phantom fluids as phenomenological representations of a
mixture of fields, each of which may or may not be in a pure state but
the overall (or effective) field is certainly in a mixed state and
therefore entitled to have an entropy. This is the case, for instance,
of assisted inflation [ 74 ] .

The entropy of the phantom fluid inside the cosmological event horizon
of a comoving observer can be related to its energy and pressure in the
horizon by Gibbs equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where owing to the fact that the number of phantom particles inside the
horizon is not conserved we have set the chemical potential to zero.From
the relation @xmath , together with the Friedmann equation @xmath , Eq.
( 6.3 ), and the equation of state @xmath (with @xmath ), we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath the phantom entropy increases with expansion (so long as
@xmath ).

To proceed further, we must specify the temperature of the phantom
fluid. The only temperature scale we have at our disposal is the
temperature of the event horizon, which we assume to be given by its De
Sitter expression [ 65 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

though in our case @xmath . Thus, it is natural to suppose that @xmath
and then figure out the proportionality constant. As we shall see below,
this choice is backed by the realization that it is in keeping with the
holographic principle [ 75 ] . The simplest choice is to take the
proportionality constant as unity which means thermal equilibrium with
the event horizon, @xmath . Otherwise energy would spontaneously flow
between the horizon and the fluid (or viceversa), something at variance
with the FRW geometry. Note that, explicitly or implicitly, every FRW
model (including inflation models) assumes thermal equilibrium.

After integration of Eq. ( 6.7 ), bearing in mind that @xmath as @xmath
, the entropy of the phantom fluid can be written as @xmath .

Some consequences follow: @xmath The phantom entropy is a negative
quantity, something already noted by other authors [ 76 ] , and equals
to minus the entropy of a black hole of radius @xmath . @xmath It bears
no explicit dependence on @xmath and, but for the sign, it exactly
coincides with the entropy of the cosmological event horizon. @xmath
Since @xmath it is not an extensive quantity. Note that @xmath does not
scale with the volume of the horizon but with its area. One may argue
that the first consequence was to be expected since (for @xmath ) it
readily follows from Euler’s equation @xmath , @xmath being the entropy
density. However, it is very doubtful that Euler’s equation holds for
phantom fluids since it is based on the extensive character of the
entropy of the system under consideration [ 77 ] and we have just argued
that for phantom fluids this is not the case. The fact that @xmath tells
us that the entropy of the phantom fluid is not to be understood as a
measure of the number of microstates associated to the macroscopic state
of the fluid and that, in general, the current formulation of
statistical mechanics might not apply to systems that violate the
dominant energy condition. Before closing this paragraph, it is
noteworthy that negative entropies are not so new after all; in
principle monoatomic ideal gases may exhibit such a feature for
sufficiently low temperatures [ 78 ] .

Two further consequences are: @xmath The sum @xmath vanishes at any
time, therefore the GSL is not violated -the increase of the (negative)
phantom entropy exactly offsets the entropy decline of the event
horizon. @xmath @xmath saturates the bound imposed by the holographic
principle [ 75 ] . The latter asserts that the total entropy of a system
enclosed by a spherical surface cannot be larger than a quarter of the
area of that surface measured in Planck units. (For papers dealing with
the holographic principle in relation with dark energy, see [ 79 ] and
references therein). In this connection, it is interesting to see that
if the equation of state were such the entropy obeyed @xmath , with
@xmath a positive–definite constant, then the GSL would impose @xmath .
This leads us to conjecture that the entropy of phantom energy is not
bounded from below but from above, being @xmath its upper limit.

Nevertheless, in a less idealized cosmology one should consider the
presence of other forms of energy, in particular of black holes and the
decrease in entropy of these objects [ 72 ] . It is unclear whether in
such scenario the GSL would still hold its ground. Nonetheless, one may
take the view that the GSL may impose an upper bound to the entropy
stored in the form of black holes. At any rate, the calculation would be
much more involved and we leave it to a future research. Among other
things, one should take into account that the scale factor would not
obey such a simple expansion law as ( 6.1 ) and that the black holes
would be evaporating via Hawking radiation [ 32 ] which would also
modify the expansion rate and, accordingly, the horizon size.

A straightforward and parallel study for a non–phantom dark
energy-dominated universe with constant parameter of state (lying in the
range @xmath ), shows that in this case too @xmath . There are two main
differences, however; on the one hand the entropy of the fluid decreases
while the area of event horizon augments, and on the other hand @xmath .
The latter comes from adopting the view that the dark energy must vanish
for @xmath (Planck’s statement of the third law of thermodynamics) and
realizing that this happens for @xmath . Again, @xmath saturates the
bound imposed by the holographic principle.

Another important difference between phantom and non–phantom dark–energy
expansions is that while the former gets hotter and hotter the latter
gets colder and colder. This implies the following. As the phantom fluid
heats up its ability to produce black holes via quantum tunnelling may
augment and the probability for this to occur becomes high near the
Planck limit [ 30 ] . This is a very strongly irreversible process since
the variation of entropy is enormous going from negative values (phantom
fluid) to positive values (black holes). Obviously, the black hole
production would severely alter the dynamics of the last stage of
expansion. Two competing effects come into play, namely: the tendency to
produce black holes via tunnelling, and the tendency to destroy these
black holes via the Babichev effect [ 72 ] (also the tendency of the
black holes to evaporate may play a non–negligible role). Depending on
which one of these eventually comes to dominate two rather different
scenarios arise: @xmath If the Babichev effect dominates, the play will
be rehearsed again and again, probably never reaching the big rip (
@xmath ) but the Universe will always be accelerating. @xmath If the
quantum tunnelling process takes the upper hand, the Universe will exit
the phantom regime and come back to the old Einstein-De Sitter expansion
during the time taken by the black hole to evaporate into radiation.
This achieved, the universe will start a new radiation dominated era. As
a consequence the analysis of above will be found inconsistent as a
whole because if the Universe is to resume a non–accelerating regime no
cosmological event horizon would have ever existed.

Coming back to the phantom energy discussion, one may adopt the point of
view that the phantom temperature is negative [ 80 ] . But, as mentioned
above, this would destroy the FRW geometry. On the other hand, negative
temperatures are linked to condensed matter systems whose energy
spectrum is bounded from above and may therefore exhibit the phenomenon
of population inversion, i.e., their upper energy states can be found
more populated than their lower energy states [ 81 ] . However, all
models of phantom energy proposed so far consist in some or other type
of scalar field with no upper bound on their energy spectrum. In
addition, while population inversion is a rather transient phenomenon
the phantom regime is supposed to last for cosmological times. Moreover,
bearing in mind that @xmath and @xmath , it follows from Eq. ( 6.7 )
that if @xmath were negative, then the phantom entropy would decrease
with expansion and the GSL would be violated.

### 6.3 Phantom and non–phantom dark energy with variable @xmath

One may argue that the result @xmath critically depends on the
particular choice of the equation of state parameter @xmath to the point
that if it were not constant, then the GSL could be violated. Here we
shall explore this issue taking the phantom model with @xmath dependent
on time of Sami and Toporensky [ 82 ] .

In this model a scalar field, @xmath , with negative kinetic energy,
minimally coupled to gravity sources with energy density and pressure
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively, is adopted. The equation of state parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is lower than @xmath as long as @xmath is positive and depends on time.

When the kinetic energy term is subdominant (“slow climb” [ 82 ] ) the
evolution equation of the phantom field simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assuming also the power law potential @xmath with @xmath a constant,
restricted to the interval @xmath to evade the big rip, the equation of
state parameter reduces to @xmath , where @xmath is a dimensionless
variable, and the field is an ever increasing function of time, namely,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the subscript @xmath stands for the time at which the phantom
energy begins to dominate the expansion. Thus @xmath increases with
expansion up to the asymptotic value @xmath . Likewise the scale
function obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

As it should, the Hubble factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

augments with expansion while the cosmological event horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

decreases monotonically to vanish asymptotically -see Figure 6.1 . Here
@xmath is the incomplete Gamma function [ 36 ] .

As in the preceding section, the entropy of this phantom fluid can be
obtained by using Gibbs’s equation and @xmath . Again, we get a negative
quantity that increases with time

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.15)
  -- -- -- --------

here @xmath .

From the above expressions, it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the quantity in square brackets is positive–definite for any
finite @xmath and @xmath , the GSL in the form @xmath is satisfied. The
equality sign occurs just for @xmath , i.e., when @xmath vanishes.

As Fig. 6.2 illustrates, the holographic principle is again transcended
in the sense that @xmath .

As an example of non-phantom dark energy with variable @xmath we
consider the Chaplygin gas [ 83 ] . This fluid is characterized by the
equation of state @xmath . Integration of the energy conservation
equation yields @xmath , whereby @xmath . Here @xmath is the scale
factor normalized to its present value and @xmath and @xmath denote
positive–definite constants. Accordingly, this fluid interpolates
between cold matter, for large redshift, and a cosmological constant,
for small redshift. This has led to propose it as a candidate to unify
dark matter and dark energy [ 84 ] .

The radius of the cosmological event horizon reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the hypergeometric function and @xmath is a
dimensionless variable. As figure 6.3 illustrates, @xmath which is
nothing but the value taken by @xmath in that limit. This was to be
expected: for large scale factor the Chaplygin gas expansion goes over
De Sitter’s.

The horizon temperature is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the entropy of the fluid and the entropy of the horizon evolve as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. The two latter equation imply that @xmath for @xmath or
equivalently, for @xmath . Thus there is an early period in which the
GSL seems to fail. However, this may be seen not as a failure of the GSL
but as an upper bound on the initial value of the energy density of the
Chaplygin gas. This is somewhat similar to the bound imposed on the
initial entropy of relic gravitational waves in a universe dominated by
non–phantom dark energy [ 57 ] .

Notice that, @xmath is a positive, ever–decreasing function of the scale
factor that complies with the holographic bound @xmath .

### 6.4 Quasi-duality between phantom and non-phantom thermodynamics

The duality transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

leaves the Einstein’s equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

of spatial FRW universes invariant and the scale factor transforms as
@xmath [ 85 ] . Thus, a phantom DE dominated universe with scale factor
@xmath (for simplicity we assume a phantom scale factor as Eq. ( 6.1 )
with @xmath and @xmath that tends to @xmath ) becomes a contracting
universe whose scale factor obeys @xmath . This universe begins
contracting from an infinite expansion at the infinite past and
collapses to a vanishing scale factor for @xmath (left panel of Fig. 6.4
).

Reversing the direction of time (i.e., the future of @xmath , @xmath ,
transforms into @xmath ), the contracting universe is mapped into an
expanding one whose scale factor grows with no bound as @xmath tends to
@xmath . Notice that the first transformation takes the universe from
expanding to contracting and the second transformation makes the
universe expand again, i.e., the final cosmology has @xmath . It should
be remarked that the latter transformation also preserve Eqs. ( 6.22 ).

Under this two successive operations, the final and the initial equation
of states parameters are related by @xmath . Consequently, phantom DE
dominated universes with @xmath , (i.e., @xmath ) are mapped into
non-phantom DE universes (see Fig. 6.4 ). Therefore, both of them, the
original and the transformed universes, have an event horizon and
entropies whose relation we derive below.

The radius of the event horizon of the original universe is @xmath
meanwhile the radius of the event horizon of the transformed universe is
@xmath . The transformations preserve the horizon temperature as the
Hubble factor does not change. From the definition of the horizon, it is
readily seen that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In virtue of the above expression together with the Gibbs equation one
obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereby, the entropy transforms as [ 68 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the entropy of the final non-phantom dark energy dominated
universe is proportional, but of the opposite the sign, to the entropy
of the original phantom universe. We might say that the duality
transformation “quasi” preserves the thermodynamics of dark energy. This
result is in keeping with the findings of Section 6.2 .

### 6.5 Conclusions

We explored some thermodynamical consequences for the dark energy when
the entropy of the cosmological event horizon is not ignored.
Irrespective of if @xmath is constant or not, we have found that phantom
fluids possess negative entropy, transcend the holographic bound and
their temperature and entropy increase as the Universe expands. By
contrast, non-phantom fluids have positive entropy, satisfy the
holographic bound and their temperature and entropy decrease with
expansion. In all the cases, the GSL is fulfilled.

It goes without saying that negative entropies are hard to assimilate;
especially because the Einstein-Boltzmann interpretation of entropy as a
measure of the probability breaks down under such circumstances. Systems
of negative entropy appear to lie outside the province of statistical
mechanics as is currently formulated [ 81 , 86 ] . Nevertheless, the
laws of thermodynamics alone do not entail that S must be a positive
quantity. The latter will be found to be positive or negative only after
combining these laws with the equation (or equations) of state of the
system under consideration. What we believe to be at the core of
thermodynamics is the law that forbids the entropy of isolated systems
to decrease, this law contains the GSL for gravitating systems with a
horizon.

As pointed out by Nojiri and Odintsov, it may well happen that in the
last stages of phantom dominated universes the scalar curvature grows
enough for quantum effects to play a non-negligible role before the big
rip. If so, the latter may be evaded or at least softened [ 87 ] . While
our study does not incorporate such effects they should not essentially
alter our conclusions so long as the cosmic horizon persists.

It is noteworthy that the duality transformation @xmath and @xmath along
with reversing the direction of time (i.e., @xmath ) leaves Einstein’s
equations invariant and maps phantom cosmologies, with both @xmath and
@xmath positive, into non-phantom cosmologies with @xmath but @xmath
-see, e.g., [ 85 ] . However, this duality does not necessarily extend
to the thermodynamics of the respective universes since future event
horizons exist only when @xmath . Nevertheless, in the particular case
of pole-like expansions, Eq. ( 6.1 ), the transformation preserves the
temperature while the entropy transforms as @xmath with the constraint
@xmath .

## Summary

Cosmology has for a long time been a rather speculative science.
Hubble’s discovery that the Universe is expanding, and -more recently-
the realization that at present this expansion is accelerated, the
measured abundance of light elements, the mass distribution of galaxies
and clusters thereof, and the discovery and posterior measurements of
the anisotropies of the CMB have changed this picture. Hopefully,
measurements of GWs will soon be added to this short list. At any rate,
now we can speak confidently of physical cosmology as a fully–fledged
branch of Science.

The relic GWs constitute a privileged window to determine the evolution
of the Universe. Little is known from the early evolution of the
Universe and the predictions for their spectrum depend on the model
considered. According to these predictions, a spectrum of relic GWs is
generated making feasible its detection with the technology currently
being developed.

In this thesis, using the adiabatic vacuum approximation, we have
reviewed how the expansion of the Universe amplifies the quantum vacuum
fluctuations, and how the relic GWs spectrum is related with the scale
factor.

We have later evaluated the spectrum in a four-stage model (which
consist on a De Sitter stage, a stage dominated by a mixture of MBHs and
radiation, a radiation dominated stage and finally a non-relativistic
matter (dust) dominated stage). We have demonstrated that the spectrum
in this scenario is much lower than the predicted by three–stage model
(De Sitter-radiation era-dust era). We have also shown how the bound
over the GWs spectrum from the measured CMB anisotropies places severe
constraints over the free parameters of the four-stage model.

We have also considered a scenario featuring an accelerated expanding
era dominated by dark energy, right after the dust era of the
three–stage model. We have found that the current power spectrum of this
four–stage scenario exactly coincides with that of the three–stage, but
it evolves in a different fashion. We have considered as well the
possibility that the dark energy decays in non–relativistic matter
leading to a second dust era in the far future and obtained the power
spectrum of the GWs as well as the evolution of the density parameter.

We have applied the generalized second law of thermodynamics to the
four–stage model of above. Assuming the GWs entropy proportional to the
number of GWs, we have found the GSL is fulfilled provided a certain
proportionality constant does not exceed a given upper bound.

Finally, we have extended the GSL study to a single stage universe model
dominated by dark energy (either phantom or not), and found that the GSL
is satisfied and that the entropy of the phantom fluid is negative.
Likewise, we have found a transformation between phantom and non–phantom
scenarios preserving the Einstein field equations that entails a “quasi”
duality between the thermodynamics of both scenarios.

## Appendix A Sudden transition approximation

Let us assume a spatially flat FRW universe which gradually evolves from
an initial stage (whose expansion is dominated by a barotropic fluid of
index @xmath ) to a next stage dominated by another perfect fluid of
barotropic index @xmath . If the transition between both stages begins
at the instant @xmath and ends at @xmath , the scale factor as a
function of time in this scenario reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the subindex @xmath denotes the instant when the expansions begins
and the subindex @xmath denotes the quantities evaluated at @xmath . The
function @xmath describes the smooth transition from one stage to the
other. Consequently, in this scenario @xmath and @xmath are continuous
functions of time at the points @xmath and @xmath .

The solution to equation ( 2.10 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

but also

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the solutions in the transition region @xmath and @xmath are some
unknown functions.

By imposing the continuity of @xmath and @xmath and its first
derivatives at @xmath and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For modes whose period is much larger than the duration of the
transition era (i.e., those modes allowed by the adiabatic vacuum bound
@xmath ), the transition can be assumed instantaneous. This is the
so-called “sudden transition approximation”. In this limit, we can
safely let @xmath . Relabelling the instant @xmath as @xmath , we have
that @xmath , @xmath , and a similar relation for the derivatives
evaluated at @xmath . Equations ( 2.41 ) and ( 2.42 ) readily follow
from ( A.4 ) and ( A.5 ) in this approximation.