The overlap Dirac operator, which satisfies the Ginsparg-Wilson
relation, realizes exact chiral symmetry on the lattice. It also avoids
fermion doubling but its locality and smoothness are subtle. In fact,
the index theorem on the lattice implies that there are certain points
where the overlap Dirac operator has discontinuities. Aside from the
theoretical subtleties, this non-smoothness also raises practical
problems in numerical simulations, especially in @xmath full QCD case.
One must carefully calculate the lowest eigenvalue of the Dirac operator
at each hybrid Monte Carlo step, in order to catch sudden jumps of the
fermion determinant on the topology boundaries (reflection/refraction).
The approximation of the sign function, which is a crucial point in
implementing the overlap Dirac operator, gets worse near the
discontinuities.

A solution may be to concentrate on a fixed topological sector in the
full theory. It is known that an “admissibility” condition, which
suppress small plaquette values, preserves topology of the gauge fields
and improves the locality of the overlap Dirac operator at the same
time. In this thesis, we test a gauge action which automatically
generates “admissible” configurations, as well as (large) negative mass
Wilson fermion action which would also keep the topology. The quark
potential and the topology stability are investigated with different
lattice sizes and different couplings. Then we discuss the effects of
these new approaches on the numerical cost of the overlap fermions.

The results of quenched QCD in the @xmath -regime are also presented as
an example of the lattice studies with fixed topology. Remarkable quark
mass and topology dependences of meson correlators allow us to determine
the fundamental parameters of the effective theory, in which the exact
chiral symmetry with the Ginsparg Wilson relation plays a crucial role.
