# Chapter 1 Introduction

What happens to matter when you squeeze it further and further? And what
if it will be heated more and more? Liquid water for example will turn
at some point into a different phase called steam when it is heated. If
instead the density is increased at room temperature by applying an
external pressure, water will subsequently turn into different types of
ice, called ice VI, ice VII, etc. Such phase transitions are not
specific for water, but they can take place in any interacting
substance, like for example hadronic matter.

Hadronic matter is matter built out of quarks and gluons. The neutron
for instance is a form of hadronic matter, it is a bound state of two
down-quarks, one up-quark and gluons which keep the quarks together.
Imagine a hypothetical situation in which one has lots of these neutrons
in a box. Then increase the temperature. What will happen? At some point
the kinetic energy of the quarks which build up the neutron will become
larger than the energy that is gained by confining the quarks inside the
neutron. At this point the neutrons will cease to exist. The matter in
the box is now in a new phase, which is called the quark gluon plasma.
An order of magnitude estimate of this transition temperature can easily
be made. Classically the kinetic energy of a quark at temperature @xmath
is about @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 In this thesis natural units are used, so @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . . Since the masses of the quarks are much smaller
than the neutron mass, the mass of the neutron is almost completely due
to confining energy. So the confining energy per quark is about @xmath .
This implies that the transition temperature @xmath to the quark gluon
plasma should be around @xmath , which is very hot (actually it is about
@xmath times the temperature of the solar core). In nature these
temperatures were achieved in the early universe and are possible in
relativistic heavy ion collisions for extremely short periods of time.

Now start again from scratch at low temperatures and squeeze the box
further and further. At some point the neutrons will start to overlap
and at even higher densities they will cease to exist as separate
entities. Around this point it is expected that quarks will form Cooper
pairs. The matter will transform into a so-called color-superconducting
state. An order of magnitude estimate shows that this will occur around
densities of about @xmath . This density is quite large, and takes only
place in extremely dense objects like for example neutron stars.

The theory which describes the interactions between the quarks mediated
by gluons is called quantum chromodynamics (QCD) and is treated in more
detail in the following section. Using QCD one could in principle
predict the behavior of matter under these extreme circumstances by
calculating its equation of state (that is the relation between its
pressure and energy density) and its phase diagram , which are discussed
in Secs. 1.2 and 1.3 respectively. The situations in which these extreme
circumstances are realized in nature are reviewed in Sec. 1.4. Since it
turns out that QCD is very complicated at the energy scales around the
phase transition, this thesis will deal with models inspired by QCD to
describe matter at high temperatures and densities, as will be discussed
in more detail in Secs. 1.5 and 1.6. A more extensive review on QCD at
high temperatures and densities can be found in for example
Meyer-Ortmanns ( 1996 ) , Rajagopal and Wilczek ( 2000 ) and Rischke (
2004 ) .

### 1.1 Quantum chromodynamics

Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) is a non-Abelian @xmath gauge field theory
which describes the interactions between the quarks. It is a
generalization of Maxwells theory of electromagnetism. Like the
electrons, quarks carry a charge, called color. Unlike the photons in
electromagnetism, the gluons, which are the force carriers of QCD carry
a color charge as well. As a result the gluons interact with themselves
and with quarks. Due to the @xmath gauge symmetry QCD has three
different color charges, named red, blue and green. Together with the
electroweak theory, QCD is one of the building blocks of the Standard
Model of elementary particle physics. QCD is defined by the following
Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the QCD coupling constant, @xmath is a hermitian
generator of @xmath and @xmath denotes its corresponding structure
constant. The matrices @xmath and @xmath are diagonal and contain the
current quark masses and the quark chemical potentials respectively.
There are six different quark flavors. The up, down and strange quark
are relatively light, while the charm, bottom and top quark are heavy.
Since the masses of the heavy quarks are so much larger than the
estimated transition temperature of about 200 MeV, these quarks will
play a minor role at these energies and will therefore be neglected in
this thesis. The discussion in this thesis will mainly deal with two (
@xmath ) and three-flavor ( @xmath ) situations.

The chemical potentials are necessary to describe a system at finite
density. The baryon chemical potential @xmath for example, is basically
the energy it takes to add one additional baryon to the system.
Temperature is introduced by considering a Euclidean space in which the
@xmath direction is made periodic (for bosons) or antiperiodic (for
fermions) with periodicity @xmath . Field theory at finite temperature
and densities is discussed in more detail in Chapter 2.

QCD has different symmetries which are reflected in the hadron spectrum
as a consequence. First of all it is invariant under local @xmath
transformations. This implies for example that red up quarks are as
heavy as blue up ones. In addition, in absence of quark masses and
chemical potentials, QCD has a global chiral @xmath symmetry. Moreover
it has a global @xmath symmetry related to baryon number conservation
and a global @xmath (axial) symmetry. At low temperatures and chemical
potentials it turns out that the chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken
down to @xmath giving rise to @xmath massless pseudoscalar Goldstone
modes. For @xmath these are the three pions, for @xmath also the four
kaons and the @xmath particle are among the pseudoscalar Goldstone
modes. If chiral symmetry is broken the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
condensates obtain a vacuum expectation value.

However, in reality the quarks have a small mass. Therefore chiral
symmetry is only an approximate symmetry, as a result the pions, the
kaons and the @xmath particle become massive. This remaining
(approximate) @xmath symmetry is the reason why the constituent quark
model of Gell-Mann works as well as it does. Particles are eigenstates
of the QCD Hamiltonian which due to the symmetry commutes with @xmath .
Hence the particles can be classified by the representations of @xmath .
At high temperatures and/or densities the chiral symmetry is
approximately restored, giving rise to a phase transition. Although the
@xmath symmetry is broken due to nonzero quark masses as well, it also
has another reason of breakdown. The non-trivial topological vacuum
structure of QCD due to instantons is causing @xmath axial symmetry
breaking too, which explains the relatively high mass of the @xmath
meson (’t Hooft, 1976 ) .

One of the mysteries in QCD is confinement. It turns out experimentally
that hadrons, which are bound states of quarks, carry no color. Colored
objects, like freely moving quarks, do not occur in nature at low
energies. In numerical computations (lattice QCD) it is confirmed that
QCD has this confinement property. But a detailed understanding of the
confinement mechanism is still lacking. At high temperatures and/or
chemical potentials it is expected that matter will be in a deconfined
phase, which means that in that situation quarks are liberated from the
hadrons. Whether the deconfinement phase transition for light quarks
coincides with the chiral symmetry restoration transition is an
important issue which has not yet been resolved.

QCD is asymptotically free, this implies that the effective coupling of
quarks to gluons becomes smaller at high energies. So at high energy
scales, larger than about @xmath , QCD is a theory of weakly interacting
quarks and gluons. Due to the small coupling constant it is possible to
perform calculations in this regime using perturbation theory. But, at
lower energies QCD becomes strongly coupled and perturbation theory
breaks down. The order of magnitude estimate of the transition
temperature @xmath from the first paragraph tell us that QCD is likely
to be strongly coupled around the phase transition. Hence it is expected
that perturbation theory will fail to describe QCD near @xmath . This
will be illustrated next by comparing perturbative and lattice
calculations of the QCD pressure.

### 1.2 QCD equation of state

Two important macroscopic thermodynamical quantities are the pressure
@xmath and the energy density @xmath of QCD. The relation between @xmath
and @xmath is called the equation of state and determines for example
the behavior of matter created in a relativistic heavy ion collision,
the properties of a (neutron) star and the evolution of the early stage
of the universe shortly after the big bang, see Sec. 1.4. Due to
asymptotic freedom, QCD describes a gas of weakly interacting quarks and
gluons in the limit of very high temperature. In that case the coupling
constant is small, and hence perturbation theory should be applicable.
However as will be shown next perturbation theory does not work for the
temperatures of in the neighborhood of @xmath .

#### Perturbative calculations

The results of the perturbative calculation of the pure glue (which
means no quarks) QCD pressure compared to numerical calculations
(lattice QCD) are displayed in Fig. 1.1 up to order @xmath . It can be
seen in the figure that for temperatures in the neighborhood of the
transition temperature @xmath , the results are varying a lot upon
inclusion of higher order corrections. This implies that the
perturbative expansion breaks down, even for very high temperatures of
around @xmath . However, by reorganizing the perturbative series using
resummation methods (Andersen et al. , 1999 , 2002 ) and self-consistent
approaches (Blaizot et al. , 1999 ) based on hard thermal loops (Braaten
and Pisarski, 1990 ) it is possible to obtain reliable results for
@xmath . In perturbation theory it is impossible to calculate the order
@xmath contribution because an infinite number of diagrams are
contributing in this order and cannot be resummed as was argued by Linde
( 1980 ) .

It is possible to perform perturbation theory for finite chemical
potentials as well, but it again fails for densities where the phase
transition occurs. Also this perturbation series can be improved by
applying the so-called hard dense loop resummation method (Andersen and
Strickland, 2002 ) .

#### Lattice calculations

The best known method to obtain the QCD thermodynamical quantities from
first principles near the phase transition temperature is by lattice
calculations. In these calculations, space-time is discretized and
replaced by a lattice of a finite size. The fermion fields live on the
vertices of this lattice, the gauge fields are replaced by links
connecting the different vertices. All thermodynamical quantities can be
obtained by numerically calculating the partition function (discussed in
Chapter 2). This requires integration over the fermion fields and links.
Since this results in a huge number of integrations, typical lattice
sizes are taken to be rather small, in the order of ten points for each
dimension. Due to this modest lattice sizes, the particles with low mass
(like the pion), which can propagate over longer distances are not very
well described. The integrations in lattice calculations are performed
statistically, using importance sampling Monte-Carlo methods. This works
fine for QCD at zero chemical potential. But at finite baryon chemical
potential, the contribution from the fermions, the so-called fermionic
determinant, becomes imaginary (see also Chapter 7). As a result, the
integrand of the partition function becomes oscillatory, which hampers
the importance sampling methods. This complication is called the fermion
sign problem. Small baryon chemical potentials are, however, accessible
by making a Taylor expansion around @xmath (Allton et al. , 2002 ; Fodor
and Katz, 2002 ; de Forcrand and Philipsen, 2002 ; D’Elia and Lombardo,
2003 ) .

In Fig. 1.2 the lattice results of the pressure of QCD for different
numbers of quark flavors are displayed as a function of @xmath for
@xmath . Here @xmath . From the figure it can be seen that the QCD
pressure rises quickly after passing the transition point. This may be
an indication that many new degrees of freedom are formed, just what one
would expect if the quarks become deconfined from the hadrons. The
figure shows that even around @xmath the pressure is still far away from
that of a freely interacting gas of quarks and gluons @xmath . While the
lattice gives reliable results for @xmath , the data at @xmath can not
be trusted. This is because the pion, the lightest particle of QCD,
which is expected to dominate the pressure of QCD at low temperatures is
still far too heavy on the lattice.

For @xmath the lattice data for the QCD pressure can be fitted to
quasiparticle models (Peshier et al. , 1996 ; Levai and Heinz, 1998 ;
Schneider and Weise, 2001 ) . The results of these fits can be extended
to finite chemical potential (Rebhan and Romatschke, 2003 ; Thaler
et al. , 2004 ) . In this way the equation of state of QCD at finite
chemical potential for @xmath can be predicted.

It is generally believed that the lattice calculations of the pressure
are reliable for temperatures around @xmath and higher. The results at
high temperatures can be predicted by hard-thermal-loop resummation
methods. At low temperatures lattice QCD is still unreliable due to the
unrealistically large pion mass. In order to predict the pressure of QCD
at low temperatures one can use a low-energy effective theory in order
to describe the hadron gas phase as is done in this thesis in Chapter 6
and will be discussed in more detail in Sec 1.5.

### 1.3 QCD phase diagram

By considering the behavior of order parameters (parameters which vanish
in one phase and are non-vanishing in another) one can determine a phase
diagram. One typically distinguishes between two different types of
phase transitions, a first order phase transition in which the order
parameter changes discontinuously and a second order phase transition in
which the derivative of the order parameter changes discontinuously.
Higher order phase transitions are also possible, but are often called
second order transitions as well. In addition, cross-over transitions in
which the order parameter changes smoothly can occur. The different
possibilities are displayed in Fig. 7.1 .

In the limit of zero quark masses the chiral condensates, @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are order parameters for the breaking of chiral
symmetry. In Sec. 1.1 it was mentioned that the chiral symmetry is
already explicitly broken in the QCD Lagrangian density due to the
non-zero quark masses. In that case the chiral condensates are only
approximate order parameters. The order parameter for the
confinement/deconfinement transition in the limit of infinitely heavy
quarks is the trace of the so-called Polyakov loop. For finite quark
masses no order parameter for this transition is known, see for example
Weiss ( 1993 ) .

In Fig. 1.3 the current understanding of the QCD phase diagram is
displayed schematically. As was discussed in the previous section, only
results for zero and small baryon chemical potential can be obtained
from lattice QCD. Lattice calculations find a cross-over transition at
@xmath . The rest of the phase diagram is not yet obtained from first
principles QCD but can be estimated by means of effective models like
the NJL model studied in Chapter 7. However, the phases with
temperatures and densities much higher than the densities and
temperatures where the phase transition takes place are accessible by
hard-thermal loop and hard-dense loop resummation techniques as was
discussed in the previous section. The NJL phase diagram as a function
of @xmath and @xmath is displayed in Fig. 7.4 .

As mentioned before, finite chemical potentials are needed to describe a
system at finite density. However, it is important to keep in mind that
the relation between chemical potential and number density is not
linear. Especially at a first order phase transition, a single value of
a chemical potential can correspond to a whole range of densities, as is
illustrated for the NJL model in Fig 7.2 . In this case one also speaks
of a mixed phase, two phases can occur together. The world we live in is
an example of a mixed phase of nuclear matter and vacuum. One should be
aware that the real phase diagram of matter is not just the QCD phase
diagram. To obtain the complete phase diagram of matter, one should also
take into account the electromagnetic and weak interactions.

The best known point in the QCD phase diagram, is the transition from
the vacuum to the nuclear matter phase, there is a first order phase
transition at @xmath , see also Halasz et al. ( 1998 ) .

It is illustrated in Fig. 1.3 that matter at low chemical potentials and
temperatures matter is in a confined phase in which chiral symmetry is
broken as well. If the temperature is increased, matter goes according
to the current understanding via a cross-over transition to the
deconfined and chirally symmetric phase at low chemical potentials, and
via a first-order transition at higher chemical potentials. This
deconfined phase is called the quark-gluon plasma. The point in which
the first-order transition goes over to a cross-over is called the
critical endpoint. It still is uncertain where this critical endpoint
lies exactly in the phase diagram. At low temperatures and high chemical
potentials due to an attractive interaction, quarks can form Cooper
pairs just like electrons in ordinary superconductivity. This phenomenon
will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.

The phase diagram in Fig. 1.3 is displayed as a function of baryon
chemical potential and temperature. Of course it is interesting to
investigate other phase diagrams as well, for example as a function of
the quark masses, as is discussed in Laermann and Philipsen ( 2003 ) .
In Chapter 7 phase diagrams of the NJL model will be investigated for
unequal chemical potentials and temperature. In that case a new
possibility appears which is not present in Fig. 1.3 , namely quarks can
form pseudoscalar condensates, like the pion condensate @xmath .

In Fig. 1.3 it is also indicated which part of the phase diagram can be
investigated using relativistic heavy ion collisions, which kind of
matter neutrons stars are presumably made of, and through which phases
the early universe went shortly after the big bang. In the following
section these three situations will be examined in somewhat more detail.

### 1.4 Matter under extreme conditions

Typical situations in which temperatures and densities could be high
enough for deconfinement to occur, are the universe just after the big
bang, during heavy ion collisions and inside very compact neutron stars.
In this section a short overview of these situations is given. More
extensive discussions can be found in for example Ellis ( 2005 ) (the
big bang in relation to heavy ion collisions), Gyulassy and McLerran (
2005 ) (heavy ion collisions) and Weber ( 2005 ) (neutron stars).

#### The big bang

In one of the earliest stages of the universe, about @xmath seconds
after the big bang, the universe was still so hot that the matter inside
was in the deconfined phase, i.e. the quark gluon plasma. Since at that
time the particles and antiparticles had not annihilated yet, the baryon
chemical potential was very small. As is indicated in Fig. 1.3 when the
universe cooled, it probably went through a cross-over transition to the
confined phase. Since a cross-over transition is smooth, it is unlikely
that the expansion of the universe was modified substantially during
this transition.

To describe the evolution of the universe one has to use an equation of
state. Most often a simple equation of state is used, @xmath for the
radiation dominated era at early times, and @xmath for the matter
dominated era which occured later. The description can be made more
realistic by using the QCD equation of state.

#### Relativistic heavy ion collisions

The behavior of matter under extreme circumstances can be studied
experimentally using heavy ion collisions. Such experiments have been
performed at the Super-Proton-Synchrotron (SPS) at CERN and are being
performed at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at BNL.
Currently new accelerators which, among other things, will be used for
relativistic heavy ion collision studies are being build at CERN (the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC)), and at GSI (Schwerionen-Synchrotron (SIS
200)).

In a typical relativistic heavy ion collision two incoming heavy nuclei
(for example gold with 197 nucleons) collide at relativistic energies.
At RHIC these energies are up to 200 GeV per nucleon. During the
collision a large fraction of the kinetic energy is converted into
particles. Therefore statistical methods can be used to describe the
system. High temperatures and energy densities are achieved during these
collisions. The baryon chemical potential remains low in a heavy ion
collision. The reason for this is that due to the large production of
particle antiparticle pairs, the initial dominance of particles over
antiparticles is washed out. Since SIS 200 will operate at a lower
energy than RHIC and LHC, a higher baryon chemical potential can be
achieved. However as a result the final temperature will be lower, which
could make it more difficult to probe the phase transition.

At RHIC it seems that the produced matter quickly achieves thermal
equilibrium. After that moment, relativistic hydrodynamics can describe
the evolution using the QCD equation of state. This indicates that the
matter created during the collisions at RHIC has a very low viscosity,
possibly the most perfect fluid ever made.

That a statistical description to model heavy ion collisions works, is
illustrated in Fig. 1.4 . In that figure, a prediction of the ratio of
particle yields is compared to the experimental data of the four
different experiments at RHIC (Braun-Munzinger et al. , 2001 ) . The
statistical model only has two fit parameters, @xmath and @xmath . It
can also be seen from the figure that the baryon chemical potential is
not that big compared to the temperature, because the ratio between
particles and antiparticles of the same hadronic species are close to
unity.

The main objective of these heavy ion collision experiments is to
produce the quark gluon plasma and measure its properties. One of the
clearest signals for the creation of a very dense and hot state of
matter comes from the suppression of back-to-back correlations between
two high transverse-momentum jets. In a collision at low energy
densities, such a jet should be correlated with a jet produced in the
opposite direction due to momentum conservation. This is indeed observed
in heavy ion collision experiments. However, at energies of 200 GeV per
nucleon in central gold-gold collisions at RHIC, this correlation has
suddenly disappeared. This indicates that the momentum of the opposite
jet is absorbed in a very hot and dense medium, probably the quark-gluon
plasma.

Using heavy ion collisions it is difficult to reach high chemical
potentials, so in order to investigate that situation one has to look to
extremely compact objects like neutron stars.

#### Neutron stars

If the mass of a star is larger than about ten times the solar mass, the
fusion process can continue until an iron-nickel core is formed. Then
fusion will stop since iron is the nucleus which has the lowest binding
energy per nucleon. As a result the temperature of the core will drop,
hence the pressure will go down. Then the gravitational interactions
cause the core to collapse until nuclear densities are reached. At this
point the collapse stops because it takes a lot of energy to squeeze the
core further. This creates a shock wave which as a result emits all of
the matter from the shells surrounding the collapsed core. This event is
called a supernova explosion. The remaining core cools down and becomes
a neutron star or at even higher densities a black hole. Typical
densities could be so high that the core of a neutron star is a color
superconductor. Using the QCD equation of state at high-densities, the
so-called Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkov relation can be applied to calculate
the mass as a function of the radius of a neutron star, see for example
Fraga et al. ( 2001 ) and Andersen and Strickland ( 2002 ) . These
mass-radius relationships can be compared to observations. However,
until now there has not yet been discovered a neutron star from which
one is certain that the inner core is so dense that it must be in a
color superconducting phase.

### 1.5 QCD inspired theories

As was argued in the previous sections, due to the nonperturbative
nature of QCD near the phase transition, it is not known how to obtain
for example the order of the phase transition, the equation of state and
the phase diagram using analytical methods from first principles QCD for
all temperatures and chemical potentials. Also the
confinement/deconfinement mechanism is not understood analytically.
However, toy models (models which share features with QCD) and
low-energy effective theories (theories which describe QCD in the
non-perturbative regime) can be studied to learn about certain aspects
to be addressed below.

#### Toy models

Toy models for QCD are models which have features in common with QCD.
One can study these models in order to learn about nonperturbative
methods and phenomena like for example the behavior of thermodynamical
quantities, the generation of a mass gap, confinement and the importance
of topological configurations like instantons. In this thesis two of
these toy models are studied, the @xmath nonlinear sigma model in @xmath
dimensions in Chapter 3 and the @xmath model in @xmath dimensions in
Chapter 4. The nonlinear sigma model is a real scalar field theory which
like QCD is asymptotically free and has a dynamically generated mass
gap. The @xmath model contains complex scalar fields and @xmath gauge
fields. This model is also asymptotically free, has a dynamically
generated mass gap, contains instanton configurations and has the
confinement property. In these two models it is possible to expand in
the number of fields @xmath . This expansion is called the large- @xmath
approximation and is a method which can give insight in the
nonperturbative behavior of these theories. This method will be used
throughout this thesis and is discussed in more detail in Chapter 3. In
this thesis the pressure for both models is calculated to
next-to-leading order in @xmath . In this way it is possible to check
the validity of the @xmath expansion and to investigate the effects of
instantons on the thermodynamical quantities in the @xmath model.

#### Low-energy effective theories

Low-energy effective theories describe QCD in the non-perturbative
regime where perturbation theory is no longer applicable. The simplest
examples of such an effective theory are the @xmath linear and nonlinear
sigma model in @xmath dimensions. The @xmath symmetry (which is locally
isomorphic to the chiral @xmath symmetry of the two-flavor QCD
Lagrangian) of these models is spontaneously broken to @xmath (which is
isomorphic to the remaining chiral @xmath symmetry of the QCD vacuum
state). Since these models have the same symmetry breaking pattern as
two-flavor QCD, they serve as a low-energy effective theory for 2-flavor
QCD in which only the pion and the sigma meson can occur. Moreover for
the same reason, the phase transition of the @xmath (non)linear sigma
model falls in the same universality class as the 2-flavor QCD chiral
phase transition. This allows one to study the order of the phase
transition and critical exponents of QCD using the @xmath (non)linear
sigma model. In this thesis the pressure of these models is calculated
to next-to-leading order in @xmath in Chapter 6. In this way a
prediction for the pressure of QCD at temperatures below @xmath is made,
where the lattice calculations are not reliable.

Another effective theory studied in Chapter 7 of this thesis, is the
Nambu–Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model. In this model the gluon exchange between
the quarks is replaced by a 4-point quark interaction. As a result some
features of QCD like confinement and asymptotic freedom are lost.
However, low-energy properties like the meson masses are described very
well using this model. Furthermore this model has the same pattern of
chiral symmetry breaking as QCD. Therefore, it is expected that the NJL
model gives a realistic qualitative description of the QCD phase diagram
for low temperatures and chemical potentials. In Chapter 7 phase
diagrams with different up, down and strange quark chemical potentials
are calculated, in order to study the competition between phases in
which color superconductivity is possible and in phases where the pions
or kaons condense.

### 1.6 Overview of this thesis

To summarize, the thermodynamics of QCD inspired theories is studied in
this thesis. In Chapter 2 a short introduction to finite density and
temperature field theory is given. Particular emphasis is put on the
analytic and numerical calculation of a combination of a sum and an
integral, which will be required frequently throughout this thesis. In
Chapter 3 the effective potential is derived from which by minimization
one can derive the thermodynamical quantities like the pressure and
determine the phase diagram. Almost all calculations in this thesis are
based on evaluating this effective potential. Moreover, Chapter 3
discusses the @xmath approximation which can give insight into
non-perturbative physics. This is also a basic ingredient for all the
calculations performed in this thesis. The thermodynamics of the @xmath
nonlinear sigma model in @xmath dimensions is studied in Chapter 4. In
Chapter 5, the effect of quantum instantons on the thermodynamical
quantities is investigated using the @xmath model in @xmath dimensions.
Chapter 6 is devoted to the study of the thermodynamics of the @xmath
linear and nonlinear sigma model in @xmath dimensions, which can be used
to predict the pressure of QCD at low temperatures. The NJL model and
its phase diagrams are discussed in Chapter 7.

### 1.7 Notations

Several notations are used throughout this thesis. These will be
summarized here.

-   Euclidean momentum vectors are denoted by a capital letter, that is
    @xmath . The length of a momentum vector @xmath is denoted as @xmath
    .

-   The integral over Euclidean momenta, the bosonic sum-integral and
    the fermionic sum-integral are respectively defined as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   The difference of a sum-integral and an integral are for bosonic
    fields and fermionic fields respectively defined as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Integration over space(-time) will be depending on the context
    written as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

## Chapter 2 Finite temperature and density field theory

In a system with a large number of particles like for example a gas, it
is very cumbersome, if not impossible, to calculate the trajectories of
individual particles. On the other hand collective properties, like the
pressure and number densities, characterize the system of particles as a
whole and are therefore in many cases much more interesting than the
behavior of individual particles. These collective properties can really
be calculated using statistical methods.

In this chapter first the basics of classical statistical physics will
be summarized. Then, by using path-integrals in Euclidean space-time,
classical statistical physics will be cast in a form suitable for
quantum field theories, called finite temperature and density field
theory. As an illustration the pressure of a free scalar and of a free
fermion field theory are obtained. Both expressions for the pressure are
explicitly evaluated after a general explanation of how frequency sums,
that naturally arise in finite temperature calculations, can be
computed. At the end of this chapter further techniques for the
evaluation of frequency sums are developed, which are useful for the
numerical computation of more complicated sums that arise in interacting
field theories.

A more extensive introduction to finite temperature and density field
theory can be found in the books by Kapusta ( 1989 ) and Le Bellac (
2000 ) and the review article of Landsman and Van Weert ( 1987 ) .

### 2.1 Classical statistical physics

Consider a box of volume @xmath , having total energy @xmath and filled
with @xmath particles. This box can be divided into regions 1 and 2.
Clearly, it holds that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the
number of ways in which the total energy @xmath can be distributed over
@xmath particles in a volume @xmath . This quantity @xmath is called the
number of micro-states. Now the two postulates of statistical physics
are,

1.  All micro-states are equally likely to occur.

2.  In equilibrium the system will choose the state that is the most
    likely to occur.

Combining postulate 1 and 2 gives that the equilibrium state is the one
with the highest number of micro-states. The number of micro-states of
the complete box can be written as the product of the micro-states of
the two different regions, @xmath , where @xmath . It is convenient to
turn this equality into an additive relation by introducing a quantity
called the entropy @xmath which is defined as @xmath . Then the total
entropy of the box @xmath is equal to the sum of the entropies of the
different regions, @xmath . The two postulates can be translated into
the condition that the total entropy is maximal in equilibrium. If the
entropy is maximal it holds that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where it was used that the total energy @xmath is constant. It follows
that in equilibrium

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In equilibrium the temperatures @xmath of the two regions @xmath and
@xmath should be equal, that is @xmath . Hence @xmath should be some
function of temperature. The correct definition of temperature turns out
to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

because in that way it is possible to derive the experimentally verified
ideal gas law, @xmath . Similarly since @xmath is constant it holds that
in equilibrium

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In equilibrium it take as much energy to transfer one particle from
region 1 to region 2 as to do the opposite. This energy is called
chemical potential, so in equilibrium the chemical potentials should be
equal, that is @xmath . As a result @xmath should be some function of
chemical potential. It turns out that the correct definition is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

because it gives rise to the correct distribution function for fermions,
Eq. ( 2.22 ).

Now consider a box of fixed volume @xmath placed in a very large heat
bath of constant temperature @xmath and constant chemical potential
@xmath . The box is allowed to exchange energy and particles with the
heat bath. The total system of heat bath and box together has energy
@xmath and contains @xmath particles. The probability @xmath that the
box has energy @xmath and contains @xmath particles is equal to the
probability that the heat bath has energy @xmath and contains @xmath
particles. So it follows that @xmath is proportional to @xmath , the
number of micro-states of the heat bath. In terms of entropy one has
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a normalization factor. Assuming the heat bath is large
implies that @xmath and @xmath . Hence it is possible to expand the
entropy of the heat bath around @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In higher orders of the expansion one gets terms like @xmath , which
reflects the change of the heat bath temperature when energy is
transferred into the box. Because it is assumed that the heat bath has
constant temperature @xmath , so this higher order term can be
neglected. Another higher order term of the expansion is @xmath which
reflects the change of chemical potential divided by temperature when
particles are transferred into the box. Again because it is assumed the
heat bath has constant temperature and chemical potential, this higher
order term can be neglected too. For the same reason one can assume that
@xmath vanishes as well.

As a result, the probability @xmath that the box has energy @xmath and
contains @xmath particles is equal to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a normalization factor different from @xmath and @xmath
.

The normalization factor @xmath which is also called the partition
function, is equal to the sum of all probabilities,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The partition function contains all information of the collective or
macroscopic behavior of the thermodynamic system. Strictly speaking this
is already a quantum mechanical equation, since the energies are assumed
to be discrete. In the classical case, one has to replace the sum over
states by an integral. Using the partition function one can calculate
thermodynamical quantities, like the energy density of the box,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

the number density of particles in the box,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the entropy density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the definition of the pressure, @xmath which is valid at constant
temperature and number density, it follows that the pressure is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Typically, the width @xmath of a system is much larger than the inverse
temperature, (i.e. @xmath ), such that one can use the infinite volume
limit to describe the thermodynamics of a finite volume to good
approximation. The advantage of the infinite volume limit is that field
theoretic calculations simplify. In all calculations performed in this
thesis, this infinite volume limit is taken. Then it turns out that
@xmath becomes proportional to @xmath , such that the pressure becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Instead of calculating @xmath directly, in this thesis the pressure will
be calculated via the effective potential (see Chapter 3) which in its
minimum equals @xmath .

### 2.2 Quantum statistical physics

Of many physical systems one does not know the energies @xmath and the
number densities @xmath exactly. Most often only the Hamiltonian @xmath
and a corresponding number operator @xmath which commutes with @xmath is
known. Denoting the eigenstates of @xmath and @xmath by @xmath , the
partition function expressed in terms of the Hamiltonian and number
operator becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The thermal expectation value of an operator @xmath can also be
expressed in terms of a trace,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

An expectation value is independent of the choice of basis due to the
cyclic property of the trace.

As an example of the formalism, it will be shown how to derive the
Bose-Einstein distribution function. This distribution function gives
the number of states as a function of energy and temperature for a
non-interacting bosonic system. The Bose-Einstein distribution function
is the expectation value of the number operator. Non-interacting bosons
obey the following harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy of the state with momentum @xmath and @xmath
and @xmath are respectively annihilation and creation operators which
satisfy the usual commutation relation for bosonic operators, @xmath and
@xmath . The bosonic number operator is given by @xmath . The
expectation value of the number operator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

With use of the following equality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the fact that @xmath it can be shown that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Bose-Einstein distribution function @xmath follows from the last
equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar way it is possible to derive the Fermi-Dirac distribution,
which is the expectation value of the fermionic number density. The
fermion creation and annihilation operators satisfy anti-commutation
relations. As a result one picks up a minus sign in ( 2.20 ) when
swapping the annihilation and creation operators. The Fermi-Dirac
distribution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.3 Statistical field theory

Using the path integral formalism it is possible to obtain the partition
function of a field theory. Consider a bosonic field @xmath . The
thermal expectation value of a product of two bosonic fields in
equilibrium with a heat bath of temperature @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dynamics of a field @xmath is entirely described by its Hamiltonian
@xmath , which can be used to determine the time evolution of the
fields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

By identifying @xmath a connection between inverse temperature and
imaginary time is found. As a result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the relation between inverse temperature and imaginary time the
partition function can be written in terms of a path integral. For this,
consider a transition matrix element between an initial bosonic state
@xmath and a final state @xmath in ordinary field theory. Such a
transition element in terms of a path integral is given by the following
expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the prime (’) on the measure indicates that the path integral is
taken over fields which satisfy the following boundary condition @xmath
and @xmath . If one makes the identification @xmath and if one chooses
@xmath and @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equation enables one to write the partition function in terms
of a path integral,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integration is implicitly over all fields which obey the
condition @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath describe the same physical
state the sign of the boundary conditions on the bosonic fields cannot
be determined in this way. However, this can be done by considering a
two-point function.

For bosonic fields the two-point function evaluated at @xmath and @xmath
, where @xmath is between 0 and @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ( 2.25 ) was used. Here @xmath indicates time ordering in
imaginary time. By choosing @xmath it follows from ( 2.29 ) that the
boundary condition on bosonic fields has a @xmath sign,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

For fermions similar arguments can be used, but since time ordering for
fermions requires an additional minus sign, one finds an
anti-periodicity condition for fermionic fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

So thermal field theory is in essence a Euclidean field theory where one
dimension ( @xmath ) is compactified to a circle. As a consequence of
this, the Fourier transform of a bosonic field becomes a sum over
so-called Matsubara frequencies,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Matsubara frequencies are @xmath . The capital @xmath is a
momentum vector in Euclidean space, @xmath . The symbol @xmath denotes a
so-called sum-integral, where the sum is over bosonic modes, and will
arise often in finite temperature calculations. The momentum
representation for fermions is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Matsubara frequencies for fermions are @xmath . The symbol
@xmath denotes a sum-integral, where the sum is over fermionic Matsubara
modes.

Two different integration contours are often used in equilibrium finite
temperature field theory. In the derivation above, the Matsubara contour
was used. This is a contour starting at @xmath straight down the
imaginary axis to @xmath , which gives rise to the so-called
imaginary-time formulation of thermal field theory. Another possibility
is the Keldysh contour which starts at @xmath , goes along the real axis
to @xmath , down to @xmath , back under the real axis to @xmath and
finally to @xmath . This Keldysh contour gives rise to the so-called
real-time formalism. The real-time formalism is favored over the
imaginary-time formalism when quantities have to be obtained in
Minkowskian space-time at finite temperature as is for example the case
for spectral densities. To calculate such a spectral density in the
imaginary-time formalism one has to make an analytic continuation, which
can be avoided by using the real-time formalism. All calculations in
this thesis will be performed using the imaginary-time formalism.

As an example of finite temperature field theory, the pressure of a free
scalar theory will be calculated. The Lagrangian density of this theory
in Euclidean space is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass of the scalar field. The action of a free field
theory is quadratic in the fields, hence the Gaussian path integral can
be computed exactly (see for example Weinberg ( 1995 ) , Chapter 9). One
finds using the fact that @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the single closed loop denotes the corresponding Feynman diagram
of this contribution to @xmath . In contrast to for example a two-point
function, @xmath contains no external vertices, so all its diagrams are
necessarily closed. In an interacting field theory more complicated
closed loop diagrams contribute to the pressure next to the single
closed loop, for examples see Figs. 3.1 and 3.2 . The Feynman rules
needed to evaluate these kind of loop diagrams at finite temperature can
be found in for example Kapusta ( 1989 ) . The functional trace in Eq. (
2.35 ) is over a complete set of functions that satisfy the periodic
boundary conditions in imaginary time for scalar fields. The trace can
be evaluated by going to momentum space. As a result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

were the sum-integral is defined in Eq. ( 2.32 ). The pressure can now
be calculated by applying Eq. ( 2.14 ). Since it is only possible to
measure pressure differences, it is convenient to normalize the pressure
at zero temperature to zero. In order to do this the contribution at
zero temperature which is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

will be subtracted from the contribution at finite temperature which is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The zero temperature contribution, Eq. ( 2.37 ) is clearly ultraviolet
divergent. It can be evaluated by applying an ultraviolet momentum
cut-off or using dimensional regularization. The finite temperature
contribution, Eq. ( 2.38 ) is ultraviolet divergent as well. Because
high-momentum modes at finite temperature are exponentially suppressed
by a Bose-Einstein distribution function (as will be shown in the next
section) and since Eq. ( 2.38 ) becomes equal to Eq. ( 2.37 ) in the
limit of zero temperature, the divergences of Eq. ( 2.37 ) and Eq. (
2.38 ) are the same. Hence the difference between those equations, which
is the normalized pressure is ultraviolet finite. One then finds that
the pressure of a free scalar field in @xmath dimensions is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following section it will be explained how this expression can be
computed.

To obtain the pressure of a free fermion field theory consider its
Lagrangian density in Minkowskian space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a chemical potential for the fermion particle minus
antiparticle number @xmath . In Euclidean space this Lagrangian density
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Performing the Gaussian path integral gives that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the determinant is over the Dirac indices and a complete set of
functions that satisfy anti-periodic boundary conditions in imaginary
time. After going to momentum space it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Evaluating the determinant over the Dirac indices and subtracting the
divergent zero temperature contribution one finds that the pressure of a
free fermion field in 4 dimensions is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Like in the bosonic case discussed in the previous
paragraph, this pressure is finite. In the following section it will be
explained how this pressure can be calculated.

### 2.4 Analytic calculation of sum-integrals

As was discussed in the previous section one often has to evaluate
sum-integrals in finite temperature field theory. In this section a
method to perform these sum-integrals analytically will be discussed.
The following section is devoted to the numerical evaluation of
sum-integrals.

In order to calculate a sum-integral, one has to perform an infinite sum
over Matsubara modes, after which the integration over momenta has to be
done. Such a sum over Matsubara modes can be obtained by using contour
integration. Consider a particular sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath as for bosonic fields. This expression can viewed as a sum
over residues of some function which has simple poles located at @xmath
. A sum over residues is equivalent to an integration around all the
poles, which is sketched in the left-hand part of Fig. 2.1 . Consider
the function @xmath . It has only simple poles at @xmath , which all
have residue @xmath . So assuming @xmath has no poles on the imaginary
axis, @xmath has simple poles at @xmath with residue @xmath . This
allows one to write the sum as the following integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the contour @xmath is depicted in the left part of Fig. 2.1 .

Now one can use that @xmath , where @xmath is the Bose-Einstein
distribution function. If @xmath , one can split @xmath in two pieces
along the imaginary axis and bring them together

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equation can be used to write the sum as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath falls off rapidly enough at @xmath it is possible to close the
contour as is done in the right-hand part of Fig. 2.1 . The integral can
now be calculated straightforwardly by summing over the residues. One
should be aware that the contour in the right part Fig. 2.1 goes
clockwise, so one picks up an additional minus sign when applying the
residue theorem to calculate the integral.

A frequently arising sum (see for example the gap equations calculated
in Chapters 4, 5 and 6) is the one over the propagator which using
@xmath with @xmath results in,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath . After integrating over spatial momenta one
finds the following important result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

By integrating Eq. ( 2.49 ) over @xmath the sum-integral of a
logarithmic function can be obtained. This sum-integral arises in the
calculation of the pressure of a bosonic field theory (see for example
Eq. ( 2.38 ) of the previous section and Chapters 4, 5 and 6). One finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an infinite constant which is independent of @xmath and
temperature. Equation ( 2.51 ) is ultraviolet divergent; all divergences
arise from the integral over @xmath and the constant @xmath . The
high-momentum modes which depend on temperature are exponentially
suppressed so they do not give rise to divergences. In the limit of zero
temperature a sum over Matsubara modes changes into an integration over
@xmath , hence Eq. ( 2.51 ) becomes in the limit of zero temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows that all ultraviolet divergences of Eq. ( 2.51 ) are
contained in the zero-temperature contribution. The pressure of a free
bosonic field as is defined in Eq. ( 2.39 ) is hence ultraviolet finite
and given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Chapter 7 a theory with fermions in the presence of a chemical
potential will be discussed. In that case @xmath . Using the formalism
presented above it can be shown that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . After integrating Eq. ( 2.54 ) over @xmath the fermionic
sum-integral of a logarithmic function can be obtained. This
sum-integral arises in the calculation of the pressure of a fermionic
field theory (see for example Eq. ( 2.44 ) in the previous section and
Chapter 7). One finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a divergent constant which is independent of temperature
and @xmath . Like in the bosonic case, the high-momentum modes of the
term which depends on temperature is exponentially suppressed an hence
does not give rise to an ultraviolet divergence. All divergences are
contained in the zero-temperature contribution, as a result the pressure
of a free fermionic field in 3+1 dimensions (defined in Eq. ( 2.44 )) is
finite and given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath and @xmath the temperature-dependent parts of the
sum-integrals can be obtained exactly. The integrals which appear after
summing over Matsubara frequencies can be evaluated with use of the
following identities with @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gamma function which obeys: @xmath and @xmath is the
Riemann zeta function. Some useful values of the Riemann zeta function
are: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Combining Eqs.  ( 2.39 ), ( 2.51 ) and
( 2.57 ) gives the following result for the pressure of a massless
bosonic spin-0 degree of freedom in 3+1 dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

By combining Eqs. ( 2.44 ), ( 2.55 ) and ( 2.57 ) the pressure of a
massless spin- @xmath fermionic field in the absence of a chemical
potential in 3+1 dimensions is obtained, which reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last two equations can be used to obtain the pressure of QCD in the
limit of infinite temperature. Due to asymptotic freedom the quarks and
the gluons are effectively non-interacting in this limit. Moreover since
the temperature is then much larger than the quark masses, the quarks
are effectively massless. So in the limit of infinite temperature the
pressure of QCD is the sum of the pressure of eight massless gluons and
@xmath massless quarks. Since all eight gluons have two transverse
polarizations their contribution to the QCD pressure in the infinite
temperature limit is @xmath . The @xmath quarks all carry three colors,
hence their contribution to the QCD pressure in the infinite temperature
limit is @xmath . Adding the gluonic and quark contribution gives the
QCD pressure in the infinite temperature limit which is @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath . In the confined phase at low temperatures
one expects the QCD pressure to be dominated by a gas of particles with
lowest mass, which are the pions. Since there are three pions which are
spin-0 particles, the pressure of QCD at low temperatures is something
in the order of @xmath (if one takes into account that the pions have a
mass this pressure even becomes smaller, see Chapter 6). Hence the
pressure divided by @xmath at low temperatures is much smaller than in
the infinite temperature limit as also can be seen from Fig. 1.2 , which
display the results of lattice calculations of the pressure of QCD. In
this figure, the infinite temperature limits calculated in this
paragraph are drawn as well.

### 2.5 Numerical computation of sum-integrals

As was discussed in the previous sections, partition functions can be
obtained by calculating sum-integrals. It was shown that these
sum-integrals are typically ultraviolet divergent, however the
difference between a sum-integral and an integral is finite because of
the exponential suppression of high momentum modes. In the examples
discussed in the previous section, the sum-integrals were obtained
relatively straightforwardly because the sum over Matsubara modes could
be performed analytically. However in more complicated cases, which for
example arise in Chapters 4, 5 and 6, an analytic result for this sum
can no longer be obtained. In this section a method will be developed,
which can be used to calculate the sum-integrals numerically.

The sum-integrals which arise in calculating partition functions are
typically of the following form (see for example Eq. ( 2.35 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

As was argued in the previous section, such sum-integrals are most often
ultraviolet divergent. Hence, an immediate problem which arises when
calculating a sum-integral numerically in the brute-force way (that is
to perform the sum over Matsubara modes numerically and then to do the
integration over spatial momenta numerically as well) are the
ultraviolet divergences. To treat these ultraviolet divergences in a
consistent way it is useful to split a sum-integral into a finite part
containing the difference between a sum and an integral and a divergent
part in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following two subsection it is subsequently discussed how the
integral and the difference between the sum-integral and the integral
can be computed numerically.

#### Computation of the integral

The term @xmath contains all possible ultraviolet divergences of @xmath
and can be calculated for example by applying a cut-off or dimensional
regularization. Numerically a cut-off regularization is the easiest,
however dimensional regularization is also possible numerically as was
shown by Caravaglios ( 2000 ) . In the cases considered in this thesis,
the ultraviolet divergences @xmath of the term proportional to @xmath
can always be extracted analytically by considering the high-momentum
behavior @xmath of @xmath , i.e. @xmath (see also Blaizot et al. ( 2003
) ). The term which contains the divergences can now be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last integral is finite and can easily be evaluated
numerically using standard techniques like Gauss-Legendre integration.
The rewriting of the divergences in terms of an integral prevents
subtraction of two large quantities which, due to the finite machine
precision, can give rise to huge numerical errors. If @xmath depends
explicitly on temperature (see Chapter 4, 5 and 6 for an example) @xmath
can have a temperature dependence as well, giving rise to
temperature-dependent ultraviolet divergences. Such a divergence gives
rise to renormalization problems, therefore a careful analysis is
required.

#### Computation of the difference between a sum-integral and an
integral

The difference between a sum-integral and an integral is most often
finite because it turns out that its high momentum modes are
exponentially suppressed (as was shown explicitly for two examples in
the previous section). Since both terms in the difference are divergent,
it is not easy to obtain this difference numerically by using the
expression in the second line of Eq. ( 2.61 ). However, using contour
integration it is possible to derive an expression which does not
contain divergent parts and hence will be suitable for numerical
evaluation. After that, this expression has to be integrated over the
spatial momenta which can be done using standard numerical techniques
like Gauss-Legendre integration.

For simplicity @xmath is taken in this section. Results can however be
easily generalized to any @xmath by rescaling. Consider a function
@xmath which is analytic for @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
integers. Using that @xmath has poles at @xmath with residue @xmath , it
holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the analyticity requirement on @xmath one is free to choose
the contour @xmath as long as it is closed, the points @xmath with
@xmath are included and other possible cuts and poles of @xmath are
excluded.

The contour @xmath used in this section is displayed in Fig. 2.2 , where
@xmath goes from @xmath to @xmath , @xmath from @xmath to @xmath ,
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath and @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Here
@xmath and @xmath . Now it can be used that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since it is assumed that @xmath has no poles or cuts within the
integration contour,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining the three equations above gives for the difference @xmath of a
sum and an integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now consider the limit @xmath . For functions @xmath which grow slower
than an exponential in the limit @xmath , the contribution coming from
integration along @xmath and @xmath can be neglected. In that case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

A convenient choice is @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath should be analytic for @xmath . This formula is
similar to the Abel-Plana formula (where @xmath is taken to be @xmath ,
see for example Barton ( 1981 ) ). Eq. ( 2.70 ) is, however, more
convenient for numerical purposes due to the larger suppression factor
of @xmath as compared to @xmath in the original Abel-Plana formula. If
@xmath for @xmath , Eq. ( 2.70 ) can be simplified to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The difference between a sum-integral and an integral can now be
calculated using the following expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term @xmath can be computed using Eq. ( 2.70 ) although not
necessarily with @xmath , since to apply that equation @xmath should
satisfy the analyticity requirements discussed below Eq. ( 2.70 ). To
illustrate the computation of Eq. ( 2.72 ) two examples will be given
below.

In order to obtain the pressure of a free scalar field theory (see
Eqs. ( 2.39 ) and ( 2.51 )) the term @xmath has to be computed. To
evaluate this expression numerically one takes @xmath . Clearly the sum
over all Matsubara modes ( @xmath ) diverges as does the integral over
@xmath . However, the difference between the sum and integral is finite.
To calculate this difference it is not allowed to use ( 2.70 ) with
@xmath , because @xmath has a cut at @xmath . One therefore has to split
the difference into parts, for example in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath is even in @xmath , @xmath . The term @xmath can be
calculated numerically using Eq. ( 2.71 ). The term @xmath can be
obtained numerically using the explicit expression for the difference
between a sum and integral. As a result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now @xmath can be obtained by integrating Eq. ( 2.74 ) over momenta
using Eq. ( 2.72 ).

In Chapters 4, 5, and 6 of this thesis, next-to-leading @xmath
corrections to the pressure are investigated. To obtain these
corrections one has to calculate a sum-integral of the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is some constant and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath is even in @xmath , has a cut for @xmath and depends
explicitly on temperature. In order to use Eq. ( 2.71 ) to calculate the
difference between a sum and an integral one has to split @xmath as
follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath because of the cut in @xmath . The term @xmath can be
obtained numerically using Eq. ( 2.71 ). It was checked numerically for
several examples that changing @xmath has no effects on @xmath as
expected. After calculating @xmath the integration over @xmath can be
done straightforwardly to obtain @xmath using Eq. ( 2.72 ). It was
observed numerically that the difference of a sum and an integral is
dominated by the low-momentum modes which can be understood as being due
to the exponential suppression of the high-momentum modes at finite
temperature. Hence after integration over momenta @xmath one obtains a
finite result for @xmath as expected. This conclusion applies to
difference of sum-integrals and integrals of more general @xmath as
well.

## Chapter 3 The effective potential and the @xmath expansion

As was discussed in the previous chapter, thermodynamical quantities can
be derived by calculating the partition function. In this chapter, it
will be made clear how such a partition function can be obtained by
locating the extremum of a so-called effective potential. The derivation
of this effective potential will be reviewed in the first section of
this chapter. Then the large- @xmath approximation, which can be used to
investigate non-perturbative phenomena, will be discussed. Thereafter,
the auxiliary field method will be studied. Using the auxiliary field
method the large- @xmath approximation of the models examined in this
thesis can be obtained systematically. Finally it will be explained why
some effective potentials expressed in terms of auxiliary fields can
have temperature-dependent ultraviolet divergences outside the minimum.

### 3.1 The 1PI effective action and the effective potential

The one particle irreducible (1PI) effective action is a useful tool for
calculating partition functions. It is especially preferred if a certain
field can obtain a vacuum expectation value. This happens for example in
a theory with spontaneous symmetry breaking. In ordinary perturbation
theory one expands around the trivial vacuum, for which the vacuum
expectation values of fields vanish, say @xmath . In the 1PI effective
action approach however, one expands around the true vacuum. This means
that the 1PI method allows for a nonzero vacuum expectation value of
@xmath , @xmath . This vacuum expectation value can be found by
minimizing the 1PI effective action. Because in the 1PI method one
perturbs around the true vacuum it is more advantageous to use this
method over ordinary perturbation theory. Moreover it allows one to
resum whole classes of Feynman diagrams and to investigate
non-perturbative physics. More details concerning the derivation of the
effective action given below can be found in quantum field theory
textbooks, for example Weinberg ( 1995 ) , Peskin and Schroeder ( 1995 )
and Zinn-Justin ( 1996 ) .

#### Formal definition of the effective action

Consider a general scalar field theory with Lagrangian density @xmath in
Euclidean space-time. The partition function of this theory in the
presence of a source term @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

here @xmath denotes the classical action. From this partition function
one can compute the generating functional for connected Green’s
functions which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

These Green’s functions are obtained by functional differentiating
@xmath with respect to @xmath . For example the vacuum expectation value
of @xmath of the theory in the presence of a source term is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, the connected two-point correlation function can be found as
follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The 1PI effective action @xmath is the generating functional of 1PI
diagrams. An 1PI diagram is a diagram that is still connected after
cutting one internal line. The 1PI effective action is the Legendre
transform of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The effective action is a function of @xmath only and not of @xmath .
The source term @xmath in Eq. ( 3.5 ) is to be chosen in such a way that
the vacuum expectation value of @xmath in the theory with a source term
will become equal to @xmath . The 1PI effective action is, unlike the
classical action, an action which contains all contributions arising
from quantum fluctuations. Extremizing the effective action with respect
to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence at an extremum of the effective action the source term has to
vanish, in other words @xmath . The extremum will be denoted by @xmath
(x),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the definition of the effective action, Eq. ( 3.5 ), it follows
that the effective action at the extremal value is equal to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This important equation shows that the partition function can be
obtained by calculating the minimal value of the effective action.

It often happens that the vacuum solution of Eq. ( 3.7 ) is
translational invariant, which implies that @xmath is space(-time)
independent. However, translational non-invariant solutions for @xmath
are sometimes possible. Instantons which for example arise in the @xmath
model discussed in Chapter 5, are translational non-invariant solutions.
But due to their dependence on space(-time), these translational
non-invariant solutions often have a larger action than the
translational invariant solution. If @xmath is translational invariant
it is useful to define the effective potential @xmath which is minus the
effective action divided by the volume @xmath of the space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the sign of the effective potential is chosen in such a way that
the extremal value of the finite temperature effective potential becomes
equal to the pressure. The extremal value of the effective potential is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

At finite temperature the volume of the space @xmath is @xmath .
Therefore at finite temperature the extremal value of the effective
potential is given by @xmath which is equal to the pressure. In the rest
of the thesis this equation will be used to calculate the
thermodynamical quantities.

Next to the 1PI effective action, a 2PI effective action (Cornwall
et al. , 1974 ) and even more general nPI effective actions exist as
well. The 2PI effective action is the Legendre transform of the
generating functional for connected Green’s functions in the presence of
a source term @xmath for the field @xmath and a source term @xmath for
the two-point function. The 2PI formalism is very useful for
out-of-equilibrium quantum field theory calculations (see for example
Berges ( 2005 ) ). This is because unlike the 1PI method, the 2PI
formalism lacks the so-called secularity problem, which causes the
perturbation series of a time-dependent quantity to diverge at late
times (see for example Arrizabalaga ( 2004 ) ). Moreover, it is very
natural to introduce Gaussian initial density matrices in the 2PI
formalism. Since in this thesis all results are obtained for equilibrium
situations, the 2PI formalism will not be discussed further. Although it
is of course also possible to perform equilibrium calculations using the
2PI formalism.

#### Perturbative calculation of the effective action

In practice, the effective action has to be calculated in perturbation
theory. Following the method of Jackiw ( 1974 ) , the field @xmath is
replaced by the sum of its vacuum expectation value @xmath and a quantum
fluctuating field @xmath . In this way it is possible to perturb around
the true vacuum @xmath . Taylor expanding the action and the source term
around @xmath gives,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the bare inverse propagator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the expansion of the action, Eq. ( 3.11 ), and the definition of
the effective action, Eq. ( 3.5 ), it follows that the effective action
obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

So the effective action @xmath is equal to the sum of the classical
action @xmath and the quantum corrections @xmath which are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the expression for @xmath the action @xmath is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the current @xmath is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantum corrections to the effective action can be obtained by
calculating @xmath in perturbation theory by summing Feynman diagrams.
In order to find out which kind of diagrams contribute to @xmath ,
consider @xmath . In perturbation theory, @xmath is equal to 1 plus the
sum of all closed loop Feynman diagrams times the contribution of the
single loop (see also Sec. 2.3). The quantity @xmath is equal to the sum
all connected closed loop Feynman diagrams. And @xmath is equal to the
sum of all one particle irreducible Feynman diagrams, for a proof see
for example Zinn-Justin ( 1996 ) . Here @xmath is a source term that is
chosen in such a way that the corresponding vacuum expectation value
@xmath vanishes. As one might expect the source term @xmath of Eq. (
3.16 ) is tuned automatically in such a way that the vacuum expectation
value @xmath of the fluctuating @xmath field vanishes, for a proof see
Jackiw ( 1974 ) . Hence @xmath is equal to the sum of all closed loop
1PI diagrams with bare propagator @xmath and vertices as given by the
shifted action @xmath . It is important to realize that although a
tadpole term arises in the shifted action, tadpole diagrams do not
contribute to @xmath . The tadpoles form part of the current @xmath ,
see Eq. ( 3.16 ), which forces the vacuum expectation value of the
@xmath field to vanish.

If the contribution of higher order 1PI diagrams to @xmath is
suppressed, for instance due to some small coupling constant, the main
contribution to @xmath will arise from the single closed loop. In such a
case the effective action can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath term arises from the Gaussian integration over the
quantum fluctuations @xmath . As will be argued in the following
sections, Eq. ( 3.17 ) can be used to obtain thermodynamical quantities
to next-to-leading order in @xmath , where @xmath is the number of
fields in the theory.

An explicit calculation of the effective potential in a scalar @xmath
field theory has been performed by Coleman et al. ( 1974 ) in an
expansion in small @xmath . This work was generalized to finite
temperature by Dolan and Jackiw ( 1974 ) . Although the discussion of
the effective potential in this section was limited to scalar fields
only, the effective potential for a theory with gauge fields and
fermions is obtained analogously. In this thesis finite temperature
effective potentials will be calculated not in a perturbative expansion
in the coupling constant, but rather in an expansion in @xmath . This
@xmath expansion will be explained next.

### 3.2 The @xmath expansion

To calculate a quantity in an interacting field theory it is often
necessary to make some kind of approximation. Expanding in the coupling
constant @xmath is a widely used method. This however has the drawback
that it only works for small couplings. Moreover, contributions which
are non-analytic in @xmath , like @xmath , will not be found in an
expansion around @xmath . If the coupling constant is large, which
happens for example to be the case in QCD at low energies, perturbation
theory is not reliable. Hence in this non-perturbative regime one has to
use other approaches like for example the @xmath expansion, lattice
discretization, Dyson-Schwinger or renormalization group methods.

In the large- @xmath method the expansion parameter is the number of
fields @xmath . In order to perform this expansion one has to change the
symmetry group of the theory under consideration. To illustrate this
point, consider the @xmath linear sigma model (which is discussed in
more detail in Chapter 6 ). This model has the following Lagrangian
density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a bare 4-point coupling constant and @xmath is the bare
“pion decay” constant. To apply the @xmath expansion in the @xmath
linear sigma model it has to be generalized to the @xmath linear sigma
model. The Lagrangian density of the @xmath linear sigma model is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

As one can see from Eq. ( 3.19 ), the coupling constants @xmath and
@xmath have been rescaled by factors of @xmath . This redefinition of
the coupling constants is important when applying a @xmath
approximation, since it assures that the relative strength of the
interactions is not changed when varying @xmath . The coupling constants
are rescaled in such a way that the action naturally scales with @xmath
. In the @xmath linear sigma model the diagrams which are contributing
to the pressure at leading order are the bubble diagrams and all
possible insertions of bubbles, see for example Jackiw ( 1974 ) . These
diagrams are called daisy and superdaisy diagrams as well and are
displayed in Fig. 3.1 . The chain diagrams which are displayed in Fig.
3.2 contribute to next-to-leading order in @xmath . All these diagrams
can be resummed using the auxiliary field method which will be discussed
in the next section. In this way it is possible to obtain an expansion
which is really in @xmath and not for example in @xmath . This allows
one to investigate the non-perturbative large @xmath behavior of the
model.

Unfortunately the situation in QCD is not that simple. The obvious
generalization is to consider an @xmath gauge theory and to take the
number of colors, @xmath , as an expansion parameter. The coupling
constant @xmath has then to be rescaled to @xmath . As was shown by
’t Hooft ( 1974 ) , only planar diagrams contribute to leading order in
the @xmath expansion. Non-planar diagrams with only one handle
contribute at next-to-leading order. Just like in the @xmath linear
sigma model an infinite number of diagrams contribute to the QCD
pressure at leading and next-to-leading order in @xmath . But
unfortunately until now no one has found a way to resum all these
diagrams, the auxiliary field method discussed in the next section for
example does not work for QCD.

Another possibility is to give all quark flavors the same mass and
expand in the number of flavors @xmath . Using this method Moore ( 2002
) calculated for zero quark mass the full non-perturbative large @xmath
contribution to the QCD pressure up to next-to-leading order. Ipp and
Rebhan ( 2003 ) extended this study to non-zero chemical potential.
Unfortunately this approach gives only limited insight in QCD, since
large @xmath QCD is not asymptotically free and hence behaves completely
differently from real QCD.

A hint that in the future methods may become available which can be used
to perform analytic calculations in the non-perturbative regime of QCD
comes from the anti-de-Sitter conformal field theory (AdS/CFT)
correspondence. Maldacena ( 1998 ) conjectured that @xmath
supersymmetric @xmath Yang-Mills theory in 4 dimensions (which is a
conformal gauge field theory) is equivalent to a 10-dimensional type IIB
string theory on @xmath . It turns out that if the supersymmetric
Yang-Mills theory is strongly coupled, the corresponding string theory
is weakly interacting. So by applying perturbation theory to this
10-dimensional string theory one can obtain insight in the
non-perturbative behavior of the corresponding 4-dimensional gauge
theory. One is of course eager to find an analogous result for real QCD
in 4 dimensions.

### 3.3 The auxiliary field method

The @xmath expansion can in some theories be systematically performed by
introduction of auxiliary fields. These auxiliary fields will have no
dynamics so they will not influence the physical content of the theory.
They will be shifted by a constant in order to obtain a Lagrangian
density which is quadratic in the @xmath original fields. This allows
for Gaussian integration, after which the @xmath expansion follows
naturally.

As an example consider the @xmath model defined in Eq. ( 3.19 ). Its
partition function is given by Eq. ( 3.1 ). An auxiliary field @xmath
can be added to this model by changing the Lagrangian density as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The original partition function times an infinite constant (which drops
out when calculating physical quantities) is recovered after integration
over the @xmath field. Since a field is nothing else than an integration
variable of the path-integral, it is always possible to shift this field
by a constant. If the @xmath field is shifted according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Lagrangian density becomes quadratic in the @xmath fields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is now possible to perform the integration over the scalar fields,
resulting in the following effective action (not to be confused with the
1PI effective action, here @xmath is still a field which should be
integrated over)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The auxiliary field can obtain a vacuum expectation value @xmath which
is assumed to be translational invariant. Hence to obtain for example
the pressure, it is necessary to calculate the effective potential and
minimize it with respect to @xmath . The leading order term of this
effective potential is just the classical effective action, @xmath and
is proportional to @xmath . By expanding @xmath around its vacuum
expectation value the quantum corrections to the effective potential can
be obtained. As will be shown in detail in Chapters 4, 5 and 6, the
leading term of these corrections is the logarithm of a determinant of
the propagator of the quantum fluctuations which is proportional to
@xmath , see also Eq. ( 3.17 ). The contributions which arise from the
1PI diagrams of the quantum fluctuations are of order @xmath and higher
because the vertices of these diagrams turn out to have @xmath
suppressing factors.

### 3.4 Temperature-dependent ultraviolet divergences111This section is
based on: Thermodynamics of the O(@xmath) non-linear sigma model through
next-to-leading order in @xmath, H.J. Warringa, proceedings of the SEWM
2004 meeting, World Scientific (2005).

The finite temperature effective potential expressed in terms of the
vacuum expectation value of the auxiliary field discussed in the
previous section is calculated explicitly for different models in
Chapters 4, 5 and 6. In all these models it turns out that the effective
potential contains temperature-dependent ultraviolet divergences.
However, as follows from the calculations, these divergences become
temperature-independent at the minimum. These temperature-dependent
divergences make renormalization of the effective potential outside the
minimum impossible because it will require a renormalization
prescription which is different for every temperature. Such a
prescription would lead to arbitrary temperature dependence and hence is
meaningless.

At first sight it might seem surprising that these temperature-dependent
ultraviolet divergences arise at all, since one expects that temperature
cannot influence the ultraviolet behavior of a theory due to the
exponential suppression of high-momentum modes of finite temperature
contributions. To see why it is nevertheless possible that an effective
potential can have temperature-dependent divergences outside its
minimum, consider as an example the @xmath linear sigma model defined in
Eq. ( 3.19 ). For other models the argument is similar. The effective
action of the @xmath linear sigma model expressed in terms of the
auxiliary field, @xmath is given in Eq. ( 3.23 ). The effective action
in the presence of a space-time independent source @xmath for @xmath is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity @xmath is defined here as the partition function of the
theory with action @xmath at temperature @xmath . Now @xmath is equal to
the pressure of the linear sigma model. One therefore expects that this
quantity should be well-defined and that it contains no
temperature-dependent divergences. So one can assume that @xmath does
not contain temperature-dependent divergences. As a result, @xmath ,
contains also no temperature-dependent divergences as long as @xmath is
independent of temperature. The reason for this is that since both
@xmath and @xmath are proportional to @xmath in the Lagrangian density,
any source @xmath can be incorporated in @xmath by the redefinition
@xmath .

The effective potential in the minimum is equal to @xmath . On
dimensional grounds, the divergences of the minimum of the effective
potential should depend on @xmath . For example in Chapter 6 it is found
that the effective potential contains terms proportional to the
divergent factor @xmath , where @xmath is an ultraviolet momentum
cut-off. Since any @xmath can be incorporated in @xmath , varying @xmath
will change the divergences of @xmath . Hence the divergences of @xmath
will depend on @xmath .

The effective potential is given by @xmath , where @xmath is the vacuum
expectation value of the @xmath field. That this vacuum expectation
value is purely imaginary is proved in Chapter 4. In the expression for
the effective potential, @xmath is defined implicitly, since @xmath is
the source term which gives the @xmath field the vacuum expectation
value @xmath . If the temperature is varied, the implicitly defined
@xmath has to change in order to keep the vacuum expectation value of
the @xmath field fixed to @xmath . Therefore the implicitly defined
@xmath has to depend on temperature. In the previous paragraph it was
argued that the divergences of @xmath depend on @xmath . Since @xmath is
part of the effective potential, the divergences of the effective
potential will depend on temperature for any non-zero @xmath .

As is shown in Eq. ( 3.10 ), the source term @xmath vanishes at an
extremum of the effective potential. This holds for any temperature. So
using the arguments in the previous paragraphs temperature-dependent
divergences do not arise at the minimum of the effective potential, but
only outside the minimum. Since physical quantities like the pressure,
entropy density and energy density are to be calculated at the minimum
of the effective potential they do not suffer from the renormalization
problems caused by temperature-dependent divergences.

## Chapter 4 Thermodynamics of the nonlinear sigma model in d=1+1

The thermodynamics of the @xmath nonlinear sigma model is studied in
this chapter in the @xmath approximation. The effective potential, from
which one can derive thermodynamical quantities, will be calculated to
next-to-leading order in @xmath . It is found that the effective
potential contains temperature-dependent divergences which become
independent of temperature at the minimum. As a result it turns out that
the effective potential can only be renormalized meaningfully at the
minimum, hence thermodynamical quantities which are obtained at the
minimum, can be rendered finite consistently. The renormalized pressure
will be calculated to next-to-leading order in @xmath . Furthermore in
intermediate steps of the calculation, thermal infrared renormalons are
encountered which potentially can give rise to ambiguities in the end
result. It will be shown that the correctly renormalized pressure is
free from these ambiguities. This chapter is based on: Thermodynamics of
the O( @xmath ) nonlinear sigma model in (1+1)-dimensions,
J.O. Andersen, D. Boer and H.J. Warringa, Phys. Rev. D69 076006, (2004).

### 4.1 Introduction

The @xmath nonlinear sigma model in @xmath dimensions has been studied
extensively at zero temperature as a toy model for QCD. It is a scalar
field theory which classically is scale invariant. Due to
renormalization of the quantum corrections a scale is introduced. As was
shown by Polyakov ( 1975 ) the nonlinear sigma model is asymptotically
free like QCD. It is renormalizable both perturbatively and in the
@xmath expansion. Moreover, as is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5,
it contains instanton solutions for @xmath only. In that chapter it is
also shown that the @xmath nonlinear sigma model is equivalent to the
@xmath model.

Unlike the nonlinear sigma model in more than two dimensions, where the
theory is no longer renormalizable, there is no spontaneous symmetry
breaking of the global @xmath symmetry for any value of the coupling
constant. This reflects the theorem of Mermin and Wagner ( 1966 ) and
Coleman ( 1973 ) , which forbids spontaneous breakdown of a continuous
symmetry in a homogeneous system in one spatial dimension at any
temperature. The nonlinear sigma model suffers from infrared divergences
in perturbation theory, because the scalar fields remain massless in
that case. It was conjectured by Elitzur ( 1983 ) ¹ ¹ 1 This article was
submitted in 1978. and shown by David ( 1981 ) that the infrared
divergences cancel in @xmath -invariant correlation functions. However,
like in QCD, a non-perturbative mass-gap is generated dynamically due to
the interactions. In contrast to QCD where the spontaneous breakdown of
chiral symmetry breakdown is responsible for non-zero masses, the
non-vanishing mass of the scalar fields in the nonlinear sigma model is
not related to symmetry breaking. In the large- @xmath limit, which is
equivalent to summing all so-called daisy and super-daisy graphs (see
Chapter 3), it turns out that the mass at zero temperature is given by
@xmath , where @xmath is the coupling constant and @xmath is the
renormalization scale. The mass is non-analytic in @xmath which explains
that it vanishes in perturbation theory.

Dine and Fischler ( 1981 ) have investigated the nonlinear sigma model
in @xmath dimensions at finite temperature. They calculated the free
energy in perturbation theory and to leading order in the large- @xmath
limit. In the weak-coupling expansion, they showed that the two-loop
contribution to the ideal gas vanishes and that the three-loop
contribution is infrared finite. In this chapter the analysis of Dine
and Fischler ( 1981 ) will be extended to next-to-leading-order (NLO) in
the @xmath expansion. To obtain the thermodynamical quantities the
effective potential will be calculated. At zero temperature, the
effective potential (or equivalently the Gibbs free energy) has been
investigated at this order by Root ( 1974 ) and Biscari et al. ( 1990 )
.

There are several reasons to calculate the @xmath corrections to the
thermodynamics. Since the nonlinear sigma model is one of the few field
theories in which non-perturbative calculations can be done (partly)
analytically, it is very useful to check whether the @xmath expansion is
converging. Furthermore renormalization at finite temperature is
non-trivial, since next to the renormalization scale an additional scale
is introduced. Normally one expects that the ultraviolet behavior of a
theory will not depend on temperature because the high-momentum modes of
thermal contributions are exponentially suppressed due to the
Bose-Einstein distribution factor. However, it is found that the
next-to-leading order effective potential contains temperature dependent
divergences. Fortunately it turns out that the effective potential can
still be renormalized at the minimum, but it then contains an ambiguity
which is related to a so-called infrared renormalon (David, 1982 ) . It
will be shown that this ambiguity vanishes when calculating the
pressure.

It was shown by David ( 1982 ) that the @xmath dimensional nonlinear
sigma model contains infrared renormalons. Renormalons (see Beneke (
1999 ) for a review) give rise to ambiguities in resummming a
perturbative series in the coupling constant @xmath . The size of these
ambiguities may give insight in the importance of non-perturbative
corrections. In QCD these infrared renormalons appear as well, which in
principle might teach us about the size of non-perturbative physics in
QCD. Because the @xmath nonlinear sigma model can be accessed both
non-perturbatively (via the @xmath expansion) and perturbatively (in an
expansion in @xmath ) the nonlinear sigma model is widely used (David,
1984 , 1986 ; Beneke et al. , 1998 ) to study these infrared
renormalons. In this chapter such ambiguities are encountered when
calculating the effective potential. However it turns out that they
vanish when calculating the pressure. Furthermore it is investigated how
these renormalons depend on temperature. It is found that thermal
infrared renormalons in the nonlinear sigma model are independent of
temperature at the minimum of the effective potential, however outside
the minimum the renormalon residue become temperature-dependent while
the position of the renormalon pole is not affected by temperature.
Thermal renormalons have been studied before by Loewe and Valenzuela (
2000 ) in @xmath theory in 3+1 dimensions. In this theory, one deals
with ultraviolet renormalons only and thus it resembles QED rather than
QCD. They found that the residues of the ultraviolet renormalon poles in
the Borel plane are temperature-dependent while the position of the
poles are not.

The Gross-Neveu model, which is a 1+1 dimensional toy model which
includes also fermions was recently studied by Blaizot et al. ( 2003 )
at finite temperature to next-to-leading order in the @xmath expansion
as well. While there are similarities between this model and the
nonlinear sigma model, such as dynamical mass generation and asymptotic
freedom, no problems related to renormalization of the effective
potential was encountered by Blaizot et al. ( 2003 ) .

This chapter is organized as follows. In Sec. 4.2 the Lagrangian density
of the nonlinear sigma model will be given. Thereafter, in Sec. 4.3 it
will be discussed how the pressure could in principle be obtained by a
weak-coupling constant expansion. Sec. 4.4 is devoted to the calculation
of the effective potential to next-to-leading order in @xmath . The
zero-temperature case will be discussed first, after which the
derivation of the finite temperature effective potential will follow. In
Sec. 4.5 the pressure for the @xmath nonlinear sigma model will be
presented. Some approximations for the pressure at high temperatures
will be discussed in Sec. 4.6. Thermal infrared renormalons are
investigated in Sec. 4.7. A summary and conclusions are given in
Sec. 4.8.

### 4.2 The nonlinear sigma model

The nonlinear sigma model is a scalar field theory with an @xmath
symmetry. It is described by a Lagrangian density which only consists of
a kinetic term and a constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the bare coupling constant. The constraint forces the
fields to live on a @xmath -dimensional hypersphere, which causes the
interactions between the fields. Since @xmath has no dimension in @xmath
, the nonlinear sigma model is renormalizable. As one can see from Eq. (
4.1 ), the classical @xmath nonlinear sigma model is scale invariant.
Due to renormalization of the quantum corrections a scale @xmath is
introduced in the theory. As will be shown explicitly in Sec. 4.4, the
@xmath nonlinear sigma model is asymptotically free. For @xmath the
nonlinear sigma model is a free field theory. This can be seen by
choosing @xmath and @xmath . The constraint is satisfied automatically
by this choice, and the Lagrangian density turns into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the Lagrangian density of a free field theory.

Thermodynamical quantities of the nonlinear sigma model can be derived
from the partition function which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following section thermodynamics in the weak-coupling expansion
will be discussed. The remaining sections of this chapter will deal with
the non-perturbative @xmath approach.

### 4.3 Thermodynamics in the weak-coupling expansion

The weak-coupling expansion can be performed by writing the scalar
fields as @xmath . Due to the constraint it holds that @xmath with
@xmath . Integrating over the @xmath field results in the following
partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the step function. This step function reflects the fact
that due the original constraint on the @xmath fields, @xmath never can
be larger than @xmath . The effective Lagrangian density @xmath can be
found by inserting the expression for @xmath in terms of @xmath in the
original Lagrangian density. As a result one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the term proportional to @xmath arises from integration over the
delta function @xmath .

For small values of @xmath the @xmath function is only vanishing when
@xmath is large. Since large values of @xmath give a small contribution
to the partition function one can approximate @xmath which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath it can be seen from @xmath that the nonlinear sigma model
contains @xmath non-interacting @xmath fields. Hence the leading
contribution to the pressure of the nonlinear sigma model is that of a
gas of @xmath non-interacting scalar fields which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the effective Lagrangian density Eq. ( 4.5 ), Dine and Fischler (
1981 ) showed that the order @xmath correction to the pressure vanishes.
In their calculation, effects of the step-function were not taken into
account. However, using the the @xmath expansion, one does find
corrections to the free pressure as will be discussed in detail in the
following sections.

### 4.4 The effective potential

By introducing an auxiliary scalar field @xmath , the constraint on the
@xmath fields can be expressed in terms of a path integral over the
@xmath fields in the following way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a temperature and @xmath independent normalization
constant. As a result one finds the following Lagrangian density which
is equivalent to the original nonlinear sigma model Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a source term for the scalar field. It is useful to keep
this source term for a moment in order to determine the scalar field
propagator. By calculating this propagator to next-to-leading order in
@xmath one can determine the physical mass of the scalar field to
next-to-leading order. Any renormalization prescription should give rise
to a finite physical mass. The expression for the physical mass will be
used later in order to renormalize the so-called gap equation to
next-to-leading order in @xmath .

Using the auxiliary field method the Lagrangian density becomes
quadratic in the scalar fields. Therefore one can perform the integral
over these fields. This yields the following exact expression for the
partition function of the nonlinear sigma model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the effective action is given by (Novikov et al. , 1984 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the last expression the trace is over a complete set of functions
that satisfy the boundary conditions for scalar fields at finite
temperature.

The vacuum expectation value of the @xmath field, @xmath is purely
imaginary since from @xmath and changing the integration over @xmath to
@xmath it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is very likely that (in absence of a source term) the vacuum
expectation value of @xmath is space-time independent because the
Euclidean space is homogeneous. The auxiliary field @xmath can be
written as the sum of its complex vacuum expectation value @xmath and a
quantum fluctuating field @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting @xmath and expanding the effective action around the vacuum
expectation value of @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equation shows that @xmath n-point vertices are suppressed by
powers of @xmath . This is of course due to the definition of @xmath in
Eq. ( 4.13 ). This definition is convenient since now one immediately
sees from the vertices that higher loop diagrams are suppressed. One
could of course choose another definition, for example, @xmath . Then
the same conclusions would follow, since in that case the @xmath
propagator has an additional suppressing factor of @xmath . Inserting a
plane wave basis in Eq. ( 4.14 ) results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the terms linear in @xmath were not written down since these terms
(tadpoles) do not contribute to the effective potential as explained in
Chapter 3. The inverse @xmath propagator is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

As discussed in more detail in Chapter 3, the effective potential @xmath
can be obtained by integrating over the quantum fluctuations @xmath .
The leading term of this effective potential proportional to @xmath
stems from the classical action. The next-to-leading order term is
originating from the Gaussian integral over the quantum fluctuations
@xmath . The remaining contributions are of order @xmath , since one
needs at least two three-point vertices (which are proportional to
@xmath ) to form a closed diagram. Choosing the sign of the effective
potential in such a way that the pressure is equal to the minimum of the
effective potential one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath field propagator can be found by differentiating Eq. ( 4.11 )
twice with respect to the sources @xmath and expanding @xmath around its
vacuum expectation value. If one then keeps terms to next-to-leading
order in @xmath and inserts the wave function renormalization factor
@xmath one finds that the scalar propagator in momentum space equals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the self-energy is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is important to keep in mind that @xmath is the vacuum expectation
value of the @xmath field. This vacuum expectation value can be found by
minimizing the effective potential with respect to @xmath . Since the
effective potential is ultraviolet divergent and the renormalization of
the nonlinear sigma model is non-trivial, the zero temperature case will
be discussed separately in the following subsection. Thereafter, the
finite temperature effective potential will be investigated.

#### The effective potential at zero temperature

At zero temperature one can obtain analytic results for the effective
potential. The sum over Matsubara modes changes into an integration over
momentum. The effective potential @xmath to next-to-leading order in the
@xmath expansion is at zero temperature given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows after integration over momenta that @xmath , which is the
inverse @xmath propagator, at zero temperature equals (see for example
Novikov et al. ( 1984 ) )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integrals integrals in Eq. ( 4.20 ) will be evaluated using an
ultraviolet momentum cutoff @xmath . For that one needs the following
integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the logarithmic integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath indicates a principal-value prescription for the integral.
Since the integrand of the logarithmic integral has a pole at @xmath , a
prescription to evaluate the integral is necessary. This prescription is
the source of the renormalon ambiguity discussed in Sec. 4.7. For
example the logarithmic integral in the @xmath prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

differs from the logarithmic integral using the principal value
prescription, that is @xmath .

Using that @xmath , where @xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant, and
after dropping divergences that are @xmath -independent in the limit
@xmath , one obtains

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.26)
  -- -- -- --------

As one can see from Eq. ( 4.26 ), the effective potential is highly
ultraviolet divergent. Its divergences can be removed by
renormalization. One way to do this is by adding or subtracting
infinite, @xmath -independent constants. This merely shifts the whole
effective potential, but since relative energy differences will not
change this does not have physical effects. This subtraction is already
performed in Eq. ( 4.26 ) but does not remove all divergences. Another
possibility to remove divergences is to absorb @xmath -independent
infinite constants in a redefinition of the coupling constant @xmath .
However, this still leaves two divergences in Eq. ( 4.26 ). The only
possibility to renormalize the term @xmath would be to subtract an
@xmath -dependent infinite constant since @xmath is still divergent if
@xmath . The @xmath term has the same problem. This divergence should be
absorbed into the coupling constant since it is proportional to @xmath .
But there does not exist a single @xmath -independent function which can
be subtracted from @xmath to obtain a finite result in the limit @xmath
. So it seems that the effective potential is not renormalizable, unless
@xmath -dependent and potentially @xmath -dependent counter terms are
introduced.

Moreover, subtracting the @xmath @xmath term as is done for instance by
Biscari et al. ( 1990 ) for @xmath , gives rise to another problem. This
term is called the perturbative tail and does not arise in dimensional
regularization suggesting that this subtraction is the correct thing to
do. But if one would calculate the effective potential using dimensional
regularization one would find a @xmath ambiguity instead (David, 1984 )
depending on whether the limit @xmath or @xmath is taken. This ambiguity
is the same as the renormalon ambiguity mentioned above due to the
choice of prescription in the logarithmic integral. In Sec. 4.5 it is
shown that the perturbative tail and its accompanying ambiguity cancel
when calculating the pressure which is the minimum of the effective
potential at finite temperature minus the minimum of the effective
potential at zero temperature.

To obtain physical quantities like the mass of the scalar fields and the
pressure, one has to evaluate the effective potential at its minimum.
The condition for the minimum is given by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.27 ) is often referred to as a gap equation, since solving
this equation determines in leading order the gap in the excitation
spectrum at zero spatial momentum or equivalently the mass of the scalar
particles. Differentiating the effective potential with respect to
@xmath , Eq. ( 4.26 ), one obtains the gap equation which reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This gap equation still contains the problematic divergence proportional
to @xmath . But unlike the effective potential, the gap equation can be
renormalized. For that the gap equation has to be expressed in terms of
the finite physical mass @xmath .

The physical mass @xmath of the scalar fields follows from the pole of
the @xmath propagator, Eq. ( 4.18 ), at zero spatial momentum in
Minkowski space. To calculate this propagator to next-to-leading order
the self-energy, Eq. ( 4.19 ), has to be evaluated. At zero temperature
this self-energy can be simplified by integrating over angles, resulting
in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the expression for the propagator, Eq. ( 4.18 ), is in Euclidean
space-time, one has to analytically continue the propagator to Minkowski
space to obtain the physical mass. Because the self-energy only depends
on @xmath as one can see from Eq. ( 4.29 ), continuation to Minkowski
space boils down to replacing the Euclidean two-vector @xmath by the
Minkowskian two-vector @xmath . Neglecting terms of order @xmath , the
physical mass @xmath yields (Flyvbjerg, 1990 ) ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving Eq. ( 4.30 ) for @xmath results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the physical mass @xmath should be finite, it follows from Eq. (
4.31 ) that @xmath , which is the vacuum expectation value of the @xmath
field, receives divergent contributions due to the quantum fluctuations
at next-to-leading order in @xmath .

Expressing the gap equation ( 4.28 ) in terms of the finite physical
mass @xmath , using Eq. ( 4.31 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath , the gap equation can now be renormalized. Making the
substitution @xmath with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

one obtains the renormalized gap equation which reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression Eq. ( 4.33 ) for @xmath is exact in @xmath up to order
@xmath corrections and results in the known next-to-leading order @xmath
-functions as calculated by Rim and Weisberger ( 1984 ) , Orloff and
Brout ( 1986 ) and Biscari et al. ( 1990 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The negative sign in front of the @xmath -functions shows that the
nonlinear sigma model is indeed asymptotically free. The next-to-leading
order beta function gives already the correct result for @xmath because
for a free theory the beta function vanishes. This is an indication that
the @xmath expansion in the nonlinear sigma model might work well down
to low values of @xmath . Solving the renormalized gap equation ( 4.34 )
for the physical mass @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation illustrates the need for the non-perturbative approach,
since the physical mass turns out to be non-analytic in the coupling
constant. For @xmath this gives a zero physical mass, reflecting the
fact that the @xmath nonlinear sigma model is a free field theory.

Using the gap equation, one can obtain the value of the effective
potential @xmath at the minimum which will be denoted by @xmath , where
@xmath given by Eq. ( 4.37 ). In terms of bare quantities, one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

In contrast to the effective potential as a function of @xmath , this
equation shows that the effective potential at the minimum can be
renormalized. It is expressed in terms of a finite mass which can be
found by solving the renormalized gap equations. The quadratic
divergence that is left in the minimum of the effective potential can be
removed by a subtraction. However, as explained before this term is
ambiguous, it would differ by a constant @xmath if a different
prescription is used. The expression for the minimum of the effective
potential at zero temperature will be subtracted from the minimum of the
effective potential at finite temperature in order to obtain a finite
pressure which is moreover unambiguous. As is shown in Sec. 4.5 this
ambiguity can be removed without renormalizing the effective potential
as well.

For completeness, the wave-function renormalization factor of the scalar
fields will be derived in this paragraph. The wave-function
renormalization constant @xmath follows from requiring that the pole of
the propagator has a residue equal to unity. This implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The wave-function renormalization Eq. ( 4.39 ) is in accordance with
that obtained by Flyvbjerg ( 1990 ) . Rim and Weisberger ( 1984 ) have
calculated the wave-function renormalization constant in dimensional
regularization. Their result also agrees with Eq. ( 4.39 ) upon
identifying @xmath where @xmath .

#### The effective potential at finite temperature

The results at zero temperature are obtained analytically, but at finite
temperature this is in general not possible. Therefore, numerical
methods will be applied to calculate thermodynamical quantities.
However, it is still possible to isolate the ultraviolet divergences
analytically and discuss the renormalization at finite temperature
without the need for numerical evaluation.

The effective potential through next-to-leading order in @xmath can be
written as @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

After summing over Matsubara modes and subtracting divergent @xmath -
and @xmath -independent terms one obtains in the limit @xmath for the
leading order effective potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath is the Bose-Einstein distribution function.

To calculate the next-to-leading order contribution to the effective
potential one needs to know the inverse @xmath propagator @xmath at
finite temperature which is defined in Eq. ( 4.16 ). Summing over
Matsubara frequencies and averaging over angles, @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression cannot be simplified further. It shows that the inverse
@xmath propagator @xmath is temperature-dependent and ultraviolet
finite. The next-to-leading order contribution to the effective
potential is not finite though.

The next-to-leading order contribution to the effective potential can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath contain divergences and @xmath and @xmath are
finite terms. As explained in Sec. 2.5 and as verified numerically, the
quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

is finite since its integrand is suppressed by a Bose-Einstein like
distribution factor. To calculate @xmath a modified Abel-Plana formula
(see Sec. 2.5 ) was used. The function @xmath depends on @xmath only and
is displayed in Fig. 4.1 . As is discussed in more detail in Sec. 4.6
@xmath which can also be seen from Fig. 4.1 . The limit of @xmath is
equivalent to fixing @xmath and taking @xmath . In this limit @xmath
should vanish because it is the difference of a finite temperature and
zero temperature contribution.

Because @xmath is finite all divergences of the next-to-leading order
effective potential arise from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nonlinear sigma model only contains ultraviolet divergences. It is
infrared finite since the mass @xmath is non-vanishing. Therefore, in
order to isolate the divergences in Eq. ( 4.47 ) one has to consider the
limit of momenta large compared to @xmath . Due to the suppression by
the Bose-Einstein distribution function of high momentum modes, only
internal momenta @xmath ’s up to order @xmath contribute to @xmath .
Hence, if the external momenta @xmath are much larger than @xmath one
can neglect factors of @xmath compared to factors of @xmath in the
high-momentum limit. In this way one can approximate the inverse @xmath
propagator as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to split off the prefactor in front of the logarithm of the
zero temperature part of @xmath , it is useful to write @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath gives the following divergent contribution to the free
energy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The divergent term @xmath is temperature independent. Hence it is also
contained in the effective potential at zero temperature as can be
verified from Eq. ( 4.26 ). The other divergent term @xmath and the
finite term @xmath can be found by calculating

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to isolate the divergent term @xmath , one needs the large-
@xmath behavior of @xmath which by using Eq. ( 4.48 ) is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where HM stands for high-momentum approximation. By integrating @xmath
over momentum it is found that the divergent term @xmath is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.54)
  -- -- -- --------

here @xmath . In the limit of zero temperature it can be seen that the
divergence @xmath coincides with the divergences found in the effective
potential at zero temperature, Eq. ( 4.26 ). Since @xmath depends
explicitly on temperature, Eq. ( 4.54 ) shows that the next-to-leading
order effective potential contains temperature dependent divergences.
This seems surprising since one expects that scales at which finite
temperature are important are much smaller than the ultraviolet cutoff.
As a result, ultraviolet divergences should be independent of
temperature. In Sec. 3.4 a general argument is given why these @xmath
-dependent divergences arise. Hence apart from problems at zero
temperature discussed in the previous subsection, it even becomes
impossible to renormalize the effective potential in a temperature
independent way. But, as will be discussed in the next section, these
problems disappear at the minimum of the effective potential.

The finite function @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.52 ) is the difference of
two divergent quantities. Due to the finite machine precision the
maximal reachable accuracy of the difference would be rather small if
the divergent quantities are calculated separately. It is therefore
better to write @xmath partly in terms of an integral in the following
way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equation can be used to write @xmath in terms of an integral
and a very slowly diverging term.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

To calculate @xmath numerically, the integral in Eq. ( 4.56 ) was
evaluated up to a cutoff @xmath . Then for increasing values of @xmath ,
@xmath was calculated until convergence to a finite number was found.
This convergence indicates that by the method discussed above indeed all
divergences were isolated. In the limit of zero temperature it can be
seen from Eq. ( 4.26 ) that @xmath . It is convenient to subtract this
zero temperature contribution from @xmath in order to define @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath is a function of @xmath and is displayed in Fig. 4.2
. In Sec. 4.6 it is shown that for small @xmath , @xmath . Consequently,
@xmath in agreement with Fig. 4.2 . For large values of @xmath , which
implies low temperatures, @xmath . This is because in the definition of
@xmath the zero temperature contribution is subtracted.

Putting everything together, the finite temperature effective potential
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gap equation ( 4.27 ) at nonzero temperature is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the fact that @xmath is temperature independent, one can conclude
that @xmath is also temperature independent at leading order in the
@xmath expansion, when it is a solution to the gap equation. This will
be used later on to conclude that the pressure can be renormalized in a
temperature-independent way. The renormalization of the gap-equation at
finite temperature proceeds analogously to the zero-temperature case
discussed in the previous subsection. To remove the problematic li
divergence the gap equation will, like was done in the zero temperature
case, be expressed in terms of the physical mass @xmath at finite
temperature. This mass can be obtained by finding the pole of the finite
temperature @xmath field propagator, Eq. ( 4.18 ), analytically
continued to Minkowski space. Here the finite temperature physical mass
will be defined as the pole of the propagator at @xmath and @xmath . It
is found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a finite function that depends on the
temperature as well as @xmath . Since @xmath is merely used as a way to
express the renormalized gap equation in terms of finite quantities, any
choice of @xmath will do and we choose @xmath . It was checked
numerically that other choices indeed do not alter the final result for
the pressure. Using Eq. ( 4.60 ), the gap equation expressed in the
physical mass becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gap equation can be rendered finite by the substitution @xmath ,
where @xmath is the zero temperature renormalization constant given by
Eq. ( 4.33 ). Hence unlike the effective potential, the gap equation can
be renormalized @xmath -independently without problems. The renormalized
gap equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 4.3 the solution to this renormalized gap equation for the
arbitrary choice @xmath is displayed as a function of temperature and
for different values of @xmath .

### 4.5 Pressure

By solving the renormalized gap equation ( 4.62 ) one can find the
minimum value of the effective potential which is equal to the pressure.
The physical mass at this minimum will be denoted as @xmath and @xmath .
By expressing the effective potential in terms of the physical mass
using Eq. ( 4.60 ) the pressure can be calculated. For this one has to
expand the @xmath and @xmath functions in @xmath . Furthermore, one
should also take into account the zero temperature results since the
pressure is the difference of the minimum of the effective potential at
finite temperature and at zero temperature (given in Eq. ( 4.38 )). As a
result due to this difference the problematic divergences drop out and
one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

This finite pressure was evaluated numerically, after solving Eq. ( 4.62
) for @xmath . The result for different values of @xmath is shown in
Fig. 4.4 , for the arbitrary choice @xmath , hence @xmath is given in
the same units as @xmath .

As can be seen in the figure, @xmath approaches an @xmath -dependent
constant (to be evaluated in the next section) at large temperatures.
This constant is exactly the pressure of a non-interacting gas of @xmath
bosons divided by @xmath , which is @xmath . This is an immediate
consequence of the asymptotic freedom and the fact that one degree of
freedom is effectively removed due to the constraint. This expression
coincides with the perturbative result, Eq. ( 4.7 ), as expected. In the
limit of zero temperature the pressure divided by @xmath approaches zero
exponentially as it effectively becomes a gas of heavy quasi-particles,
see Fig. 4.3 . The figure shows that corrections are really of order
@xmath , which indicates that the @xmath is a good expansion for the
nonlinear sigma model.

If the pressure, for a given value of @xmath , is normalized to its
value at @xmath , the normalized pressure has a very small dependence on
@xmath as is displayed in Fig. 4.5 . Similar behavior is found in
lattice calculations of the normalized pressure of the pure SU @xmath
gauge theory in 4-dimensions (Bringoltz and Teper, 2005 ) , see Fig. 4.6
. Also lattice calculations performed by Karsch et al. ( 2000 ) show
that for full QCD the normalized pressure turns out to be rather
insensitive to the number of flavors.

To obtain the pressure, the next-to-leading order gap equation was used.
But as was argued by Root ( 1974 ) one in principle only needs the
leading order gap equation in order to obtain the value of the effective
potential at the minimum. Writing the solution to the gap equations as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Taylor expanding the effective potential, one obtains (up to @xmath
corrections)

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.65)
  -- -- -- --------

The last term of Eq. ( 4.65 ) vanishes by using the leading-order gap
equation. The pressure @xmath can now be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the discussion above it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the solution of the leading-order gap equation, at
temperature @xmath . By using the leading order gap equation it can be
shown that at the minimum, part of @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath contains the logarithmic integral it is dependent on the
prescription and has an ambiguity. From Eq. ( 4.68 ) it follows that the
problematic @xmath -dependent divergences become @xmath -independent at
the minimum of the effective potential, and vanish in the calculation of
the pressure due to the subtraction of the zero temperature
contribution. As a result the pressure is unambiguous, i.e. independent
of the choice of prescription.

### 4.6 High-temperature approximations

Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) consider the nonlinear sigma model in 3+1
dimensions, at next-to-leading order in the @xmath expansion. Since
their result for the pressure cannot be obtained analytically, they
resort to a “high-energy approximation”. In this section the same
approximation for the @xmath -dimensional case will be made to compare
it with the exact numerical results obtained in Sec. 4.5 .

The essence of the high-energy approximation of Bochkarev and Kapusta (
1996 ) is that one neglects the zero temperature part of @xmath and
approximates it by its temperature-dependent part @xmath . According to
Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) one can then approximate @xmath by its
high-energy behavior. In the present case of the nonlinear sigma model
in @xmath dimensions, these approximations amount to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This expression is identical to the high-momentum
approximation to @xmath , Eq. ( 4.48 ). In the high-energy approximation
the effective potential is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting expression for the gap equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, the gap equation requires coupling constant renormalization. In
this approximation, it is found that the renormalization constant is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

which differs slightly from the exact renormalization constant to
next-to-leading order in @xmath , Eq. ( 4.33 ). It is in fact equal to
the perturbative one as for instance is discussed in Peskin and
Schroeder ( 1995 ) . Making the substitution @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the functions @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

By substituting the gap equation ( 4.71 ) into the expression for the
effective potential in the high-energy approximation, Eq. ( 4.70 ), the
pressure becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the functions @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Fig. 4.7 , one can see that the high-energy approximation
underestimates the pressure compared to the exact result. The advantage
of an approximation like the high-energy approximation is that the
analytic calculations are simpler and that it is easier to implement
numerically. However, it is not a satisfactory approximation because one
cannot really justify that the temperature-independent part of @xmath
can be left out. It may even be considered surprising that this
approximation works. In Chapter 6 it will be shown that the high-energy
approximation in the nonlinear sigma model in @xmath dimensions actually
leads to wrong results.

It is possible to derive a different approximation, which is better than
the high-energy approximation. The inverse @xmath -propagator @xmath at
finite temperature can be obtained by first integrating over the
momentum which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since it follows from the leading order gap equation that for high
temperatures and for all values of the coupling constant, @xmath see
Fig. 4.3 , @xmath can at high temperatures (HT) be approximated by
keeping only the @xmath mode in the sum Eq. ( 4.77 ) as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using that @xmath can be written as @xmath and shifting @xmath after
taking the logarithm, it is found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the function @xmath can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath in the high-temperature approximation because @xmath
does not contain a finite term that depends on temperature. The part
proportional to @xmath gives rise to a divergence which by definition is
not part of @xmath . These high temperature limits agree with the
numerical calculations displayed in Figs. 4.1 and 4.2 .

The numerical calculation of @xmath shows that for @xmath this
approximation has an error smaller than @xmath percent. To obtain the
pressure in the high-temperature approximation, Eq. ( 4.63 ) was applied
using the approximations to @xmath and @xmath . The result for the
pressure in the high-temperature approximation is shown for comparison
in Fig. 4.7 (again for @xmath ). It can be seen that the
high-temperature approximation is much better than the high-energy
approximation.

One can approximate the pressure even further by expanding the functions
@xmath and @xmath in the limit @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Inserting the approximations given in Eqs. ( 4.80 ), ( 4.81 ) and ( 4.82
) into the gap equation ( 4.62 ), one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

which indicates that @xmath for large @xmath . In the limit @xmath , the
high-temperature approximation of the pressure is

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.84)
  -- -- -- --------

where the first term is the pressure of a gas of free massless particles
with @xmath degrees of freedom.

### 4.7 Thermal infrared renormalons

An observable @xmath in a quantum field theory like QCD is often only
known in terms of an expansion in the coupling constant @xmath . Because
negative @xmath gives rise to unphysical behavior as was argued by Dyson
( 1952 ) for QED, it is expected that this series expansion has zero
radius of convergence. Hence one should view it at best as an asymptotic
series. One might wonder whether it is possible by resumming the series
expansion to learn about the non-perturbative physics. In specific cases
this is possible, but more often one finds so-called renormalons, which
give rise to ambiguities in the relation between @xmath and its resummed
version. These ambiguities may give an insight in the size of the
non-perturbative corrections.

Since one can apply the @xmath expansion to the nonlinear sigma model,
observables can be calculated exactly in terms of the coupling constant.
These exact expressions can be used to study the renormalons in the
nonlinear sigma model as was done at zero temperature by David ( 1982 ,
1984 , 1986 ) and Beneke et al. ( 1998 ) . In this section this analysis
is extended to finite temperature.

This section consists of two parts. In the first part a short
introduction into renormalons will be given. In the second part the
nonlinear sigma model will be used to investigate the temperature
dependence of the renormalons and how they affect the possible
definitions of the renormalized effective potential, pressure and gap
equation. For a more extensive review on renormalons see Altarelli (
1995 ) and Beneke ( 1999 ) .

#### Renormalons

An observable @xmath can in general be expressed in terms of a
perturbation series in @xmath in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

It often happens that this series is an asymptotic series which is not
convergent. Such an asymptotic series can sometimes be resummed by the
Borel transform method, although in general this resummation is not
unique. The Borel transform of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The observable @xmath can now be expressed in terms of an integral over
its Borel transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the series expansion of Eq. ( 4.85 ). For example if one takes
@xmath , the series expansion for @xmath is clearly divergent. The Borel
transform however is convergent for @xmath and equal to @xmath . To
resum @xmath it is assumed that @xmath for any value of @xmath . The
resummed expression for @xmath now yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral in Eq. ( 4.88 ) is convergent and, moreover, well-defined
since there are no singularities along the integration contour. So in
this example the asymptotic series has been resummed unambiguously.
However, sometimes this method gives rise to ambiguities. Take for
example @xmath in which case @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case the integral is not well defined since there is a
singularity at @xmath on the integration contour. This singularity is
called the renormalon pole. One can still give a meaning to this
resummed series by introducing a prescription how to integrate around
the pole

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

This resummation gives rise to ambiguities, since one does not know
whether to take the @xmath , @xmath or a combination like the principal
value prescription. But as long as the differences between the
prescriptions are not that big, it does not really matter. The
difference is equal to the residue at @xmath , which is called the
renormalon residue. In this case it is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

So in this example the series can be resummed up to ambiguities of order
@xmath . These ambiguities are tiny when @xmath is small. However for
larger values of @xmath they can become important. These ambiguities
indicate that the non-perturbative corrections to Eq. ( 4.85 ) could be
in this case of order @xmath .

#### Renormalons in the nonlinear sigma model

Renormalons appear in the vacuum expectation value of the @xmath field.
A calculation shows that at zero temperature one can write (David, 1986
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This equation is in agreement with the gap equation (
4.28 ) if @xmath is split as follows @xmath . The part of the integral
in Eq. ( 4.92 ) that has the infrared renormalon pole in the Borel plane
is in fact the contribution from the integrand in the limit @xmath (its
“perturbative tail”)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath the exponential integral which is defined below.
In the limit @xmath , the logarithmic integral has the asymptotic
expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . From Eq. ( 4.94 ), it is clear that there is a renormalon
pole at @xmath . This shows that when @xmath the value of @xmath is
inherently ambiguous at next-to-leading order, due to the freedom in the
choice of prescription. David ( 1984 ) has shown that this ambiguity
also arises in dimensional regularization.

The same problem appears in the calculation of the effective potential
even at its minimum, but not in the gap equation. The latter can be seen
from the last term of Eq. ( 4.20 ) which contributes to the gap equation
as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ambiguity that would arise from this term when removing its
perturbative tail (cf. Eq. ( 4.93 )) cancels in the gap equation ( 4.28
) against the one arising in @xmath (cf. Eq. ( 4.92 )).

The perturbative tail of the effective potential, i.e. the first two
terms of @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.54 ), corresponds to poles in the
Borel plane at @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Since @xmath is only
temperature independent at the minimum (at LO only, but that is
sufficient because one is working at NLO), the subtraction of the
perturbative tail will become temperature dependent, except at the
minimum. Since subtracting temperature-dependent divergences renders the
remaining temperature-dependent terms meaningless, it is impossible to
define a finite effective potential at finite temperature. In order to
avoid any renormalon ambiguity, it also not possible to obtain a finite
effective potential or even an unambiguous minimum at zero temperature.
However, as was shown in Sec. 4.5 the quantity @xmath is free from
renormalon ambiguities and is finite after temperature-independent
coupling constant renormalization.

Finally, using Eq. ( 4.92 ) one can investigate the finite temperature
dependence of renormalon contributions to @xmath and the effective
potential. One can show that Eq. ( 4.92 ) at finite temperature has
exactly the same renormalon contribution, i.e. neither the pole nor the
residue become temperature dependent. Secondly, the perturbative tail of
the effective potential which is given by the first two terms of @xmath
, corresponds to poles in the Borel plane at @xmath and @xmath . The
positions of the renormalon poles are not affected by temperature. Only
the residues become temperature dependent, except at the minimum of the
potential, as we concluded earlier. The fact that renormalon pole
positions are not affected by temperature, but residues are, is also the
case for the thermal ultraviolet renormalons in @xmath in @xmath
dimensions studied by Loewe and Valenzuela ( 2000 ) .

### 4.8 Summary and Conclusions

To summarize, the pressure in the nonlinear sigma model was calculated
at finite temperature to next-to-leading order in the @xmath expansion.
The main result is that one can obtain an unambiguous, finite pressure,
by subtracting the zero-temperature value of the pressure and
renormalization of the coupling constant in a temperature-independent
way. This procedure cannot be carried out away from the minimum of the
effective potential and it was argued that defining a finite, effective
potential by the subtraction of the so-called perturbative tail, leads
to ambiguities associated with infrared renormalons. In general, these
become temperature dependent, and this casts doubt on the usefulness of
defining a finite effective potential outside the minimum. Since it
turns out that, as it should, physical quantities are independent of the
choice of prescription, one can apply any prescription for the
logarithmic integral without worrying about the possible ambiguities.
This is what will be done in the remaining chapters of this thesis.

The expression for the pressure was calculated numerically at finite
temperature. This calculation shows that the @xmath expansion is a
meaningful expansion for all temperatures. The high-energy approximation
that was originally applied to the nonlinear sigma model in 3+1
dimensions by Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) was also studied. In 1+1
dimensions, where one can compare with exact numerical results, it was
found that it underestimates the pressure for all temperatures. An
improved approximation was suggested, the so-called high-temperature
approximation. This approximation has the advantage that it is quite
easy to produce numerical results and agrees better with the exact
results. At asymptotically high temperatures the pressure approaches
that of a gas of @xmath free massless particles. It was found that the
pressure divided by the pressure at infinite temperatures has a very
weak dependence on @xmath . Similarly behavior is found in lattice
calculations as a function of @xmath and @xmath .

## Chapter 5 Thermodynamics of the @xmath model

Using the @xmath expansion, the influence of quantum instantons to the
thermodynamics of the @xmath model in 1+1 dimensions is studied. The
auxiliary field effective potential is calculated to next-to-leading
order in @xmath and turns out to have temperature-dependent ultraviolet
divergences. These divergences can only be renormalized at its minimum
just like in the nonlinear sigma model discussed in Chapter 4. By using
that the @xmath model is equivalent to the @xmath nonlinear sigma model
it is argued that the pressure for intermediate temperatures is
dominated by the effect of quantum instantons. This chapter is based on:
The effect of quantum instantons on the thermodynamics of the @xmath
model , J.O. Andersen, D. Boer and H.J. Warringa, hep-th/0602082.

### 5.1 Introduction

It was discovered by Belavin et al. ( 1975 ) that the classical
equations of motion of Euclidean QCD have finite action solutions with
nontrivial topology. These solutions are called instantons. They are
stationary points of the classical action. In perturbation theory one
most often only takes into account the trivial vacuum and small
fluctuations around it. However, in the non-perturbative regime the
instanton solutions and the fluctuations around it can really contribute
to physical quantities as was first observed by ’t Hooft ( 1976 ) . He
showed that instantons are giving rise to an additional source of @xmath
symmetry breaking in QCD, which is necessary to explain the relatively
large mass of the @xmath meson.

In this chapter it is investigated whether instantons can have an
influence on the thermodynamical quantities. To answer this question,
the @xmath model in @xmath dimensions will be studied since it admits
instanton solutions for all @xmath . The @xmath model was introduced by
Eichenherr ( 1978 ) . It is possible to investigate its non-perturbative
regime using the @xmath expansion (D’Adda et al. , 1978 ) . An
attractive feature of the @xmath model in @xmath dimensions are its
similarities with QCD in @xmath dimensions. Like QCD it is an
asymptotically free theory. Moreover, classically the @xmath model is
scale-invariant. Due to renormalization of the quantum corrections a
mass scale is introduced in the model. Furthermore, a mass gap for the
scalar fields is generated dynamically by the interactions. The local
@xmath symmetry of the @xmath model generates a long range interaction
between the scalar fields. Since the Coulomb potential in @xmath
dimensions is proportional to the distance between the charges, this
model has confinement (D’Adda et al. , 1978 ) . Finally as alluded to
above, the classical equations of motion of the @xmath model admit
instanton solutions (Golo and Perelomov, 1978 ) . Lazarides ( 1979 )
investigated the @xmath model at finite temperature for the first time
and showed that at non-zero temperature the model is no longer
confining. For a review on the @xmath model at finite temperature, see
Actor ( 1985 ) . Instantons in QCD at finite temperature are discussed
by Gross et al. ( 1981 ) and in the large @xmath limit by Schäfer ( 2004
) .

As is explained in Chapter 3, thermodynamical quantities like the
pressure can be obtained by minimizing the finite temperature effective
potential. In this chapter the finite temperature effective potential
will be calculated to next-to-leading order in @xmath . Its
zero-temperature counterpart was calculated by Campostrini and Rossi (
1992 ) . It turns out that the effective potential contains
temperature-dependent ultraviolet divergences. These divergences become
temperature-independent at the minimum. Thermodynamic quantities like
the pressure are defined at the minimum of the effective potential and
hence can be calculated without such renormalization problems. The same
phenomenon is also found in the @xmath nonlinear sigma model in @xmath
dimensions (Chapter 4) and the @xmath linear sigma model in @xmath
dimensions (Chapter 6). A general explanation of how these temperature
divergences arise is given in Sec. 3.4.

Instantons are characterized by a quantized winding number @xmath ,
which is a topological invariant. The instantons give a contribution
proportional to @xmath to the partition function, where the
non-analyticity in @xmath shows that the contribution is
non-perturbative. This contribution also indicates that instantons
effects disappear in the limit @xmath as was argued by Witten ( 1979 ) .
As a result one has to perform calculations to next-to-leading order in
@xmath to investigate the effects of instantons in the @xmath expansion.
It was argued by Witten ( 1979 ) using the @xmath expansion at zero
temperature that quantum corrections let the instanton configurations to
disappear. However, Jevicki ( 1979 ) showed that classical instantons
still are present in the quantum effective action, not longer as
stationary solutions but as poles. However, at finite temperature,
Affleck ( 1980a , b , c ) found that the large- @xmath quantum effective
action does contain stationary solutions with quantized topological
charge, called quantum instantons. Hence, at finite temperature
configurations with non-trivial topology can contribute to physical
quantities. In this chapter the same conclusion will be drawn. The
pressure is calculated for topological configurations with zero winding
number. The contribution from other configurations will be ignored since
they are difficult to calculate. It is found that for intermediate
temperatures, where the leading order contribution to the pressure
divided by @xmath displays a sharp increase, the next-to-leading @xmath
contributions gives rise to a negative pressure. This is unphysical
because it results in a negative entropy. Therefore, the negative
pressure indicates that an important contribution, most probably from
the configurations with non-zero winding number, is left out. This
conclusion is further strengthened by using a correspondence discovered
by Eichenherr ( 1978 ) between the @xmath model and the @xmath nonlinear
sigma model. In the @xmath approximation of the @xmath nonlinear sigma
model one implicitly includes all instanton configurations. Hence the
difference between the pressure of the @xmath sector of the @xmath model
and the pressure of the @xmath nonlinear sigma model gives the
contribution of the topological configurations with @xmath to the
pressure of the @xmath model. In this way a strong hint is found that
the topological configurations with @xmath give a large contribution to
the pressure for intermediate temperatures.

This introduction will be ended by mentioning some related studies of
the @xmath model. Schwab ( 1982 ) , Münster ( 1982 ) and Münster ( 1983
) have investigated the @xmath model on the sphere @xmath . Münster (
1983 ) remarked that it is naive to expand only around the saddle point
@xmath because it leads to an improper treatment of zero modes.
Furthermore, the @xmath model has been studied on the lattice as well,
see for example Campostrini et al. ( 1992a , b ) and Vicari ( 1993 ) . A
way to investigate the relevance of the topological solutions is by
adding a term @xmath to the action. Olejnik and Schierholz ( 1994 ) and
Schierholz ( 1995 ) calculated for @xmath the free energy as a function
of @xmath . They found that depending on the size of the coupling
constant there is a phase transition from the confined to the deconfined
phase for @xmath . Azcoiti et al. ( 2004 ) found that for @xmath the CP
symmetry is spontaneously broken for @xmath . The @xmath model also has
applications in condensed matter physics. Pruisken et al. ( 2003 ) and
Pruisken and Burmistrov ( 2005 ) have applied this model to investigate
the quantum Hall effect. Ichinose and Yamamoto ( 1990 ) studied
antiferromagnetism using the @xmath model at finite temperature.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Sec. 5.2 the @xmath model is
introduced. The calculation of the effective action and effective
potential are performed in Secs. 5.3 and 5.4. In Sec. 5.5 the results of
the calculation of the pressure are discussed. Finally a summary and
conclusions are given in Sec. 5.6.

### 5.2 The @xmath model

The @xmath model is described by the following Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a complex scalar field and @xmath is the bare coupling
constant. Under an @xmath transformation which is parametrized by @xmath
, @xmath . By requiring that the Lagrangian density is invariant under
local @xmath transformations, the interaction term @xmath can be
determined from the transformation rule of the Lagrangian density which
reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence the interaction term should contain derivatives. If the
interaction Lagrangian density is chosen as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

then Eq. ( 5.2 ) is satisfied. As a result the model becomes invariant
under global @xmath transformations as well.

The Lagrangian density can also be written in terms of gauge fields
@xmath which transform under a @xmath gauge transformation as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lagrangian density expressed in gauge fields is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the covariant derivative @xmath . By solving the equations of
motions of the @xmath fields one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If this expression is inserted into ( 5.5 ) the original Lagrangian
density ( 5.1 ) and Eq. ( 5.3 ) is recovered.

#### Coset models

The @xmath and the @xmath nonlinear sigma model are examples of coset
models. A coset model is a theory of fields @xmath which take values in
the coset space @xmath . Here @xmath denotes a compact Lie group and
@xmath a closed subgroup of @xmath . The coset space @xmath is a
manifold though only a Lie group if @xmath is an invariant subgroup of
@xmath . The coset space has dimension @xmath . In 2-dimensional
Euclidean space, @xmath is a map from @xmath , whereas at finite
temperature this map becomes @xmath . In a coset model the fields
transform as @xmath where @xmath . The Lagrangian density of a coset
model is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the space-time metric ( @xmath in Euclidean space) and
@xmath is a metric on the coset space @xmath . The metric @xmath is to
be chosen in such a way that the Lagrangian density is invariant under
transformations @xmath .

Coset models have an interesting connection to the topology of
space-time. If one identifies all points at space-time infinity, the
fields @xmath become a map from @xmath . These maps can be topologically
nontrivial, which implies that there are maps @xmath which cannot be
deformed continuously into each other. Such maps can be classified
according to the second homotopy group of @xmath , @xmath . In the case
that the second homotopy group is nontrivial, the action of the coset
model has more than one stationary solution, which in Euclidean
space-time are called instantons. At finite temperature all points at
@xmath can be identified, as a result space-time becomes @xmath as well.
Hence finite temperature instantons (also called calorons) do exist, but
unlike instantons at zero temperature they satisfy the boundary
conditions for scalar fields in imaginary time (Lazarides, 1979 ;
Affleck, 1980a ; Gross et al. , 1981 ; Bruckmann et al. , 2005 ) .

The @xmath nonlinear sigma model is an @xmath coset model with real
scalar fields. Since in a coset model, the fields take their value in
the coset space, it follows that @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is the
radius of @xmath . If the metric is chosen to be @xmath the Lagrangian
density becomes invariant under G. Furthermore the Lagrangian density
discussed in Chapter 4, Eq. ( 4.1 ), is recovered from Eq. ( 5.7 ) in
this way. Since @xmath only for @xmath , the @xmath nonlinear sigma
model has instanton solutions for @xmath only.

The @xmath model is an @xmath coset model. The space @xmath is the
so-called complex projective space, it is the space of @xmath
-dimensional complex vectors @xmath satisfying the equivalence relation
@xmath if @xmath where @xmath and the relation @xmath . Hence the @xmath
scalar fields @xmath of the @xmath model satisfy @xmath . The
equivalence relation together with the constraint directly translates
into the requirement of @xmath gauge invariance. The corresponding
metric on the coset space can be read off from Eq. ( 5.3 ), @xmath . It
turns out that @xmath , hence the @xmath model has instanton solutions
for any @xmath .

##### Instantons

Classical instantons are solutions to the classical equations of motion
in Euclidean space-time which have finite action. They can be
characterized by an integer topological charge @xmath which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Eq. ( 5.6 ) the expression for @xmath can be written in terms of
the gauge field as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

To show that @xmath is an integer, consider a configuration with finite
action. In that case the fields @xmath should go to a constant times a
phase factor (arising from gauge invariance) at infinity, @xmath . Since
@xmath is the integral over a total divergence, it can be written as a
surface integral at infinity. As a result one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the change in @xmath by going along a circle at
infinity. Since the fields with finite action should be continuous
functions, @xmath is a multiple of @xmath . Hence @xmath can only take
integer values.

Like any vector, @xmath satisfies @xmath . Working out this equation
gives a lower bound on the Lagrangian density of the @xmath model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating this equation over @xmath results in the classical action
@xmath which satisfies the following lower bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

For instantons this lower bound turns into an equality. The explicit
form of the instantons can be found by solving the self-duality equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solutions of this equation, the instantons, are of the following
form (Golo and Perelomov, 1978 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a smooth @xmath -dimensional complex vector function.
The one instanton (with @xmath ) for example can be written as (Golo and
Perelomov, 1978 ; D’Adda et al. , 1978 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the position of the instanton in space and @xmath the
size of the instanton. The constants @xmath and @xmath obey the
following relations, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

These results can be generalized to finite temperature. If all points at
@xmath are identified the space changes from @xmath into @xmath . To
obtain a finite action at non-zero temperature, the fields @xmath still
have to go to a constant, @xmath . Due to the finite temperature
boundary condition @xmath . The topological charge is still quantized at
finite temperature (Affleck, 1980a ) . The action has the same bound as
at zero temperature. The explicit form of the instanton at finite
temperature (also called calorons) follow from solving the self-duality
equations using the boundary condition on @xmath , see Affleck ( 1980b )
.

##### A correspondence between @xmath and @xmath

The @xmath model is equivalent to the @xmath nonlinear sigma model,
which was shown by Eichenherr ( 1978 ) , see also Banerjee ( 1994 ) .
This means that there is a one-to-one correspondence between those two
models. Such an equivalence for example implies that one can obtain the
pressure of the @xmath model by calculating the pressure of the @xmath
nonlinear sigma model. The correspondence can be made explicit by
writing the @xmath nonlinear sigma fields @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the three @xmath Pauli matrices satisfying @xmath .
Using Eq. ( 5.16 ) the @xmath nonlinear sigma Lagrangian density, Eq. (
4.1 ), with constraint turns into the @xmath Lagrangian density, ( 5.1
), with the corresponding constraint.

### 5.3 Effective action

To obtain the effective action, the constraint from ( 5.1 ) can be
implemented by introducing an auxiliary Lagrange multiplier field @xmath
. This gives rise to the following Lagrangian density which is
equivalent to the original Lagrangian density Eq. ( 5.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the Lagrangian density is now quadratic in the @xmath fields, the
Gaussian integration over these fields can be performed. This results in
the following effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The covariant derivative @xmath transforms as @xmath . Hence, as
expected this effective action is invariant under local @xmath
transformations. In order to obtain the effective potential, @xmath has
to be expanded around the vacuum expectation values of the @xmath field.
The vacuum expectation value of the @xmath field is purely imaginary as
is proved in Eq. ( 4.12 ). Therefore @xmath can be expressed in terms of
the sum of its vacuum expectation value @xmath and a quantum fluctuating
field @xmath as follows, @xmath . For convenience the gauge fields are
rescaled by a factor @xmath . This rescaling with factors of @xmath does
not have any effect on the final results since the @xmath and @xmath
fields are integration variables of the path integral. It is just a
convenient way to organize the @xmath expansion. Working out the square
of the covariant derivative and inserting the vacuum expectation value
gives the following effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now as shown by Affleck ( 1980a ) @xmath contains stationary solutions
@xmath at finite temperature, which vanish at zero temperature according
to Witten ( 1979 ) . These solutions have a quantized topological charge
given by Eq. ( 5.9 ). Since these solutions are stationary points of an
action in which quantum effects are incorporated, they are called
‘quantum instantons’. In the limit of high temperature, the exact form
of these quantum instantons can be found (Affleck, 1980a ) . Such
instantons need to be considered in a full calculation of the pressure.
As a first step to investigate the relevance of the quantum instantons
to the pressure, only the fluctuations around the trivial configuration
@xmath are taken into account in this chapter. The result for the
pressure of the @xmath model with @xmath will be compared to the
pressure of the @xmath nonlinear sigma model in which the contribution
of all quantum instantons is take into account. Because the @xmath model
is equivalent to the @xmath nonlinear sigma model this comparison should
therefore give the contribution to the pressure of the quantum
instantons.

To obtain the pressure for the @xmath configuration, @xmath has to be
expanded around the vacuum expectation value @xmath and the trivial
configuration @xmath (with @xmath ). Expanding @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

With help of the following relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the traces in @xmath can be evaluated. To next-to-leading order in
@xmath these relations lead to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the results above one gets the following effective action up to
corrections of order @xmath (D’Adda et al. , 1978 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.31)
  -- -- -- --------

where the inverse @xmath and gauge field propagators are given by
(D’Adda et al. , 1978 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The trace of the inverse gauge field propagator was evaluated using
dimensional regularization in @xmath dimensions, in that case @xmath .
Of course using a Pauli-Villars regulator one obtains the same result
(D’Adda et al. , 1978 ) , but one has to be careful in applying this
regularization technique in this case because it explicitly breaks gauge
invariance.

Equation ( 5.31 ) shows that although a kinetic term for the gauge
fields was absent from the classical action, it follows that such a term
is generated by the quantum corrections. The Lorentz structure of the
inverse gauge field propagator follows from gauge invariance which
requires the inverse propagator to be transverse, that is @xmath .

The nonzero temperature results can be obtained by changing the
integrals over momenta into sum-integrals. Due to gauge invariance, the
inverse gauge field propagator is still transverse at nonzero
temperature. Its tensor structure at finite temperature is the same as
at zero temperature (this is typical for @xmath dimensions, in more
dimensions Lorentz symmetry breaking terms can appear at finite
temperature). At finite temperature one finds (Lazarides, 1979 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is up to a factor 2 equal to Eq. ( 4.44 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the low-momentum limit at zero temperature the inverse gauge field
propagator becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is expression is up to a constant (which could be absorbed in the
gauge fields by a redefinition) equal to the ordinary inverse photon
propagator which gives rise to a Coulomb potential between two charges.
In @xmath dimensions, this potential is proportional to the distance
between the charged particles. Therefore the @xmath model has
confinement at zero temperature (D’Adda et al. , 1978 ; Samuel, 1983 ) .
However, confinement disappears at non-zero temperature as was shown by
Lazarides ( 1979 ) , see also Actor ( 1985 ) .

### 5.4 Effective potential

By integrating the effective action @xmath over the quantum fluctuations
@xmath and @xmath one obtains the effective potential. The leading term
of the effective potential can be read off directly from Eq. ( 5.31 ).
In order to obtain the next-to-leading order corrections a Gaussian
integration has to be performed. For the contribution arising from the
@xmath fluctuations this is straightforward. But to calculate the gauge
field contribution to the effective potential one has to fix the gauge,
because otherwise it is not possible to invert the gauge field inverse
propagator. In the generalized Lorenz gauge this boils down to adding
the gauge fixing term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

to the effective action. As a consequence the ghost fields give a
contribution to the effective potential which is @xmath . After
subtracting @xmath -independent constants it is found that the gauge
field and ghost contribution to the effective potential together is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is independent of @xmath as expected. The same result could of
course also be obtained in any another gauge, for example the @xmath
gauge. In that gauge the ghost fields give a contribution of @xmath ,
whereas the @xmath gauge field gives a contribution of @xmath .
Together, this leads of course to the same result as in the generalized
Lorenz gauge.

From ( 5.31 ) and the results above, one obtains the complete finite
temperature effective potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the leading order contribution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the next-to-leading order contribution by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effective potential is ultraviolet divergent. To regulate the
divergences an ultraviolet momentum cutoff @xmath is introduced. This
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The minimum of the leading order effective potential obeys the following
gap equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gap equation can be rendered finite by the substitution @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this renormalization prescription it follows that the leading order
beta-function is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The negative sign shows that the @xmath model is asymptotically free.

In order to calculate the next-to-leading order contribution to the
effective potential, @xmath is written as a sum of divergent ( @xmath )
and finite parts ( @xmath ) in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the divergent and finite quantities are defined through the
following relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath .

The functions @xmath and @xmath are functions which contain all
divergences of the next-to-leading order effective potential. In order
to obtain these ultraviolet divergences, the high-momentum limits of
@xmath and @xmath are needed. In the high-momentum approximation (
@xmath ) one finds using Eq. ( 4.48 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

The divergences @xmath and @xmath can be obtained by integrating ( 5.52
) and ( 5.53 ) over momenta. It is found that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From these two equations it can be seen that (through @xmath and @xmath
) the effective potential contains temperature dependent divergences.
They cannot be renormalized in a temperature-independent way. However,
by using the leading order gap equation ( 5.46 ) one can show that
@xmath and @xmath become temperature-independent at the minimum of the
effective potential. Therefore the quadratic divergence and the
divergence proportional to the li function become
temperature-independent at the minimum. As a result these divergences
can be renormalized at the minimum, as will be done explicitly in the
following section.

The finite functions @xmath and @xmath will be obtained numerically. In
order to calculate these functions, the divergences will be written
partly in terms of an integral as is discussed in Sec. 2.5 . This
prevents subtracting large quantities which can give rise to big
numerical errors. The functions @xmath and @xmath are calculated using
the following expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

here @xmath denotes the principal value integral. At zero temperature it
is found that @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath . This is in agreement
with the zero temperature calculations of Campostrini and Rossi ( 1992 )
. For convenience the finite temperature parts of @xmath and @xmath are
defined as @xmath and @xmath . These functions divided by @xmath depend
on @xmath only and are displayed in Fig. 5.1 . For large @xmath these
functions go to zero because that is equivalent to taking the limit of
zero temperature. For small @xmath they go to zero as well, for the same
reason as discussed in Sec. 4.6 for the function @xmath .

The finite functions @xmath and @xmath were calculated using the method
explained in Sec. 2.5 . They are displayed in Fig. 5.2 .

The @xmath large limit of @xmath and @xmath can be obtained by noting
that for large @xmath the temperature dependent part of the inverse
propagator does not contribute to @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, the
dominant contribution to the difference of a sum-integral and an
integral arises from the low momentum modes. So the large @xmath
behavior of the zero temperature inverse propagators can be used to
obtain a large @xmath approximation for @xmath and @xmath . It is found
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

As one can see in Fig. 5.2 this is in agreement with the numerical
calculations.

The small @xmath limit of @xmath and @xmath can be obtained as well. For
that one needs the small @xmath limit of @xmath . That limit can be
found by first performing the momentum integration and taking the zero
modes as is explained around Eq. ( 4.78 ). In this limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

This results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.60)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These limits are also in agreement with the numerical calculations as
can be seen from Fig. 5.2 .

### 5.5 Contribution of quantum instantons to the pressure

In the previous section the effective potential was evaluated. It was
found that the effective potential contains temperature-dependent
ultraviolet divergences. At the minimum these temperature-dependent
divergences will disappear as will be discussed now. To calculate the
effective potential at the minimum one only needs to solve the leading
order gap equation ( 5.46 ) as was shown by Root ( 1974 ) and as
discussed in Sec. 4.5 . As a result the leading and next-to-leading
order contributions to the pressure are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the solution of the leading-order gap equation ( 5.46 )
at temperature @xmath . By using the leading order gap equation ( 5.46 )
it can be shown that at the minimum the divergent terms @xmath and
@xmath become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence the temperature-dependent quadratic divergence and the divergence
proportional to the li function become temperature-independent at the
minimum of the effective potential. They cancel in the calculation of
the pressure due to the subtraction of the zero temperature
contribution. The divergences proportional to the @xmath function can be
absorbed into the coupling constant @xmath . The renormalization factor
@xmath to next-to-leading order becomes in this way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this renormalization prescription it follows that the beta-function
to next-to-leading order in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the results above it follows that the leading and next-to-leading
order contributions to the pressure are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.67)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.68)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The results of the calculation of the pressure are displayed in Fig. 5.3
for the arbitrary choice @xmath , for different values of @xmath . As
one can see, for low temperatures and all finite values of @xmath the
pressure first decreases for increasing values of @xmath . A decreasing
pressure is unphysical because it implies that the entropy which is the
derivative of the pressure with respect to temperature becomes negative.
But this is in disagreement with the third law of thermodynamics that
states that the entropy is minimal at zero temperature. If one believes
that the @xmath expansion is a good expansion (which is for example
shown in the @xmath nonlinear sigma model discussed in Chapter 3) it is
likely that the reason for this negative pressure is that the effective
action, Eq. ( 5.20 ) was only expanded around the vacuum @xmath solution
with zero winding number. The contribution of other vacua (quantum
instantons) with nonzero winding number was left out of the
calculations. As one can see from the figure, the problem of the
negative pressure becomes less severe if @xmath becomes larger. This is
in agreement with the fact that the instanton contribution vanishes in
the @xmath limit (Witten, 1979 ) as is discussed in Sec. 5.1. Moreover,
that this problem arises at low temperatures is also reasonable because
instantons are non-perturbative in @xmath . They become less important
at small couplings, so they should vanish at high temperatures due to
asymptotic freedom.

Using the equivalence between the @xmath nonlinear sigma model and the
@xmath model (see Sec. 5.2) the exact contribution of the quantum
instantons with nonzero winding number to the pressure can be found.
Since there are no gauge fields in the @xmath nonlinear sigma model and
because the integration over the scalar fields can be done exactly the
effects of all quantum instantons are automatically included its
effective potential (see Chapter 4). Due to the equivalence, the
pressure of the @xmath model should be exactly equal to that of the
@xmath nonlinear sigma model. In Fig. 5.4 the result of the NLO
calculation of the pressure of the @xmath nonlinear sigma model for
@xmath is compared to the contribution to the pressure of the @xmath
model with zero winding number. It can be seen that for very low and
high temperatures both pressures coincide. For intermediate temperatures
these pressures differ. This difference is displayed in Fig. 5.5 . This
is a strong indication that quantum instantons give a sizable
contribution to the pressure and other thermodynamical quantities at
where the pressure (divided by @xmath ) increases considerably.

### 5.6 Summary and Conclusions

In this chapter the effect of quantum instantons on the thermodynamical
quantities was investigated. For that the effective potential of the
@xmath model expanded around a background with zero winding number was
calculated to next-to-leading order in @xmath . It was shown that the
effective potential contains temperature-dependent divergences which
only can be renormalized at the minimum of the effective potential.
Hence thermodynamical quantities (which are all defined at the minimum
of this effective potential) can be rendered finite like in the
(non)linear sigma models discussed in Chapters 4 and 6.

It was found that for all values of @xmath the contribution of the
vacuum with zero winding number gives rise to a negative pressure, which
is large for intermediate temperatures where the leading order pressure
divided by @xmath increases strongly. Since this is unphysical, it
indicates that the quantum instantons must give a considerable
contribution to the pressure for intermediate temperatures. In agreement
with the vanishing of the instantons in the @xmath limit this problem of
the negative pressure becomes less severe for large values of @xmath .

For @xmath the exact contribution of the quantum instantons was found
using an equivalence between the @xmath nonlinear sigma model and the
@xmath model. In the @xmath approximation to the @xmath nonlinear sigma
model one implicitly integrates over all quantum instantons and one
finds a finite pressure in next-to-leading order in @xmath . Comparing
this result to the pressure of the @xmath model with zero winding number
gives the exact contribution of the quantum instantons for @xmath . They
give a large contribution for intermediate temperatures where the
pressure divided by @xmath raises quickly.

A possible extension of this work would be to add a term @xmath to the
effective action and investigate the dependence of the thermodynamical
quantities on @xmath . Moreover one could try to take the fluctuations
around the quantum instantons with nonzero winding number into account
explicitly and see whether they will reduce the problem of the negative
pressure, but this is not attempted in this thesis.

## Chapter 6 Thermodynamics of @xmath sigma models in d=3+1

The @xmath linear and nonlinear sigma model in @xmath dimensions are
low-energy effective theories for QCD. The pressure of these two
low-energy effective models will be computed up to next-to-leading order
in @xmath by minimizing the effective potential. It is found that the
finite temperature effective potential contains temperature dependent
divergences which become temperature-independent at the minimum. The
calculated pressure can serve as a prediction for the pressure of QCD at
low temperatures and will be compared to approximations discussed
previously in the literature. Finally a mass bound on the sigma meson is
presented. This chapter is based on: Thermodynamics of O @xmath sigma
models: @xmath corrections , J.O. Andersen, D. Boer and H.J. Warringa,
Phys. Rev. D70 116007, (2004).

### 6.1 Introduction

Although the QCD Lagrangian possesses a chiral symmetry in the limit of
zero quark masses, the true QCD ground state does not respect this
symmetry. The chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken by quantum
effects. To be specific, QCD with @xmath massless quarks has a global
@xmath symmetry, which for the ground state at low temperatures is
broken down to an @xmath symmetry. According to Goldstone’s theorem,
there is a massless, spinless particle for each generator of a broken
global continuous symmetry. In this case this implies the occurrence of
@xmath Goldstone bosons. In phenomenological applications @xmath is
either two or three, and one also has to take into account the explicit
symmetry breaking due to the nonzero quark masses. Both the spontaneous
and the explicit chiral symmetry breaking are apparent in the low-energy
hadronic particle spectrum, where the expected number of relatively
light mesons is observed (e.g. the three pions for @xmath ). At
sufficiently high temperatures one expects the chiral symmetry to be
restored and lattice simulations of QCD suggest that this happens at a
temperature of approximately 170 MeV depending on the number of quarks
and their masses.

In the case of two flavors, the situation is the simplest, since one can
exploit the fact that the @xmath symmetry is locally isomorphic to
@xmath . If baryons (nucleons in this case) and the @xmath and @xmath
meson are not included the simpler @xmath linear sigma model can be used
as a low-energy effective theory for describing the dynamics of three
pion fields and one sigma field. These four fields form a
four-dimensional vector @xmath in the fundamental representation of
@xmath . At low temperature, the @xmath symmetry is spontaneously broken
down to @xmath , where the sigma field acquires a vacuum expectation
value and the three pions are interpreted as the Goldstone bosons. At
high temperatures the vacuum expectation value of the sigma field
vanishes. According to the calculations performed in this chapter, the
symmetry is restored via a second-order phase transition in agreement
with other calculations in the literature. If the symmetry is restored,
the pion and the sigma field have the same mass.

For @xmath there is no connection between the @xmath model and the
@xmath linear sigma model since the symmetries differ. The @xmath sigma
models have besides their relevance to low-energy QCD also other
applications. For example the Higgs field in the Standard Model is
described by an @xmath linear sigma model. In that case the scalar
fields are also coupled to the electroweak gauge fields and the
fermions. The spontaneous symmetry breakdown of the @xmath symmetry
causes the Higgs field to acquire a vacuum expectation value. As a
result the weak vector bosons and the fermions (except for the
neutrinos) become massive. Another application is in cosmology. It is
believed that during early times the universe went through a period of
rapid expansion, called inflation. The field which controls the
inflation, called the inflaton can be described by a linear sigma model
(see for example Kolb and Turner ( 1990 ) ). In condensed matter physics
the @xmath sigma models are used to model spin-spin interactions (see
for example Itzykson and Drouffe ( 1995 ) ) .

In this chapter both the @xmath linear sigma model and @xmath nonlinear
sigma model in 3+1 dimensions will be studied at finite temperature and
to next-to-leading order in the @xmath expansion. At zero temperature,
the @xmath expansion was applied to @xmath sigma models a long time ago
at leading order (LO) by Coleman et al. ( 1974 ) and at next-to-leading
order (NLO) by Root ( 1974 ) . At finite temperature the LO @xmath
contribution has been studied by Meyers-Ortmanns et al. ( 1993 ) . In
that case, the effective potential is that of an ideal gas and thus
straightforward to compute. The NLO @xmath corrections are less trivial,
since they involve a momentum-dependent self-energy and cannot be
evaluated analytically. A high-temperature expansion was performed by
Jain ( 1993 ) to obtain purely analytical results for the linear sigma
model. Similarly Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) resorted to a
“high-energy” approximation, which makes the calculations manageable.
However, this approximation is uncontrolled and it is difficult to
assess how reasonable it is, unless one calculates the full NLO @xmath
corrections. These corrections will be calculated in this chapter and
compared to the “high-energy” approximation.

The @xmath sigma models have also been studied in detail at finite
temperature using various other approaches. A systematic study has been
carried out by Chiku and Hatsuda ( 1998 ) using optimized perturbation
theory. The method was used to calculate spectral functions, properties
of the effective potential, and dilepton emission rates. The 2PI
formalism (Cornwall et al. , 1974 ) (see Sec. 3.1 ) has also been used
to examine various properties of the @xmath linear sigma models at
finite temperature (Baym and Grinstein, 1977 ; Amelino-Camelia and Pi,
1993 ; Amelino-Camelia, 1997 ; Roh and Matsui, 1998 ; Petropoulos, 1999
; Lenaghan and Rischke, 2000 ; Nemoto et al. , 2000 ; Aarts and
Martinez Resco, 2004 ; Arrizabalaga et al. , 2005 ; Röder, 2005 ) , see
Petropoulos ( 2004 ) for a recent review. For example, in several papers
the temperature dependence of the pion and sigma masses, and of the
vacuum expectation value of the sigma field, have been investigated. The
calculations of the scalar field effective potential as a function of
temperature have been carried out in the Hartree approximation and the
large- @xmath limit (Amelino-Camelia and Pi, 1993 ; Amelino-Camelia,
1997 ; Roh and Matsui, 1998 ; Petropoulos, 1999 ; Lenaghan and Rischke,
2000 ; Nemoto et al. , 2000 ) . In these cases, the gap equations for
the propagators are easy to solve since the self-energy reduces to a
local mass term. In the Hartree approximation (which implies ignoring
momentum-dependent self-energies), the result has been shown to be
problematic (and a first-order phase transition occurs), which has been
remedied by including more diagrams in the truncation (Verschelde and
De Pessemier, 2002 ; Baacke and Michalski, 2003 ) , resulting in a
second-order phase transition. If one goes beyond the Hartree
approximation or includes the full NLO contributions in the @xmath
expansion, the gap equations become nonlocal and very difficult to
solve.

The advantage of using the 1PI formalism over the 2PI formalism is that
one does not have to make a Hartree or other approximation to calculate
the full @xmath corrections to the thermodynamical quantities. However,
to describe out of equilibrium phenomena, the 2PI formalism is favored
as is explained in Sec. 3.1 .

The approach followed in this chapter is similar to the study of the
nonlinear sigma model in 1+1 dimensions (see Chapter 4) and to that of
the @xmath model in 1+1 dimensions (see Chapter 5). Similar conclusions
about the renormalization of the effective potential in 3+1 dimensions
as in 1+1 dimensions will be drawn. It turns out that at NLO,
temperature-independent renormalization is only possible at the minimum
of the auxiliary field effective potential. This aspect of the @xmath
expansion was missed in previous work by Jain ( 1993 ) and Bochkarev and
Kapusta ( 1996 ) , since the renormalization is considerably simplified
or even ignored in the various approximations.

Since explicit chiral symmetry breaking plays a very important role in
the actual hadron spectrum at low energy, the case of explicit symmetry
breaking will also be considered in this chapter. The results change
considerably and moreover, a critical temperature cannot be determined
in that case, since the second-order phase transition turns into a
smooth cross-over.

The nonlinear sigma model in 3+1 dimensions is non-renormalizable and
should be viewed as an effective theory, which is valid up to a certain
energy scale where new physics enters. Strictly speaking the linear
sigma model is renormalizable, but since it becomes a trivial theory in
the limit where the cutoff goes to infinity (see for example
Amelino-Camelia ( 1997 ) ), it will be treated as a theory with a finite
cutoff. Given a finite cutoff, terms are called divergences when they
are increasing in magnitude without bound as the cutoff is increased.
The low-energy physics should be independent of such terms (decoupling)
and they can be subtracted in the renormalization procedure in order to
avoid increasing sensitivity to the ultraviolet cutoff as it grows. On
general grounds, one expects the temperature dependence to be
insensitive to an increasing cutoff due to the exponential suppression
provided by the Bose-Einstein distribution function. Therefore one
expects the renormalization to be possible in a temperature-independent
way.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Sec. 6.2, the effective action
of the linear and nonlinear sigma model in the @xmath expansion are
discussed. In Sec. 6.3, the effective potential and gap equations to
next-to-leading order are calculated. In Sec. 6.4, the results for the
pressure at next-to-leading order for general @xmath and for the special
case of @xmath are presented. Also, the so-called high-energy
approximation is discussed and compared with exact numerical results.
Sec. 6.5, is devoted to the choice of parameters for @xmath , in order
to make contact with low-energy QCD phenomenology. A bound on the scalar
sigma meson is derived too in this section. In Sec. 6.6, a summary and
conclusions are given.

### 6.2 Effective actions

The Euclidean Lagrangian density of the @xmath -symmetric linear sigma
model with a symmetry breaking term proportional to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Summation over repeated indices is implicitly understood.
The subscript @xmath denotes a bare quantity. The coupling constants are
rescaled with factors of @xmath in such a way that for large @xmath the
action naturally scales as @xmath as is explained in Sec. 3.2 .

It is possible to eliminate the quartic interaction term from Eq. ( 6.1
) by introducing an auxiliary field which is denoted by @xmath , in
order to allow for Gaussian integration. To this end one adds to the
Lagrangian density Eq. ( 6.1 ) the term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If one integrates over the @xmath fields, the original Lagrangian in
Eq. ( 6.1 ) is recovered. Hence Eq. ( 6.3 ) is equivalent to the
original Lagrangian density of the linear sigma model. In the limit
@xmath the term quadratic in @xmath vanishes and one obtains the
Lagrangian of the nonlinear sigma model Eq. ( 4.1 ) with a symmetry
breaking term.

If explicit symmetry breaking is absent ( @xmath ), the field @xmath
acquires a vacuum expectation value by spontaneously breaking the
symmetry. Because of the residual @xmath symmetry, it is possible to
write @xmath , such that only @xmath has a nonzero expectation value.
For @xmath the same argument applies, because the action is minimal when
the @xmath field is the only one that acquires an expectation value.

Integrating over the @xmath ’s gives the following effective action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The scalar fields @xmath and @xmath can be written as a sum of
space-time independent vacuum expectation values @xmath and @xmath , and
quantum fluctuating fields @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 6.2 ) can be used to show that the vacuum expectation value
of @xmath is purely imaginary (for a proof, see Sec. 4.4 ). The vacuum
expectation value of @xmath is proportional to @xmath , which follows
from Eq. ( 6.1 ). Substituting Eqs. ( 6.5 ) into Eq. ( 6.4 ), the
effective action @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.6)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Expanding Eq. ( 6.6 ) in powers of @xmath up to corrections of order
@xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is a vector containing the Fourier transforms of
@xmath and @xmath , and the function @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 6.3 Effective potential and gap equations

One can obtain the effective potential to next-to-leading order in the
@xmath expansion from Eq. ( 6.7 ) by performing the Gaussian integral
over the fluctuating fields @xmath and @xmath . Up to corrections of
order @xmath , the effective potential can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, \beq I(P,m) = 16 π ^2 Π(P, m) + 32 π 2 λ b + 32 π 2 ¯ σ 2 P 2 + m
2 . \eeq To derive the effective potential, divergent constants which
are independent of @xmath , @xmath and the temperature were subtracted.
Equivalently, these terms can be removed by adding a vacuum counterterm
to the effective potential. In the following, such terms are simply
dropped.

In thermodynamic equilibrium, the system will be in the state that
extremizes the effective potential with respect to @xmath and @xmath .
This extremum can be found by differentiating the effective potential
with respect to @xmath and @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations are often referred to as gap equations. Solving the gap
equations gives @xmath and @xmath as a function of the parameters @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , and of the temperature. The solution of the gap
equation is needed to calculate thermodynamical quantities like the
pressure.

The inverse @xmath and @xmath propagators can also be obtained from
Eq. ( 6.7 ). For this the @xmath matrix in Eq. ( 6.7 ) has to be
inverted. As a result one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In these equations the values for @xmath and @xmath are determined by
solving the gap equations. The @xmath propagator is equal to (see Eq. (
4.11 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding @xmath around its vacuum expectation value @xmath in the
previous equation, and using the expression for @xmath propagator, Eq. (
6.14 ), it follows that the inverse @xmath propagator in momentum space
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Gap equation ( 6.13 ) can be used to show that in the broken phase where
@xmath (for @xmath ) the pion propagator has a pole at @xmath . This
implies that also to next-to-leading order in @xmath the pions are
massless, in accordance with Goldstone’s theorem.

From Eq. ( 6.15 ) it follows that in the unbroken phase, the @xmath mass
becomes equal to the leading order mass of the @xmath field, which is
@xmath . It may appear therefore that the @xmath and @xmath masses are
not equal at next-to-leading order in the unbroken phase, but this is
not a correct conclusion. This is because the @xmath field only starts
to propagate at next-to-leading order, so its @xmath mass corrections
require a next-to-next-to-leading order calculation. In the calculation
of the pressure to next-to-leading order one only needs the leading
order masses as will be explicitly shown below in Eq. ( 6.4 ).

The leading-order and next-to-leading order contributions to the
effective potential in @xmath dimensions will be explicitly calculated
in the next subsections. The integrals over momentum are regulated using
an ultraviolet momentum cutoff @xmath . Furthermore it is assumed that
the cutoff is large compared to the other scales in the problem, that is
@xmath .

#### Leading-order contribution

The leading-order contribution to the effective potential is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the function @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. Since a finite
effective momentum cutoff @xmath was introduced in the theory, one makes
an error in the evaluation of @xmath by summing over all Matsubara modes
and integrating up to infinite momenta instead of up to @xmath .
However, this error is negligible as long as @xmath . This remark also
applies to the functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath defined below. For
an investigation of how one could apply a finite cut-off in the
calculation of sum-integrals see Amte and Rosenzweig ( 1993 ) .

Equation ( 6.18 ) contains ultraviolet divergences in the sense
explained in Sec. 6.1. These divergences can be dealt with by defining
the renormalized parameters @xmath and @xmath as \bqa f^2_ π &=& f^2_ π
,b - Λ^2 / 16 π ^2  ,
32 π 2 λ &= &log(Λ 2 μ 2 ) + 32 π 2 λ b , \eqa where @xmath . The
renormalization group equation for the running coupling @xmath that
follows from Eq. ( 6.3 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -function is exact to all orders in @xmath in the large-
@xmath limit, but differs from the perturbative one obtained at one
loop, see Peskin and Schroeder ( 1995 ) . However, at next-to-leading
order they agree as will be shown in the next subsection. After this
renormalization, the leading-order effective potential becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the potential term in the Lagrangian should always have a minimum
in order to have a stable theory, @xmath must be positive (cf.
Amelino-Camelia ( 1997 ) for a detailed discussion). From Eq. ( 6.3 ) it
immediately follows that there is a maximal value for the cutoff given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the linear sigma model should be viewed as an effective
theory, which is at most valid up to the cutoff given by Eq. ( 6.22 ).
Taking the cutoff to infinity is equivalent to taking @xmath to zero,
which implies that the theory is trivial. One should keep in mind that
the renormalized leading-order effective potential does not depend
explicitly on @xmath , but is only valid for @xmath and @xmath much
smaller than @xmath . When @xmath the linear sigma model reduces to the
nonlinear sigma model, since in this case @xmath .

The leading-order renormalized gap equations follow from differentiating
Eq. ( 6.21 ) with respect to @xmath and @xmath and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where \beq G = T^2 J_1( β m) + 16 π ^2 ¯ σ ^2 - m^2 log( μ 2 m 2 ) - 32
π 2 m 2 λ . \eeq Here, the function @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Figs. 6.1 and 6.2 the vacuum expectation value of the sigma field and
the pion mass are respectively displayed as a function of temperature.
The cases with ( @xmath ) and without ( @xmath ) explicit symmetry
breaking are considered. Both figures were calculated using the
parameter set discussed in Sec. 6.5.

If @xmath , one can show by using the gap equation ( 6.24 ) that either
@xmath or @xmath . From the gap equation ( 6.23 ) it follows that for
@xmath the expectation value of @xmath has the temperature dependence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The order parameter for symmetry breaking, @xmath vanishes continuously.
Hence at @xmath there is a second-order phase transition. Below @xmath
the @xmath symmetry is broken spontaneously to @xmath since @xmath .
Above @xmath the @xmath symmetry is restored and one has @xmath and
@xmath .

#### Next-to-leading order contribution

In this subsection it will be shown that it is not possible to
renormalize the next-to-leading order effective potential in a
temperature-independent way. It turns out that one can only renormalize
the effective potential at the minimum, since the temperature-dependent
divergences become temperature independent by using the leading order
gap equations. Hence physical quantities like the pressure, which can be
obtained from the minimum of the effective potential can be renormalized
consistently. To show this, the divergent parts of the effective
potential will be extracted. This can be done analytically. A perhaps
more familiar example in which the effective potential is meaningless
outside the minimum arises at zero temperature in gauge theories. In
this case, the effective potential depends on the gauge-fixing condition
except at the minimum (Jackiw, 1974 ; Nielsen, 1975 ; Kobes et al. ,
1991 ) .

In order to isolate all divergences, one in principle needs to evaluate
@xmath including corrections of order @xmath , since such terms can also
give rise to divergences in the effective potential. However, since the
linear sigma model is an effective theory, Eq. ( 6.1 ) should be viewed
as the part containing only the so-called relevant operators, see
Polchinski ( 1984 ) . For instance, irrelevant operators of
mass-dimension six are not included in the Lagrangian density. Such
operators also contribute to @xmath at order @xmath . Therefore, for
consistency with Eq. ( 6.1 ), order @xmath terms in @xmath are not
considered. Although it is possible to obtain an exact analytic
expression for the zero-temperature part of @xmath , here it will only
be given up to order @xmath since this expression is much less
complicated. As a result one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the temperature-dependent part of @xmath equals (Bochkarev and
Kapusta, 1996 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath , @xmath can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next-to-leading-order effective potential has only ultraviolet
divergences. Using the leading order renormalization of @xmath , it is
easily seen that @xmath (defined in Eq. ( 6.3 )) becomes finite. Also,
the difference

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

is finite (cf. Sec. 2.5 ). Therefore, all possible divergences of @xmath
can be isolated by calculating

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the high-momentum (HM) approximation to @xmath . It
gives the large- @xmath behavior of @xmath . After averaging over
angles, one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By integrating the function @xmath over @xmath , all the divergences of
the NLO effective potential can be found. The logarithmic and power
divergences are given by the quantity @xmath , which is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.37)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

while the terms that have a small cutoff dependence through their
dependence on @xmath , are given by the quantity @xmath , which is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath depends explicitly on the temperature, it is impossible to
renormalize the next-to-leading-order effective potential in a
temperature-independent way. However, at the minimum, the leading-order
gap equation ( 6.23 ) can be used to show that @xmath . Hence, the
divergences become independent of the temperature at the minimum and
renormalization can be carried out in a temperature-independent manner.
This will be discussed in more detail next.

The divergence proportional to @xmath in Eq. ( 6.37 ) is independent of
@xmath in the minimum even though it depends on @xmath . This divergence
can be removed by vacuum renormalization. The divergent terms which are
proportional to @xmath can be removed by defining the renormalized
parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The remaining divergence is proportional to @xmath and is removed by
renormalizing @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eq. ( 6.40 ), the @xmath -function governing the running of @xmath
can be obtained

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which coincides with the standard one-loop @xmath -function in
perturbation theory, see Peskin and Schroeder ( 1995 ) . One could argue
from this renormalization that one can only trust the @xmath expansion
for @xmath . Although the @xmath correction to the @xmath function
indeed has a large coefficient, this is not the case for the effective
potential itself as will be shown below.

As mentioned, the terms in @xmath have a small cutoff dependence through
their dependence on @xmath . These terms will not be renormalized, since
they do not grow without bound with increasing cutoff and are not
strictly speaking divergences. The effective potential does not become
increasingly sensitive to them with increasing cutoff. The term in the
first line of Eq. ( 6.38 ) becomes smaller if @xmath is increased and
the absolute value of the other term from @xmath increases as a function
of @xmath , but is bounded by a finite number which is independent of
@xmath and @xmath . Moreover, renormalizing these terms would invalidate
the @xmath expansion, because of their magnitude. This is similar to
ordinary perturbation theory, where one is only allowed to do finite
renormalizations that do not invalidate the perturbative expansion. A
final reason for not renormalizing these terms is the connection with
the nonlinear sigma model ( @xmath ). In that case, the terms from
@xmath are not divergent and @xmath will be renormalized just as in
Eq. ( 6.39 ) with @xmath .

The next-to-leading order correction changes the critical temperature
@xmath . Since the next-to-leading order gap equations are complicated,
it is not possible to obtain an analytical expression for the critical
temperature at next-to-leading order. However, in the limit of small
@xmath and @xmath the gap equations simplify to \bqa && @xmath ∫_P 1P 2
+ m 2 - 2 m 2 λ b = ( f_ π ,b^2 - ¯ σ ^2)  ,
&& (m^2 + λ b N @xmath ∫_P 1P 2 + m 2 ) ¯ σ = 0  . \eqa From the gap
equations it follows that the critical temperature at NLO is \beq T_c =
121+2/N f_ π . \eeq This result is the same as obtained by Jain ( 1993 )
and Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) . It is probably only correct in the
weak-coupling limit and @xmath may depend on @xmath at NLO in @xmath .
In the next section it can be seen that the transition at NLO remains
second order.

### 6.4 Pressure

Like in Chapters 4 and 5, the pressure @xmath is defined as the value of
the effective potential at the minimum at temperature @xmath minus its
value at the minimum at zero temperature. As was shown in the previous
section, it is possible to renormalize the effective potential at the
minimum. The pressure is therefore a well-defined quantity. In order to
determine the value of the next-to-leading order effective potential in
the minimum, only the gap equation to leading order Root ( 1974 ) is
needed. Writing the solutions to the gap equations as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and Taylor expanding the effective potential ( 6.9 ), one obtains (up to
@xmath corrections)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last two lines of Eq. ( 6.4 ) vanish by using the leading-order gap
equations. In the following, the pressure @xmath will be written as \bqa
P ≡N P _LO + P _NLO  . \eqa From the discussion above, it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the solutions of the leading-order gap
equations ( 6.23 ) and ( 6.24 ), at temperature @xmath .

In the following, the results for the numerical evaluation of the
leading and the next-to-leading order contributions to the pressure for
general @xmath will be presented. Subsequently the @xmath case which is
of relevance for QCD phenomenology will be discussed.

As will be motivated in Sec. 6.5 , the following values for the
parameters will be used: @xmath , @xmath (note that @xmath as defined in
Eq. ( 6.1 ) is @xmath times the more conventional definition) and if
there is explicit symmetry breaking @xmath in order to reproduce the
physical value of the pion mass at @xmath . A realistic choice of
parameters would allow to compare to lattice QCD simulations of the
@xmath case for @xmath , although this would require extrapolation of
the lattice results down to the actual pion masses.

#### Leading-order contribution to the pressure

The leading order pressure can be obtained from Eqs. ( 6.21 ) and ( 6.44
). In Fig. 6.3 , the leading-order pressure normalized by @xmath is
shown. If @xmath , the pions are massless below @xmath . Then it can be
see from the leading-order effective potential ( 6.21 ) that the
pressure becomes equal to the pressure of an ideal gas of massless
particles: @xmath . If @xmath , the pions are massive. In the limit of
zero temperature the @xmath goes to zero because of the Boltzmann
suppressing factor @xmath .

#### Next-to-leading order contribution to the pressure

To calculate the next-to-leading order contribution to the pressure,
@xmath is decomposed as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the term containing logarithmic and power ultraviolet
divergences given in Eq. ( 6.37 ), and @xmath and @xmath are finite
terms defined below.

The term @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the term @xmath contains the finite cutoff-dependent term @xmath
(which is defined in Eq. ( 6.38 )) it has a small dependence on the
cutoff as well. The function @xmath was calculated numerically by
rewriting the terms involving @xmath as an integral like it was done in
Sec. 4.4. Then it is possible to subtract the integrands, instead of the
large values of the integral. In this way, it is easier to avoid large
numerical errors.

The function @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to calculate the function @xmath a modified Abel-Plana formula
was used, see Sec. ( 2.5 ). It turns out that due the suppression of
high momentum modes at finite temperature, low momentum modes gives the
main contribution to @xmath . This shows that the “high-energy
approximation” of Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) (implicitly defined as
such a difference and directly related to @xmath ) is invalid, since in
that approximation the high-momentum modes are assumed to give the main
contribution.

After renormalization, it turns out that the next-to-leading order
contribution to the pressure is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is shown in Fig. 6.4 .

At @xmath , @xmath can be calculated exactly. This can be used as a
check of the numerical calculations. At @xmath , clearly @xmath , and
hence @xmath . At @xmath , for low @xmath , @xmath is dominated by
@xmath . This gives \beq F_2 ≈12 @xmath ∫_P log(P^2 + m^2)  . \eeq For
@xmath , the mass @xmath vanishes and so @xmath . For @xmath it follows
that @xmath , since @xmath is in that case much smaller than @xmath ,
such that the pressure is exponentially suppressed.

The pressure for @xmath is approaching the @xmath pressure at high
temperatures, indicating that the effects of the explicit
symmetry-breaking terms become smaller at higher temperatures. This is
because @xmath is a temperature-independent constant.

#### Pressure of the @xmath linear sigma model

In order to make contact with two-flavor low-energy QCD the @xmath model
is studied in this subsection. In Fig. 6.5 , the pressure normalized by
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath to next-to-leading order as function of
@xmath is shown.

The LO pressure below @xmath equals the pressure of a gas of four
massless non-interacting scalars. This follows immediately from Eqs. (
6.21 ) and ( 6.19 ). At NLO the sigma field becomes massive. For
temperatures much lower than @xmath , the contribution to the pressure
from the sigma is Boltzmann suppressed and (to good approximation) it
holds that @xmath , which is the pressure of a gas of three massless
non-interacting scalars. From the calculations presented here it can be
concluded that the transition to next-to-leading order is of second (or
higher) order since the derivative of the pressure is not diverging.

In Fig @xmath 6.6 , the pressure normalized by @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath to next-to-leading order as function of @xmath is shown.

In Figs. 6.5 and 6.6 the cutoff @xmath GeV. To make contact with
low-energy QCD, a few comments on this choice are in order. For the
low-energy chiral Lagrangian, the cutoff is usually taken to be @xmath
(using our definition of @xmath ), which is around 1.2 GeV. However, for
the present purpose this value would be at the limit of applicability,
since the critical temperature at which chiral symmetry is
(approximately) restored is only about a factor of 8 smaller and the
requirement that @xmath should be satisfied. In this way one ensures
that one sums over sufficient Matsubara modes. Therefore, the cutoff is
taken to be considerably larger to reduce the sensitivity of the results
to the cutoff. However, only for temperatures considerably lower than
@xmath one expects that the result is of actual relevance for the QCD
pressure.

#### Pressure of the @xmath nonlinear sigma model

In the limit @xmath , the Lagrangian of the nonlinear sigma model is
obtained. In the nonlinear sigma model there are no counterterms
available for logarithmic divergences. Therefore only @xmath will be
renormalized as in Eq. ( 6.39 ) with @xmath . This implies that @xmath
has a weak cutoff dependence.

In Fig. 6.7 the pressure of the @xmath nonlinear sigma model without
explicit symmetry breaking ( @xmath ), through next-to-leading order in
@xmath is shown. The pressure has been calculated for different values
of the cutoff. The LO result for @xmath is included. For comparison,
also the pressure resulting from the “high-energy approximation”
employed by Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) is shown. A considerable
difference between our results and those of the “high-energy
approximation” is observed.

In the approximations made by Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) , the
@xmath part of sum-integrals are omitted such that every @xmath is
replaced by @xmath . Hence @xmath is simply replaced by @xmath . In the
high-energy approximation the latter is furthermore approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are given by Eqs. ( 6.25 ) and ( 6.29 ),
respectively. The term involving @xmath in Eq. ( 6.3 ) is omitted
because Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) incorrectly assumed that this
term is @xmath suppressed with respect to the other contributions in
Eq. ( 6.3 ). As a result the pressure in the “high-energy approximation”
reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining the functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , the pressure becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding Eq. ( 6.53 ) in powers of @xmath and rescaling with factors of
@xmath , Eq. (52) of Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) is obtained.

For completeness, the gap equations in this approximation are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the functions @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are several problems with the approach of Bochkarev and Kapusta (
1996 ) . Firstly, it is incorrect to ignore zero-temperature
contributions to the pressure and it also obscures renormalization
issues. Then, as was argued below Eq. ( 6.48 ), the arguments for
applying the high-energy approximation are not valid. Furthermore, one
cannot neglect the term proportional to @xmath in @xmath for @xmath .
Fourthly, as the solutions to the gap equation ( 6.54 ) indicate, @xmath
becomes significantly larger than one for @xmath , hence the @xmath
expansion breaks down. If one were to use Eq. ( 6.53 ) instead, one
finds that the pressure even becomes negative above @xmath MeV. Another
problem is that for @xmath their pressure is equal to that of a massless
gas, which is incorrect since the sigma meson is massive and included at
NLO. Hence, one expects a deviation from the ideal-gas pressure at
@xmath . Finally, at high temperatures the next-to-leading order
pressure should become approximately equal to the leading order pressure
because chiral symmetry will be restored. This is not the case for the
pressure calculated by Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) as can be seen
from Fig. 6.7 .

Jain ( 1993 ) has calculated the thermodynamic potential to NLO in the
@xmath linear sigma model using a high-temperature expansion. This
approximation breaks down at low temperatures. Therefore it is not
useful to compare those results to the results obtained in this chapter
since they are strictly speaking only valid at low temperatures (much
lower than the cutoff @xmath ).

### 6.5 Choice of parameters

The plots in the preceding sections are made using particular choices of
the parameters, namely, @xmath , @xmath (note that this @xmath differs
from the more conventional definition by a factor of @xmath ) and if
there is explicit symmetry breaking, @xmath . In this section these
choices are motivated. For simplicity partly leading-order calculations
are used for fixing the parameters.

The values for @xmath and @xmath are chosen to be roughly equal to their
measured values: @xmath and @xmath MeV (the average of the measured
masses of the @xmath and @xmath ). These values are used for determining
the parameter @xmath as follows. Given a choice of @xmath at some scale
@xmath the LO renormalized gap equations ( 6.23 ) and ( 6.24 ) are
solved for @xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath (which is the correct
identification at leading order, see Eq. ( 6.15 )). For the choice of
@xmath , this results in @xmath .

The choice of @xmath is motivated by considerations on the maximal value
of the cutoff and the sigma mass. As explained below, the sigma mass
turns out to be maximal if @xmath . The problem with this choice of
@xmath is that in that case the maximal value of the cutoff is 720 MeV.
This is very low and allows us only to do calculations up to around
@xmath . Therefore, a lower value is chosen: @xmath . Using that
parameter choice @xmath and the sigma mass is equal to 256 MeV and 350
MeV in the case of @xmath and @xmath respectively.

To obtain the mass of the sigma field, one has to find the poles of the
propagator in Minkowski space. The physical mass @xmath is often defined
by the solution to the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the self-energy. Using the expression for the inverse
@xmath propagator in the @xmath expansion, Eq. ( 6.15 ), and choosing
@xmath (because all results are independent of @xmath , one can choose
@xmath as one likes, the choice @xmath is just convenient), one finds
that at @xmath and for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 6.58 ) can be maximized with respect to @xmath . This implies
that @xmath MeV, which is lower than the averaged measured value of 400
- 800 MeV. An analogous bound was found using the large- @xmath
expansion by Einhorn ( 1984 ) on the mass of the Higgs boson. Patkos
et al. ( 2002 ) show a figure in which the bound on the sigma mass can
be seen indirectly, although they do not comment on this rather
interesting fact.

For @xmath a similar bound applies. In that case the maximal value of
the sigma mass can be found by maximizing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

with respect to @xmath . Finding the maximum of the previous equation
requires solving the following equation for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

By solving this equation it turns out that the maximal value of @xmath
is equal to 433 MeV. This is on the low side of the experimental
measured values between 400 and 800 MeV. The reason that a rather low
bound (which might be unrealistic) on the sigma meson mass is found
could be because possible essential three-flavor physics was missed out
in the calculation.

The bounds in the previous section were obtained using non-perturbative
large- @xmath expansion. So these bounds are valid for any value of
@xmath . In perturbation theory in small @xmath , the mass of the sigma
field is @xmath . This result can be found by expanding the expression
for the inverse @xmath propagator, Eq. ( 6.15 ). One might think that
this indicates that the sigma mass can grow to any value by increasing
@xmath . However, by increasing @xmath , the sigma field will be coupled
stronger to the pions. Since the sigma field is not stable, but can
decay into two pions, the decay width is increased when @xmath becomes
bigger. As a result this decay shifts the mass of the sigma meson to
lower values.

### 6.6 Summary and Conclusions

In this chapter, the thermodynamics of the @xmath linear and nonlinear
sigma models to next-to-leading order in the @xmath expansion was
studied.

At next-to-leading order it was shown that one can renormalize the
effective potential in a temperature-independent manner only at the
minimum of the effective potential. By renormalizing the next-to-leading
order effective potential in the minimum the beta function for @xmath to
next-to-leading order was found. This beta function is consistent with
the perturbative result.

The pressure for the linear and nonlinear sigma model to next-to-leading
order as a function of temperature was calculated numerically. The
results show that for the calculation of the pressure @xmath is a good
expansion, even if @xmath . With a relatively realistic choice of the
parameters a prediction for the pressure of QCD for temperatures below
@xmath was made. The results for the pressure disagree significantly
with the calculations of those by Bochkarev and Kapusta ( 1996 ) . This
is due to the fact that in the calculations performed in this chapter
the zero-temperature contributions are not neglected and that the
next-to-leading order contribution is treated without resorting to a
“high-energy approximation”.

It was also found that in the linear sigma model the sigma mass has an
upper bound at zero temperature. This bound depends only on the
parameters @xmath and @xmath . For a realistic choice of these
parameters, this implies that the mass of the sigma meson is smaller
than 433 MeV. This does not necessarily have consequences for the real
sigma meson, since the full three-flavor physics was not taken into
account. It would be interesting to investigate the temperature
dependence of this bound.

An interesting extension of these calculations would be the the
calculation of spectral functions at finite temperature. It would be
interesting to see how the bound on the sigma meson mass depends on
temperature. The methods developed in this chapter could also be useful
for the study of more complicated models incorporating additional
features of low-energy QCD.

## Chapter 7 The phase diagram of the NJL model

In order to obtain information about the structure of the QCD phase
diagram, one can investigate the phase diagram of low-energy effective
theories for QCD. In this chapter phase diagrams of such an effective
theory, namely the Nambu–Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model, will be presented.
These phase diagrams are obtained numerically as a function of
temperature and of the up, down and strange quark chemical potentials.
Phases with broken chiral symmetry, color superconducting phases and
phases in which the pseudoscalar mesons condense can be found in the
calculated diagrams. It is shown numerically that color superconducting
and pseudoscalar condensed phases are separated by a first order phase
transition. This chapter is based on: Color superconductivity versus
pseudoscalar condensation in a three-flavor NJL model , H.J. Warringa,
D. Boer and J.O. Andersen, Phys. Rev. D72 014015, (2005).

### 7.1 Introduction

The NJL model (Nambu and Jona-Lasinio, 1961 ) , the instanton liquid
model (Shuryak, 1982 ) and random matrix models (see for example
Verbaarschot and Wettig ( 2000 ) ) are examples of effective models
which can be used to study the QCD phase diagram at finite temperature
and densities. Despite their shortcomings, it is expected that these
models do describe the qualitative features of the QCD phase diagram in
regions not accessible to perturbative or lattice QCD. For example, a
critical point at finite baryon chemical potential has been predicted
using effective models by Halasz et al. ( 1998 ) . Furthermore, it is
expected that due to the existence of an attractive interaction, quarks
can form Cooper pairs. This is just as electrons do in ordinary
superconductivity due to the attractive phonon interaction between
electrons. As a result, at high baryon chemical potentials and low
temperatures, quark matter can for instance be in a two-flavor
color-superconducting phase (2SC) (Bailin and Love, 1984 ; Alford et al.
, 1998 ; Rapp et al. , 1998 ) in which two flavors pair, or in a
color-flavor locked (CFL) phase (Alford et al. , 1999a , b ) in which
three flavors pair. In these color-superconducting phases gaps in the
quasi-particle excitation spectrum on the order of 100 MeV arise. These
gaps are large compared to the mass gaps of free quarks (the up and the
down current quark masses are about 5 MeV), indicating that the physics
in the color superconducting phase is very different from that in the
deconfined phase.

Many results on high density phase diagrams presented in the literature
have been obtained for equal up, down and strange quark chemical
potentials. However, this may not be directly relevant for heavy-ion
collisions or compact stars. For example to model compact stars, one has
to enforce electric and color neutrality and weak equilibrium. For this
reason, different flavor and color chemical potentials have been
introduced in the NJL model (Alford and Rajagopal, 2002 ; Steiner et al.
, 2002 ) . This gives rise to a more complicated phase diagram in which
one also finds new 2SC-like (Neumann et al. , 2003 ) and gapless
superconducting phases (Alford et al. , 2000 ; Shovkovy and Huang, 2003
; Alford et al. , 2004 ; Rüster et al. , 2004 ; Abuki et al. , 2004 ;
Rüster et al. , 2005 ; Blaschke et al. , 2005 ) . It is still an open
issue whether these phases are really stable. Similarly, in heavy-ion
collisions, a difference between the quark chemical potentials arises if
the number densities of the different quark flavors are not the same.
This difference can cause interesting observable effects such as two
critical endpoints (Klein et al. , 2003 ; Toublan and Kogut, 2003 ) .
However, instanton induced interactions tend to suppress this effect as
was shown by Frank et al. ( 2003 ) .

In addition to a more complicated structure of the superconducting
phases, different chemical potentials can also trigger pseudoscalar
condensation (Son and Stephanov, 2001 ; Kogut and Toublan, 2001 ) . This
has been confirmed on the lattice at zero baryon chemical potential (
@xmath ) but finite isospin chemical potential ( @xmath ) by Kogut and
Sinclair ( 2002 ) . In a pseudoscalar condensed phase, depending on the
flavors involved, the charged pion, neutral or charged kaon field
acquires a vacuum expectation value. As a result parity is broken
spontaneously. Pseudoscalar condensation in the two-flavor NJL model has
been studied by Toublan and Kogut ( 2003 ) and Barducci et al. ( 2004 )
, as a function of the different chemical potentials at zero and finite
temperature. An extension to three flavors was carried out by Barducci
et al. ( 2005 ) as well.

The phase diagram of the three-flavor NJL model as a function of the
different chemical potentials including both pseudoscalar condensation
in the quark-antiquark channel and color superconductivity had not yet
been addressed. This is the subject of this chapter. At zero
temperature, pseudoscalar condensation is possible if @xmath , as was
shown by Son and Stephanov ( 2001 ) , or if @xmath (Kogut and Toublan,
2001 ) . On the other hand, color superconducting phases occur if the
chemical potentials are large and approximately equal. Therefore, one
can imagine scenarios where for example @xmath (the Fermi surfaces of
the @xmath and @xmath quark should be sufficiently close for Cooper
pairing to occur) and @xmath (the Fermi surfaces of the @xmath and
@xmath should be sufficiently close for kaon condensation to occur),
with @xmath . In such a case a 2SC phase is competing against a phase in
which kaons condense. Hence the phase diagrams presented in this chapter
are not a superposition of the phase diagrams with only pseudoscalar
condensation and with only color superconductivity, which were
calculated before in the literature. From the calculations it follows
that a coexistence phase of pseudoscalar condensation and color
superconductivity does not occur for the parameters chosen and that
these phases are separated by a first-order transition. However, it is
not excluded that other choices of parameters may lead to such a
coexistence phase, just as coexistence of color superconductivity and
chiral symmetry breaking may occur in the NJL model for specific ranges
of parameters as was found by Blaschke et al. ( 2003 ) . Here a
coexistence phase is to be understood as a phase in which two
condensates are nonzero simultaneously to be distinguished from a mixed
phase in which phases coexist.

In this chapter pseudoscalar condensation in the quark-antiquark channel
is studied. The pseudoscalar diquark interaction was not taken into
account. This interaction is suppressed relative to the scalar diquark
interaction due to instantons (Rapp et al. , 1998 ) . However, in
absence of instanton interactions, if one neutralizes the bulk matter
with respect to color and electric charges it is possible to have
pseudoscalar diquark condensation with rather large gaps as was shown by
Buballa ( 2005b ) . According to Buballa ( 2005b ) pseudoscalar diquark
condensation in the NJL model is similar to pseudoscalar condensation in
the CFL phase studied with effective chiral models studied by Casalbuoni
and Gatto ( 1999 ) , Son and Stephanov ( 2000 ) , Casalbuoni et al. (
2000 ) , Schäfer ( 2000 ) , Bedaque ( 2002 ) , Kaplan and Reddy ( 2002 )
and Forbes ( 2004 ) .

Overall charge neutrality conditions are not applied in this chapter,
this allows us to compare to the previous studies of Toublan and Kogut (
2003 ) , Barducci et al. ( 2004 ) and Barducci et al. ( 2005 ) .
Imposing neutrality conditions is necessary to describe situations in
nature where the quark matter is realized at high densities such as in
the core of neutron stars. Neutrality conditions would qualitatively
affect the phase structure, leading for example to the observation that
in a macroscopic volume of electric neutral quark matter in equilibrium
with the weak interactions the 2SC phase is energetically disfavored
(Alford and Rajagopal, 2002 ; Steiner et al. , 2002 ) .

To obtain the phase diagrams an auxiliary field effective potential will
be minimized with respect to the vacuum expectation values. This
effective potential will be calculated in leading order in @xmath where
@xmath is the number of colors. For simplicity next-to-leading order
@xmath corrections are not taken into account. However, it is possible
to calculate these corrections as was shown by Hüfner et al. ( 1994 ) .
The leading order @xmath expansion amounts to the so-called mean field
approximation.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, it will be argued how
the NJL model qualitatively arises from the QCD Lagrangian density. The
NJL model itself and the choice of parameters will be treated in Sec. 3.
In Sec. 4, the calculations and some of its technical aspects are
discussed. In Sec. 5, the phase diagrams are presented and a summary and
conclusions are given in Sec. 6.

### 7.2 From QCD to the NJL model

The NJL model can serve as a low-energy effective theory of QCD. In this
section it will be discussed qualitatively which approximations one has
to make in order to obtain the NJL model from QCD. A related discussion
about the connection between QCD and the NJL model can be found in
Bijnens et al. ( 1993 ) and Bijnens ( 1996 ) .

The QCD Lagrangian density in Minkowki space, Eq. ( 1.1 ), can be
written as @xmath , where the kinetic term of the fermions is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the terms involving the gluon fields by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The interaction between the gluons and the quarks is written in terms of
a fermion color current which is equal to @xmath , where @xmath is a
generator of @xmath . The partition function of QCD can be factored in
the following way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the quark interaction action @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By adding a gauge fixing term and the corresponding ghost fields one can
perform the integration over the gauge fields in such a way that the
quark interaction action can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where for simplicity the 6-point and higher fermion interaction terms
will be neglected from now on (if @xmath is small this is certainly
allowed). In a more realistic low-energy effective theory the effect of
the 6-point and higher fermion interactions should be taken into
account. In Eq. ( 7.5 ) @xmath is the exact gluon propagator of pure
glue QCD in a specific gauge

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit of high momenta the pure gluon propagator becomes (in the
Feynman ( @xmath ) gauge)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

At low momenta non-perturbative effects will modify this propagator.
Since the exact gluon propagator cannot be calculated analytically in
the low-momentum regime, one can try to make an ansatz for the exact
gluon propagator. Such an ansatz should reduce to Eq. ( 7.7 ) in the
high-momentum limit. One of the non-perturbative effects is that gluons
can form massive bound states called glueballs (see for example
Morningstar and Peardon ( 1999 ) ). The effect of these glueballs should
somehow be reflected in the gluon propagator. As an ansatz one could
take

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath mimics the effect of a massive glue-ball. This mass should
be on the order of the scale at which non-perturbative physics starts to
play a role, which is roughly @xmath . Comparing this ansatz to lattice
calculations of the exact propagator for pure gluon QCD in the Landau
gauge ( @xmath ) (Bernard et al. , 1994 ; Bonnet et al. , 2000 ; Silva
and Oliveira, 2004 ) shows it to be fairly realistic.

Since the objective is to obtain a low-energy effective theory for QCD,
the ansatz can at low-momenta be crudely approximated by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an ultraviolet momentum cutoff. This ansatz, Eq. ( 7.9 )
will eventually lead to the NJL model. The term @xmath acts as a sort of
coupling constant and should be in the order of @xmath . Because one has
to fix a gauge to obtain the gluon propagator, one should realize that
after a gauge transformation in principle the ansatz for the propagator
should transform as well. Since this is usually not done in the NJL
model, gauge invariance is lost, but a global @xmath symmetry is
retained.

To obtain a more realistic low-energy effective theory for QCD one
should use a more general ansatz for the exact gluon propagator. Such a
better ansatz could be found by fitting it to lattice calculations of
the gluon propagator which were performed by Bernard et al. ( 1994 ) ,
Bonnet et al. ( 2000 ) and Silva and Oliveira ( 2004 ) . However, in
most cases this will lead to non-local interactions between the quarks
which will be more difficult to solve analytically in the end, see for
example Hashimoto et al. ( 2005 ) . In a first approximation the local
interaction could be sufficient.

Now at finite temperatures and densities, the term @xmath is the
contribution of the pure gluon part of QCD to the total pressure of QCD.
This term does not depend on chemical potentials but only on
temperature. If one investigates phase diagrams as a function of
chemical potential at a fixed temperature this term is just a constant
added to the effective potential. Hence to first approximation the
effects of @xmath can be neglected. At finite temperature, the exact
gluon propagator depends on temperature, this could be taken into
account in a more realistic ansatz.

As a result the QCD partition function can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Lagrangian density of the NJL model is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath is a coupling constant. The term @xmath contains the gluonic
energy density and does not depend on chemical potentials but only on
temperature.

The qualitative arguments to obtain the NJL model will not play a role
in the following sections. Below the NJL model will be taken as a
starting point. One must therefore be careful to extend the conclusions
obtained below to QCD without cautionary remarks, especially at chemical
potentials and temperatures close to the cutoff. Nevertheless, there are
certainly reasons to believe that the qualitative features of the NJL
model also extend to QCD. For instance the meson spectrum is well
described by the NJL model, see for example Klevansky ( 1992 ) . In the
following section the NJL model will be discussed in more detail.

### 7.3 The NJL model

The NJL model (Nambu and Jona-Lasinio, 1961 ) was originally intended to
describe the interactions between nucleons. Nowadays, however, it is
mainly used as an effective model for QCD. In QCD the interaction
between the quarks is caused by gluon exchange. In the NJL model this
gluon exchange is approximated by a four-point color current-current
interaction. This is like the four-Fermi theory of the weak interactions
in which the low-energy exchange of a massive vector boson is modeled by
a four-point interaction. At energies much lower than the mass of the
vector bosons, the weak interactions are almost independent of momentum.
Therefore in that case the four-Fermi theory works well. In the previous
chapter it was argued that by making an ansatz for the gluon propagator
in the non-perturbative regime a fermion four-point interaction arises
too.

There are many NJL-like models. In this chapter a three-flavor NJL model
with three colors is discussed. The different NJL models are based on a
Lagrangian density which contains a kinetic term and a four-point color
current-current interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The color, flavor and Dirac indices of the fermion fields @xmath are
suppressed in this equation for notational simplicity. The diagonal mass
matrix @xmath contains the bare quark masses @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. The matrix @xmath is also diagonal and contains the quark chemical
potentials @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The matrices @xmath are the
@xmath generators of @xmath and act in color space. They are normalized
as @xmath .

By applying several Fierz transformations to the current-current
interaction (see for example Buballa ( 2005a ) ) and including only
terms which give rise to attractive @xmath and @xmath channels, one
obtains the following Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the quark-antiquark, the scalar diquark and the pseudoscalar
diquark interaction term are respectively given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.15)
     @xmath   @xmath               (7.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , since only the interaction in the antisymmetric color and
flavor triplet channel is attractive. The matrices @xmath are the @xmath
generators of @xmath and act in flavor space. They are normalized as
@xmath . The matrices @xmath are the generators of @xmath and act in
color space. Their normalization is @xmath . To remind the reader, the
antisymmetric flavor matrices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath couple up to
down, up to strange and down to strange quarks, respectively. The charge
conjugate of a field @xmath is denoted by @xmath where @xmath . The
coupling strength @xmath of the diquark interaction is fixed by the
Fierz transformation (see Buballa ( 2005a ) ) and will be used in this
chapter. However, some authors discuss the NJL model with a different
diquark coupling constant (see for example Rüster et al. ( 2005 ) for a
comparison).

The NJL model has a symmetry structure similar to QCD, except for the
color symmetry. The NJL model is only invariant under global SU(3) color
transformations since it does not contain gauge fields. In absence of
quark masses and chemical potentials, the Lagrangian density of the NJL
model has a global @xmath symmetry. Due to the non-vanishing quark
masses, the symmetry is like in QCD broken down to @xmath . Since the
masses of the quark and the chemical potentials will be different, the
symmetry of the Lagrangian density is further reduced to @xmath , where
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath stand respectively for baryon, isospin (the
@xmath -component) and hypercharge number. An additional @xmath symmetry
breaking term is necessary to explain the large mass of the @xmath
particle. As was shown by ’t Hooft ( 1976 ) this is due to the
non-trivial topological structure of the vacuum, the instantons. The
effect of these instantons can be modeled by the following effective
six-point interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the determinant acts only in flavor space. In the two-flavor case
one can argue by applying a Fierz transformation on this interaction,
that the scalar diquark interaction is more attractive than the
pseudoscalar diquark interaction (Rapp et al. , 1998 ) . Therefore
condensation in the scalar diquark channel is favored over pseudoscalar
diquark condensation. Likewise this is also expected to hold in the
three-flavor case. Therefore from now on the pseudoscalar diquark
interaction will be neglected.

Unfortunately the six-point instanton-induced interaction gives a very
complicated contribution to the effective potential when allowing for
pseudoscalar quark-antiquark condensates in the mean field approximation
or beyond (Osipov et al. , 2005 ) . Therefore in this chapter this
instanton-induced interaction is left out but it would be interesting to
take this term into account in a further study.

The results that will be presented in this chapter are obtained with the
following choice of parameters which were also used by Buballa ( 2005a )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are the precise values used in the calculations, but clearly not
all digits are significant implying that a small change of parameters
will not have a big influence on the results. This choice of parameters
gives rise to constituent quark masses @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV. In
that case the pion and kaon have a mass of respectively 138 MeV and 450
MeV.

### 7.4 Effective potential

To obtain a phase diagram one has to investigate the behavior of order
parameters. A good order parameter vanishes in one phase and is
non-vanishing in another and related to symmetry breaking and
restoration. In massless QCD good order parameters indicating chiral
symmetry breaking are the quark-antiquark condensates @xmath and @xmath
. Since quarks in reality have a mass, chiral symmetry is already
explicitly broken in the QCD and NJL Lagrangian. Even if one uses
massless quarks, different quark chemical potentials also break the
chiral symmetry. Therefore the quark-antiquark condensates will be
nonzero in every phase. So the quark-antiquark condensates are no good
order parameters in a strict sense, but since their values in the broken
phase are much larger than in the approximately restored phase, one can
use these condensates to distinguish different phases. So the
quark-antiquark condensates are “approximate order parameters”. The
quark-antiquark condensates are not the only possible order parameters,
others follow naturally from the discussion below in which it is
explained how to calculate the condensates.

As is discussed in Chapter 3, the quantity from which one can derive
thermodynamical quantities is the effective potential. One also can find
the values of certain condensates from this effective potential and
hence determine the phase diagram. To calculate the effective potential
of the NJL model it appears to be useful to introduce 18 auxiliary real
scalar fields @xmath and @xmath and 9 complex scalar fields @xmath in
the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

By shifting these auxiliary fields as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

the Lagrangian density Eqs. ( 7.1 ), ( 7.14 ) and ( 7.15 ) becomes
quadratic in the fermion fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows integration over the quark fields. These quark fields
@xmath have 3 (color) @xmath (flavor) @xmath (Dirac) @xmath components.
As is explained in appendix 7.A the integration is most easily done by
introducing a two-component Nambu-Gorkov field @xmath which has 72
components in this case. After integration over the fermion fields one
obtains an effective action which depends on the auxiliary fields. To
obtain the effective potential to leading order in @xmath , these
auxiliary fields are replaced by their vacuum expectation values. The
leading order @xmath approximation is equivalent to the so-called mean
field approximation. From now on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath stand for
the vacuum expectation values of the auxiliary fields. The quantum
fluctuations around the vacuum expectation values of the auxiliary
fields are not taken into account in the mean field approximation. The
vacuum expectation values of the auxiliary fields are directly related
to the quark condensates

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.23)
  -- -- -- --------

The condensate @xmath is complex. To calculate its vacuum expectation
value one should in principle average over all its phases. Because of
the @xmath symmetry of the action, this averaging will let the vacuum
expectation vanish. However, in a real physical situation the system
will just pick one direction giving rise to a nonzero vacuum expectation
value of @xmath . The phase will however be undetermined unless a small
asymmetry is brought in. This is situation is similar to the
magnetization below the phase transition temperature in the Ising model.
In that case averaging over all possibilities will also give rise to a
zero net magnetization. However the real system should choose to have
either a finite positive or negative magnetization. It turns out that
@xmath is a good order parameter, giving rise to a BCS gap in the
quasi-particle excitation spectrum indicating color superconductivity.

In this chapter it is assumed that all condensates are space-time
independent. When this restriction is dropped it is possible to find the
crystalline Larkin-Ovchinnikov-Fulde-Ferrell (LOFF) phase (Alford et al.
, 2001 ) . This is a phase in which quarks with different momentum
magnitudes pair. One can find this phase between the phase in which
chiral symmetry is broken and the color superconducting phases.

After going to imaginary time, the thermal effective potential @xmath to
leading order in @xmath (which is equivalent to the mean-field
approximation) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The matrix @xmath is the identity matrix in color ( @xmath ), flavor (
@xmath ), or Dirac ( @xmath ) space.

The values of the condensates and the phase diagram are determined by
minimizing the effective potential @xmath with respect to the
condensates. To make the minimization procedure easier, one can take
advantage of the fact that certain condensates must vanish. Firstly,
application of QCD inequalities derived by Weingarten ( 1983 ) shows
that in QCD at zero temperature, global @xmath symmetry breaking cannot
be driven by condensates of the type @xmath (Vafa and Witten, 1984b ;
Son and Stephanov, 2001 ) . Therefore, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
zero. Outside the phase in which diquarks condense, it was checked
numerically that this is correct at non-zero temperatures and chemical
potentials as well. At zero chemical potential and temperatures a
theorem by Vafa and Witten ( 1984a ) states that all parity violating
condensates should vanish in QCD, this is also in agreement with the
calculations. Moreover, although perturbative one-gluon exchange cannot
distinguish between @xmath and @xmath condensation with @xmath ,
pseudoscalar condensation is favored due to the instanton interaction
(Son and Stephanov, 2001 ) . One can therefore set all @xmath ’s again
with @xmath to zero. Numerically it was found that this is correct, even
in the absence of instanton interactions.

One can further simplify the minimization procedure by exploiting the
symmetries of the NJL model. The free energy (which is the energy in the
minimum of the effective potential) is invariant under the same
transformations as the Lagrangian density, so applying a @xmath -flavor
transformation to all condensates leaves the free energy invariant. The
@xmath condensates transform under a @xmath -flavor transformation which
is parametrized by an angle @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, using the @xmath -flavor transformations one can choose the
pseudoscalars to condense in the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath channels,
and set @xmath , @xmath and @xmath to zero. The phase in which @xmath ,
@xmath and/or @xmath is non-vanishing is called the @xmath , @xmath
and/or @xmath condensed phase, respectively. The condensates @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are good order parameters since they break the @xmath
symmetry which is present in the Lagrangian density into @xmath if only
one pseudoscalar condensate arises or to @xmath if there are more.
Moreover, these condensates break parity symmetry. To summarize for all
quark-antiquark condensates, only the @xmath and @xmath condensates will
be considered below.

Because of the global @xmath symmetry, one can also rotate away several
diquark condensates. Without loss of generality one can minimize with
respect to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In
principle, all six diquark condensates can have a phase. It is always
possible to remove two of them by using the two diagonal @xmath
transformations. As long as there is no pseudoscalar condensation, one
can use the @xmath -flavor symmetries to rotate away three other phases.
As a result either @xmath , or @xmath has a phase (Buballa, 2005a ) .
However, this reduction is not completely possible if pseudoscalar
condensation occurs. By choosing the pseudoscalars to condense in the
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath channels, one breaks the @xmath -flavor
symmetry. Hence if pseudoscalar condensation arises in one channel, one
can in general rotate away one phase less in the diquark sector. If it
occurs in more channels, two phases less can be rotated away. However,
numerically it is found that allowing for such a complex phase leads to
diquark condensation only in the @xmath , @xmath and the @xmath
channels. The @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath diquark condensates do not
arise or can be rotated away. Moreover it is found that pseudoscalar
condensation in the quark-antiquark channel does not coexist with color
superconductivity, such that one can always take the diquark condensates
to be real.

The different possible color-superconducting phases are named as follows
(Rüster et al. , 2005 )

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

The abbreviation CFL stands for color-flavor locked phase. If there is
exact @xmath flavor symmetry, the three diquark condensates in this
phase have equal size and the vacuum is invariant under a combined
rotation in color and flavor space (Alford et al. , 1999a , b ) . In the
uSC, dSC or sSC phase the up, down or strange quark always takes part in
the diquark condensate, respectively. In the 2SC phase an up and a down
quark form a diquark condensate, in the 2SCus and the 2SCds phase this
condensate is formed by an up and and strange quark and a down and a
strange quark, respectively.

To calculate the effective potential one needs to evaluate a determinant
of a @xmath matrix. Only in special cases such as when all masses and
chemical potentials are equal and in absence of pseudoscalar
condensation one can perform over the sum over Matsubara frequencies
analytically and hence simplify the effective potential somewhat
further. But in the more general cases which will be discussed in this
chapter this either is not possible or gives rise to very complicated
equations. One is therefore restricted to do numerical calculations.

To calculate the determinant of the effective potential in an efficient
way, one can multiply the matrix @xmath with @xmath which leaves the
determinant invariant. In this way, one obtains a new matrix @xmath with
@xmath ’s on the diagonal. By determining the eigenvalues @xmath of the
matrix @xmath with @xmath , one can reconstruct the determinant of
@xmath for all values of @xmath which is namely @xmath . After summing
over Matsubara frequencies, one finds using Eq. ( 2.55 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

All that remains in order to determine the effective potential is to
integrate over three-momentum @xmath up to an ultraviolet cutoff @xmath
.

The speed of the calculation of the effective potential depends heavily
on how fast one can compute the eigenvalues. There are several ways to
speed up the calculation. Firstly, the determinant of @xmath does not
depend on the direction of @xmath . Therefore, one can choose @xmath to
lie in the @xmath -direction. Together with the choice of the
non-vanishing condensates mentioned above, this implies that @xmath
becomes a real symmetric matrix, which simplifies the calculation of the
eigenvalues. Secondly, one can interchange rows and columns of @xmath
without changing its determinant. By doing so, one can bring @xmath in a
block-diagonal form. One can then determine the eigenvalues of the
blocks separately which is significantly faster since the time needed to
compute eigenvalues numerically scales cubically with the dimension of
the matrix. In the most general case with diquark condensation, one can
always reduce the problem to two @xmath matrices. Moreover, if there is
no diquark condensation, but only pseudoscalar condensation (Barducci
et al. , 2005 ) , the problem can be further reduced to computing the
eigenvalues of two @xmath matrices

The eigenvalues were obtained using LAPACK routines (Anderson et al. ,
1999 ) . After numerical integration over three-momentum @xmath up to
the cutoff, the condensates were determined by minimizing the effective
potential using MINUIT (James and Roos, 1975 ) . To be certain that the
minimization procedure did not end up in a local minimum the continuity
of the minimized effective potential as a function of chemical
potentials and/or temperature was always checked.

### 7.5 Phase diagrams

In this section results for the phase diagrams of the NJL model with
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath quarks are presented. The phase diagrams
are plotted as a function of the chemical potentials and temperature. To
determine the locations of the phase boundaries, the behavior of the
condensates was examined. The different possibilities are displayed in
Fig. 7.1 . If a condensate jumps discontinuously the transition is
first-order (a), and this is indicated by a solid line in all phase
diagrams. If its derivative has a discontinuity, the transition is
second order (b), and this is indicated by a dotted line. If a
condensate changes rapidly in a narrow range without vanishing, in other
words no derivative has a discontinuity, there is a smooth cross-over
(c), and this is indicated in the phase diagrams by a dashed-dotted line
at the point were the condensate varies maximally.

To calculate the phase diagrams, the effective potential was minimized
on a grid of chemical potentials and or temperatures. The numerical
uncertainties in the presented phase diagrams are in the order of the
distance between the points in the grid which was about 3 MeV, this
coincides with the thickness of the lines in the phase diagrams.

One should keep in mind that the relation between chemical potential and
number density is not linear. In Fig. 7.2 the baryon number density as a
function of the baryon chemical potential is displayed. In that figure
it can be seen that at a first-order phase boundary the number density
increases discontinuously. At these particular densities, quark matter
for example can be in a mixed state of normal and superconducting matter
(see e.g. Bedaque ( 2002 ) and Lawley et al. ( 2005 ) ).

A typical outcome of the minimization procedure is displayed in Fig. 7.3
, in which the chiral and pion condensates are plotted as a function of
@xmath for @xmath . It can be seen from the figure that pion
condensation arises via a second order transition for @xmath . It can
also be seen that the chiral condensates @xmath and @xmath are small but
non-vanishing in the phase with pion condensation.

#### Phase diagram with @xmath vs. @xmath

In Fig. 7.4 the phase diagram of the NJL model as a function of baryon
chemical potential @xmath and temperature is displayed for @xmath . This
phase diagram is similar to the qualitative QCD phase diagram displayed
in Fig. 1.3 . At low temperatures and baryon chemical potential the
chiral symmetry is broken in the phases denoted by (a) and (g). By
increasing the chemical potential at low temperatures one enters the
color superconducting phases, first the 2SC phase (n/q) and thereafter
again via a first order transition the CFL phase (t). Three critical
endpoints can be seen in this diagram.

#### Phase diagram with @xmath and @xmath

In Fig. 7.5 the phase diagram of the NJL model for @xmath and @xmath as
a function of @xmath and @xmath is displayed. Outside the 2SC phase (q),
the results agree qualitatively with the two-flavor calculations by
Barducci et al. ( 2004 ) (see their Fig. 1), where color-superconducting
phases were not taken into account. Moreover, Barducci et al. ( 2004 )
use different parameters, in addition to a form factor. One can clearly
see that the phase diagram is symmetric under reflection in the origin.
This is because the free energy is invariant under the transformation
@xmath , that stems from the symmetry between particles and
antiparticles. Fig. 7.5 is also symmetric under interchange of @xmath
and @xmath , because of the choice of equal up and down quark masses.
This gives rise to the symmetry of the phase boundaries with respect to
the diagonals.

In general, horizontal and vertical lines in the phase diagrams arise if
the pairing of one type of quark is not changed after a transition. In
this case, the location of the phase boundary is determined by the
properties of other quarks. Therefore, changing the chemical potential
of the unchanged quark species cannot have a big influence on the
location of the phase boundary. This results in the horizontal and
vertical lines. For @xmath , one always finds these lines near the
values of the constituent quark masses, i.e. @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
(see for example Buballa ( 2005a ) ). The diagonal lines arise because
at @xmath pion condensation can occur if @xmath (Son and Stephanov, 2001
) .

The diagram shows that if the chemical potentials are different, the
transition to the 2SC phase (q) remains first order as was concluded by
Bedaque ( 2002 ) . Moreover, one can see from Fig. 7.5 that if @xmath it
is possible to go through two first-order transitions before entering
the 2SC phase (q) (similar to the situation discussed by Toublan and
Kogut ( 2003 ) without color superconductivity). To have such a scenario
at zero temperature, a minimum difference between @xmath and @xmath is
required. In the present case this is about 35 MeV. Pion condensation
(i) and the 2SC phase (q) are in this diagram separated by two phase
transitions in contrast to the estimated @xmath phase diagram of He
et al. ( 2005 ) which correctness is therefore questionable.

#### Phase diagram with @xmath and @xmath

In Fig. 7.6 the phase diagram for @xmath and @xmath as a function of
@xmath and @xmath is displayed. Since the up and down quark masses are
much smaller than the strange quark mass, this diagram is very different
from Fig. 7.5 . Besides the possibility of pion condensation in (h) and
(i) also phases in which the charged kaon (k) and the neutral kaon
condense (l)/(m) arise. The lines separating the charged kaon phase (k)
from the chirally broken phase (a) are diagonal because at @xmath kaon
condensation can occur if @xmath (Kogut and Toublan, 2001 ) (the chosen
parameter set gives rise to a somewhat low kaon mass, but this is not
relevant for the qualitative features of the phase diagram). The 2SCus
phase appears in (r). This phase is surrounded by phases in which the
pions (h)/(i) and the neutral kaons (l) condense. One passes a
first-order transition when going from the pion and neutral kaon
condensed to the 2SCus phase.

#### Phase diagrams with @xmath

In Fig. 7.7 the phase diagram for @xmath as a function of the up and
down quark chemical potential and the strange quark chemical potential
is displayed. In this phase diagram @xmath where @xmath is a very small
positive number. This @xmath is necessary because when @xmath one is
just at a first-order phase boundary between the phase in which the
charged kaons condense (k) and the one in which the neutral kaons
condense (m), as can be seen from Fig. 7.6 . This nonzero value of
@xmath gives rise to a small asymmetry in the phase diagram. If @xmath
is chosen to be negative, the phases in which the neutral (l)/(m) and
the charged (j)/(k) kaon condenses are interchanged.

Apart from the additional 2SC (n)/(q) and CFL (t) phases, the results
presented here agree qualitatively with the three-flavor calculations by
Barducci et al. ( 2005 ) (see their Fig. 7). Barducci et al. ( 2005 )
have used different quark masses and a different coupling constant, and
in addition employed a form factor to mimic asymptotic freedom.
Therefore, one may conclude that the use of such a form factor does not
affect the phase diagram qualitatively. The phase diagram Fig. 7.7
cannot simply be obtained by a superposition of phase diagrams obtained
from a calculation with pseudoscalar condensation, but without
superconductivity (such as done by Barducci et al. ( 2005 ) ), and one
with superconductivity, but without pseudoscalar condensation (such as
done by Gastineau et al. ( 2002 ) ). Despite the fact that the two types
of phases do not coexist, there is nevertheless competition between
them. Figure 7.7 shows that the @xmath (l)/(m) and the @xmath (j)/(k)
phase are separated from the 2SC phase (q) by a first-order transition.
This remains the case at finite temperature as is illustrated in Fig.
7.8 . This figure displays the phase diagram as a function of @xmath and
temperature, for fixed @xmath .

Returning to the discussion of Fig. 7.7 ; the line @xmath goes through
the phase (a) in which chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken. At some
point it enters via a first-order transition the 2SC + @xmath phase (q),
and finally goes into the CFL phase (t), again via a first-order
transition. If there is a difference between @xmath and @xmath , one can
see in Fig. 7.7 that as the densities increase, quark matter can go
directly from a phase with chiral symmetry breaking (a) to a CFL phase
(t) without passing the 2SC phase (q) first. This can also occur in
compact stars as was shown by Alford and Rajagopal ( 2002 ) .

It is also interesting to note that the phases (l)/(j) of kaon
condensation can also occur outside the region of spontaneous chiral
symmetry breaking. Assuming the phase transition towards chiral symmetry
restoration coincides with the deconfinement transition (as appears to
be the case in lattice studies at small baryon chemical potential and in
some models), this would imply that condensation of a state with quantum
numbers of the kaon may persist in the deconfined phase. This was first
observed by Son and Stephanov ( 2001 ) , based on a perturbative
calculation at very high isospin chemical potential.

#### Phase diagrams with @xmath

In Fig. 7.9 the phase diagram at zero temperature as a function of
@xmath and @xmath is shown. This diagram is similar to Fig. 7.5 for
small strange quark chemical potentials (below the kaon mass). At larger
strange quark chemical potentials the diagrams differ, exhibiting kaon
condensation (l) and diquark condensation involving strange quarks
(r)/(o)/(t).

In Fig. 7.10 the phase diagram as a function of @xmath and @xmath , for
fixed @xmath is displayed. In this figure one can find five critical
points. Also, one can see in this figure that the @xmath phase (l) is
separated from the 2SCus phase (r) by a first-order transition for all
temperatures. Furthermore, it is interesting that at finite temperature
there is a first-order transition from the phase in which the neutral
kaons condense (l) to the pion condensed phase (h). In Fig. 7.11 the
lower-right corner of Fig. 7.10 is enlarged for clarity. In this figure
one can find all possible superconducting phases, including the more
exotic uSC (u), dSC (v) and sSC (w) phases. For @xmath one goes from the
CFL phase (t) via the 2SC phase (n) to the chirally restored phase when
raising the temperature. However, small differences between @xmath and
@xmath can cause one to go through completely different phases.

### 7.6 Summary and Conclusions

In this chapter the phase diagram of the three-flavor NJL model
including pseudoscalar quark-antiquark condensation and color
superconductivity was studied as a function of the different quark
chemical potentials and temperature. The NJL model has a rich and
interesting phase structure. The pseudoscalar condensed and color
superconducting phases are competing and are separated by a first-order
phase transition. As was discussed, this need not be the case for other
(less conventional) choices of the parameters of the model.

Furthermore, it was concluded that at zero temperature and zero strange
quark chemical potential, a minimum asymmetry of about 35 MeV between
the up and the down quark chemical potentials is required in order to
have two first-order transitions, when going from the phase with
spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking to the 2SC phase.

The results provide a qualitative check and extension of several earlier
calculations that appeared in the literature. The calculations in this
chapter simultaneously allowed for nine different nonzero condensates,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . The new aspects of the phase diagrams are often located in
regions, where the quark chemical potentials are large and very
different in magnitude for the different flavors. Although such
situations are not necessarily realized in compact stars or in heavy-ion
collisions. The study of such unusual situations is nevertheless
interesting for a fundamental understanding of the theory. Moreover a
comparison with future lattice data may provide interesting information.
This is especially relevant for pseudoscalar condensation in the phase
where chiral symmetry is restored and also for the complicated
superconductivity phase structure close to the cutoff of the model.

This work can be extended in several ways. For example, one can take
into account the instanton-induced interaction (’t Hooft, 1976 ) , Eq. (
7.17 ) in the mean field approximation or using the method of Osipov
et al. ( 2005 ) . If one has pseudoscalar condensation, this is much
more difficult than in the normal case though. Another very useful
extension would be the inclusion of the neutrality conditions (Alford
and Rajagopal, 2002 ; Steiner et al. , 2002 ) , in which case the phase
structure changes and for instance gapless phases will occur. It would
also be interesting to see how the results depend on the strength of the
diquark coupling and on the quark masses. Furthermore, one could add the
LOFF phase (Alford et al. , 2001 ) . In this crystalline phase, quarks
of different momentum magnitudes can pair. One could also include vector
interactions. In this case spin-1 diquark condensation (see for example
Pisarski and Rischke ( 2000 ); Buballa et al. ( 2003 ) ) and an induced
Lorentz-symmetry breaking (ISB) phase (Langfeld and Rho, 1999 ) are
among the possibilities. It would also be worthwhile to take
pseudoscalar diquark condensation (Buballa, 2005b ) into account.
Finally, one could try to go beyond the mean-field approximation as was
done by Hüfner et al. ( 1994 ) .

## Appendix 7.A The Nambu-Gorkov formalism

In case a Lagrangian density contains terms which are proportional to
@xmath , the integration over the quark fields is non-trivial. In that
case it useful to apply the Nambu-Gorkov formalism which is discussed
for the Lagrangian density used in this chapter, Eq. ( 7.22 ).

Taking the fermionic part of the Lagrangian Eq. ( 7.22 ) and transposing
half of the quark-antiquark term gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . By introducing a two-component Nambu–Gorkov field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can rewrite the Lagrangian in Eq. ( 7.32 ) as @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the path integral the measure @xmath will be changed into @xmath .
Integration over the Nambu-Gorkov fields yields that @xmath since @xmath
is antisymmetric in this case. The determinant is invariant under
interchange of an even number of rows. Using that one can put the part
containing the kinetic term on the diagonal. The effective action is
simplified further if one multiplies from the left with @xmath and from
the right with @xmath where @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix,
resulting in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression was evaluated further in Eq. ( 7.24 ), using a basis for
a complete set of functions which satisfy the anti-periodicity
conditions for fermions in imaginary time like in Eq. ( 2.43 ).

## Summary

In this thesis, entitled “Thermodynamics of QCD-inspired theories” the
behavior of (quark) matter under extreme high temperatures and densities
is investigated. Such extreme conditions can be reached for example in
the early universe shortly after the big bang, during a heavy-ion
collision and inside the core of a neutron star. They can be so extreme
that normal nuclear matter does longer exist, such that matter is in a
different phase than usual, like for example the so-called quark-gluon
plasma (at high temperatures and/or densities) or the
color-superconducting phase (at high densities).

A general introduction to this thesis is given in Chapter 1. Firstly, it
will be discussed what could happen to matter under such extreme
conditions. Then, the relevant aspects of quantum chromodynamics (QCD)
(the theory which describes the interactions between the quarks) will be
explained shortly. Thereafter, an overview of the results and problems
of previous calculations of the pressure and the phase diagram of quark
matter are given. The relevance of these kind of calculations for the
understanding of a compact star, heavy ion collisions, and the state of
the universe shortly after the big bang, will be examined as well. At
the end of the chapter the term “QCD-inspired theories” will be
explained.

In Chapter 2 it is discussed how one can perform calculations at finite
temperature and densities in a field theory like QCD. For that, results
from statistical physics will be applied. Firstly, a short review of
classical statistical physics is given, which thereafter will be
generalized to a quantum mechanical approach. Using path-integrals it
will be discussed how this approach can be used in order to investigate
quantum field theories at finite temperature and densities. In
calculations at finite temperature and densities one often has to
perform summations over an infinite number of terms. A method to perform
these sums exactly will be discussed. Also it will be explained in
detail how these summations can be computed numerically for more
difficult cases.

The third chapter treats the so-called effective potential and the
@xmath expansion. The effective potential is an important quantity,
since the pressure and the phase diagrams can be obtained by minimizing
this potential. The @xmath expansion is a method which can be used to
investigate the non-perturbative (in the coupling constant) behavior of
some theories. It will be explained how this expansion can be obtained
by the introduction of auxiliary fields. At the end of this chapter an
important result of this thesis, which is the occurrence of
temperature-dependent divergences in the effective potential, will be
discussed. Such divergences cannot be renormalized properly. These
divergences become independent of the temperature at the minimum of the
effective potential. That is just at the point at which one has to
evaluate the effective potential in order to obtain the physical
quantities like the pressure and the phase diagram. At the minimum,
these divergences are no problem because there they can be renormalized
in a systematic way.

The subject of Chapter 4 is the thermodynamics of the nonlinear sigma
model in two dimensions. This model has some aspects with QCD in common
such as asymptotic freedom. Using the @xmath expansion it is possible to
investigate this model in the domain where it is non-perturbative in the
coupling constant. By studying this model one can learn something about
QCD at finite temperature, for example how the behavior of an
asymptotically free theory changes when going from low to high
temperatures. In this chapter, the effective potential will be
calculated to next-to-leading order (NLO) in @xmath . It turns out that
this effective potential contains temperature-dependent divergences
which can only be renormalized properly at the minimum. By minimizing
the effective potential, the pressure as a function of temperature is
obtained. It is found that @xmath is a good expansion method.
Furthermore it turns out that the pressure divided by the pressure in
the limit of infinite temperature is almost independent of @xmath .
Similar behavior is found in lattice calculations of SU( @xmath )
Yang-Mills theory.

Chapter 5 discusses the thermodynamics of the @xmath model in two
dimensions. This model is an extension of the nonlinear sigma model in
which also electromagnetism is taken into account. This model shares
also some features with QCD, it contains for example like QCD so-called
topological non-trivial vacua. The influence of these vacua on the
pressure is investigated using the same methods as in Chapter 4. It is
found that the non-trivial vacua give a large contribution in the region
in which the pressure as a function of the temperature raises quickly.
This result is a possible indication that topological non-trivial vacua
are important for the thermodynamics of QCD in the neighborhood of the
phase transition.

In Chapter 6 the thermodynamics of the linear and nonlinear sigma model
in four dimensions is investigated. These models are low-energy
effective theories of QCD. The pressure of these models is calculated to
NLO in @xmath . The most important result of these calculations is a
prediction for the pressure of two-flavor QCD at low temperatures. The
NLO correction is compared to predictions of this correction in the
literature. These predictions turn out to be wrong. Finally a relatively
low upper bound on the mass of the sigma meson is found. The mass of the
sigma meson has not yet been determined very accurately experimentally.
If this upper bound is a result of the approximations or occurs really
in QCD should be investigated further.

The phase diagram of the NJL model is examined in Chapter 7. The NJL
model is a low-energy effective theory of QCD as well. The phase
diagrams are calculated by minimizing the effective potential. The
calculations have been carried out for situations in which the densities
of the up, down and the strange quark are different, such as in a
compact star or in a heavy-ion collision. Next to the phase in which one
can find ordinary matter, different color-superconducting phases and
phases in which the pseudoscalar mesons condense are found. The results
of this chapter are an extension of earlier calculations in which either
only the color-superconducting phases or the phases in which the
pseudoscalar mesons condense were taken into account. The main result is
that these previous calculations are extended, such that one gets a more
complete picture of the phase diagram. Furthermore the competition
between the color-superconducting phase and the phase in which
pseudoscalar mesons condense is studied. It is found that they are
separated by a first-order phase transition. A possible extension of
this work would be the inclusion of color and electric neutrality
constraints, such that obtain the phase diagram of a compact star.

## Samenvatting

Het standaardmodel is de natuurkundige theorie die de deeltjes waaruit
materie is opgebouwd en hun onderlinge wisselwerkingen (met uitzondering
van de zwaartekracht) beschrijft. Dit model heeft tot nu toe, op het
aantonen dat neutrino’s een hele kleine massa hebben na, alle
experimentele testen glansrijk doorstaan. Hoewel de wisselwerkingen
tussen de deeltjes onderling dus goed begrepen zijn, is het gedrag in
situaties waarbij een heleboel deeltjes met elkaar wisselwerken vaak
beperkt bekend. Een voorbeeld van zo’n situatie is materie onder extreem
hoge temperaturen en dichtheden, zoals tijdens de oerknal en in hele
compacte sterren. In dit proefschrift zijn enkele berekeningen
uitgevoerd die tot een beter begrip van materie onder zulke extreme
omstandigheden kunnen leiden.

### Van atomen naar quarks

De materie om ons heen is opgebouwd uit atomen. Een atoom bestaat uit
een positief geladen kern waar elektronen , die negatief geladen zijn,
zich omheen bevinden. De elektronen blijven in de buurt van de kern
omdat positief en negatief geladen deeltjes elkaar via de
elektromagnetische wisselwerking aantrekken. De elektromagnetische
kracht tussen twee ladingen wordt veroorzaakt door de uitwisseling van
fotonen (hetzelfde soort deeltjes waaruit licht bestaat). Deze kracht
wordt beschreven door quantumelektrodynamica (QED), de quantumtheorie
van het elektromagnetisme. QED is het best geteste onderdeel van het
standaardmodel.

De kern bevat bijna alle massa van het atoom en is ook weer opgebouwd
uit deeltjes: positief geladen protonen en neutrale neutronen . De kern
van het waterstofatoom bestaat uit één proton, terwijl bijvoorbeeld het
stabiele goudatoom 79 protonen en 118 neutronen bevat.

Omdat protonen elektrisch geladen zijn, zorgt de elektromagnetische
wisselwerking voor een afstotende kracht tussen de protonen. Desondanks
zijn er veel stabiele atoomkernen waarin de protonen en neutronen toch
bij elkaar blijven. Daarom moet er nog een aantrekkende kracht tussen de
protonen en de neutronen bestaan. Deze kracht wordt de sterke
wisselwerking genoemd. Het blijkt dat de aantrekkende kracht tussen
protonen en neutronen een gevolg is van de wisselwerkingen tussen de
quarks , dat zijn de deeltjes waaruit protonen en neutronen zijn
opgebouwd.

Een proton is opgebouwd uit drie quarks, twee zogenaamde up quarks en
een down quark . Een neutron bestaat uit een up quark en twee down
quarks. Naast de elektrische lading hebben de quarks nog een zogenaamde
kleurlading . Quarks oefenen een kracht op elkaar uit door uitwisseling
van gluonen . Deze kracht is op hele kleine afstand veel sterker dan de
elektromagnetische kracht, waardoor een proton en ook sommige
atoomkernen stabiel zijn.

Naast het up en het down quark zijn er nog vier andere zwaardere soorten
quarks bekend, te weten het strange , charm , bottom en top quark. Met
al deze quarks kunnen allerlei (instabiele) deeltjes gevormd worden.
Maar vanwege de onderlinge interacties kunnen lang niet alle combinaties
van quarks voorkomen. Bijvoorbeeld, een quark als vrij deeltje is
onmogelijk. Onder normale omstandigheden vormen quarks altijd met z’n
drieën een deeltje (bijvoorbeeld een proton of een neutron) of met z’n
tweeën. In het laatste geval vormt het quark tezamen met een antiquark
een deeltje, een zogenaamd meson. Een voorbeeld hiervan is het positief
geladen pion , dat een gebonden toestand van een up quark en een
anti-down quark is.

De wisselwerkingen tussen de quarks worden beschreven door
quantumchromodynamica (QCD) (zie formule 1.1 ). QCD is net als QED een
onderdeel van het standaardmodel. Met behulp van deze theorie kunnen
bepaalde uitkomsten van botsingsexperimenten tussen bijvoorbeeld twee
protonen worden voorspeld. De resultaten van deze experimenten stemmen
overeen met de voorspellingen, wat dus betekent dat de fundamentele
wisselwerkingen tussen de quarks in principe goed begrepen zijn.

### Materie onder extreme omstandigheden

In dit proefschrift is theoretisch onderzocht wat met materie opgebouwd
uit quarks gebeurt onder extreem hoge temperaturen, zoals tijdens de
oerknal en bij hele grote dichtheden, zoals in een compacte ster. In
beide gevallen hebben we natuurlijk te maken met een heleboel quarks,
veel meer dan in een botsingsexperiment tussen twee protonen. Net zoals
het ondoenlijk is om te voorspellen hoe een individueel watermolekuul
zich door water beweegt, kunnen we in dat geval geen uitspraken doen
over het gedrag van ieder individueel quark. Maar het is wel mogelijk om
uitspraken te doen over het gedrag van alle quarks tezamen, net zoals
water te karakteriseren is door collectieve grootheden, als de
temperatuur, de dichtheid en de druk. De relaties tussen deze grootheden
kunnen met behulp van thermodynamica (warmteleer) worden uitgerekend en
zijn ondere andere van belang voor het begrijpen van het gedrag van
compacte sterren en het ontstaan van het heelal.

Water kan in verschillende toestanden (ook wel fasen genoemd) voorkomen,
te weten ijs, vloeibaar en damp. Al deze fasen zijn natuurlijk opgebouwd
uit dezelfde watermolekulen, alleen gedraagt de verzameling
watermolekulen zich in iedere fase compleet anders. In ijs zijn de
watermolekulen relatief sterk aan elkaar gebonden. Als de temperatuur
verhoogd wordt, gaan de watermolekulen sneller trillen, op een gegeven
moment trillen ze zo hard dat ze niet meer in een soort roostervorm bij
elkaar kunnen worden gehouden, water gaat dan over naar de vloeibare
fase. Bij de overgang naar waterdamp gebeurt ongeveer hetzelfde.

Algemeen wordt aangenomen dat iets dergelijks ook met quarks moet
gebeuren. Zoals eerder is aangegeven, vormen quarks met z’n tweeën of
met z’n drieën een deeltje zoals het neutron. Neem nu eens in gedachten
een groot aantal neutronen in een doos. Als de temperatuur laag is dan
blijven de quarks bij elkaar, maar als de temperatuur verhoogd wordt kan
het gebeuren dat de quarks zo hard gaan trillen, dat ze niet meer bij
elkaar kunnen worden gehouden in een neutron. De materie komt dan in een
nieuwe fase die het quark-gluonplasma wordt genoemd. In deze fase hoeven
de quarks niet langer met z’n tweeën of drieën bij elkaar te blijven. De
temperatuur waarbij de faseovergang optreedt is ongeveer twee biljoen
graden Celsius, dat is maar liefst honderdduizend keer de temperatuur in
het binnenste van de zon. Vlak na de oerknal was het heelal
waarschijnlijk eventjes een quark-gluonplasma. Er zijn sterke
aanwijzingen dat het quark-gluonplasma onlangs voor een hele korte tijd
in het laboratorium is gemaakt tijdens een experiment in het Brookhaven
National Laboratory, New York, waar goudkernen met enorme snelheden
tegen elkaar werden geschoten.

De neutronen in de doos kunnen natuurlijk ook op elkaar gedrukt worden.
Op een gegeven moment wordt de dichtheid zo groot dat alle neutronen
tegen elkaar aanzitten. Als er dan nog harder gedrukt wordt, dan gaan de
neutronen overlappen, zodat ze hun identiteit als individuele deeltjes
verliezen. In dit geval kan er kan een faseovergang optreden naar een
zogenaamde kleur-supergeleidende fase. Dit gebeurt bij enorm grote
dichtheden van ongeveer honderd biljoen kilogram per liter. In theorie
zou die faseovergang bereikt kunnen worden in het binnenste van een
neutronenster . Een neutronenster is een uitgebrande ster met een enorm
hoge dichtheid. Tot nu zijn er echter nog geen neutronensterren gevonden
die zo’n hoge dichtheid hebben dat ze zich met zekerheid in de
kleur-supergeleidende fase bevinden.

De bovenstaande beweringen over het gedrag van deeltjes onder extreme
omstandigheden kunnen in principe wat preciezer gedaan worden door
berekeningen met QCD uit te voeren. Het blijkt dat de krachten tussen de
quarks minder sterk worden naarmate de energie van de quarks groter
wordt. Dit fenomeen heet asymptotische vrijheid . Als gevolg daarvan is
het mogelijk analytische berekeningen (berekeningen met pen en papier)
met QCD bij hele hoge energieën uit te voeren. Maar deze energieën zijn
nog veel hoger dan de energieën die de quarks hebben rond de
faseovergangen. Een manier om QCD bij lagere energieën te bekijken is
met behulp van computersimulaties ( lattice QCD ). Het probleem van deze
computersimulaties is dat ze niet goed werken bij grote dichtheden. Om
toch iets te voorspellen en te begrijpen over het gedrag van QCD bij
temperaturen en dichtheden rond de faseovergangen kun je eenvoudiger
theorieën bekijken die QCD tot op zekere hoogte benaderen (zoals in
hoofdstuk 6 en 7 van dit proefschrift) of die bepaalde aspecten met QCD
gemeen hebben (zoals in hoofdstuk 4 en 5) (vandaar de uitdrukking
QCD-inspired theories in de titel).

Een belangrijke uit te rekenen grootheid is de druk (aangeduid met het
symbool @xmath ) van materie die uit quarks is opgebouwd, als functie
van de temperatuur ( @xmath ). Het resultaat van de exacte berekeningen
is afgebeeld in figuur 1.1 . De grijze banden geven de foutmarges aan.
Duidelijk is te zien dat voor lagere temperaturen (in het bijzonder rond
de faseovergang) de resultaten van de berekeningen onbetrouwbaar zijn
(omdat de krachten tussen de quarks dan te groot worden). Het resultaat
van de computerberekeningen is voor een verschillend aantal quarks
afgebeeld in figuur 1.2 . De resultaten van deze computerberekeningen
zijn betrouwbaar voor temperaturen in de buurt van de faseovergang
(ongeveer 170 MeV, dat correspondeert met 2 biljoen graden Celsius) en
hoger. Om de druk bij lagere temperaturen te voorspellen kunnen
QCD-achtige theorieën gebruikt worden, zoals in hoofdstuk 6 van dit
proefschrift is gedaan. In figuur 6.6 is het resultaat van de berekening
van de druk afgebeeld. De onderbroken lijn in deze figuur is een
voorspelling is van de druk van QCD bij lage temperatuur.

Een ander interessant voorbeeld is het fasediagram van QCD. Het
fasediagram geeft, afhankelijk van bijvoorbeeld de dichtheid en de
temperatuur, aan in welke fase materie zich bevindt. In figuur 1.3 is
het fasediagram van QCD geschetst . Op de horizontale as van dit diagram
staat @xmath afgebeeld, een grootheid die een directe relatie heeft met
de dichtheid (hoe groter @xmath , hoe groter de dichtheid). Op de
verticale as staat de temperatuur. Het quark-gluonplasma en de
kleur-supergeleidende fase zijn in dit diagram terug te vinden. Het is
belangrijk te weten dat dit diagram een schets is, het is namelijk niet
precies bekend waar de lijnen die de verschillende fasen van elkaar
scheiden in het diagram liggen. Dat komt doordat dit diagram gebaseerd
is op berekeningen aan theorieën die QCD benaderen in een bepaald
gebied. In het fasediagram afgebeeld in figuur 1.3 zijn de dichtheden
van de verschillende soorten quarks allemaal gelijk. In hoofdstuk 7 van
dit proefschrift zijn, met behulp van een QCD-achtige theorie,
fasediagrammen uitgerekend waarbij de dichtheden van de quarks allemaal
verschillend zijn gekozen.

### Overzicht en resultaten van dit proefschrift

Dit proefschrift getiteld, “Thermodynamics of QCD-inspired theories”
(Thermodynamica van QCD-achtige theorieën), gaat dus over het gedrag van
materie onder extreme omstandigheden.

In hoofdstuk 1 wordt een algemene inleiding gegeven. Eerst wordt
ingegaan op de vraag wat er zou kunnen gebeuren met materie onder
extreme omstandigheden. Daarna worden in het kort de relevante aspecten
van quantumchromodynamica (QCD) uitgelegd. Vervolgens worden eerdere
berekeningen van de druk en het fasediagram en de problemen die daar bij
komen kijken behandeld. Ook wordt in hoofdstuk 1 aandacht besteed aan
situaties waarbij zulke extreme omstandigheden kunnen voorkomen, te
weten in het heelal vlak na de oerknal, tijdens zware-ionenbotsingen en
in neutronensterren. Tot slot wordt uitgelegd wat er bedoeld wordt met
QCD-achtige theorieën.

Hoofdstuk 2 gaat over hoe met een zogenaamde quantumveldentheorie als
QCD berekeningen kunnen worden uitgevoerd bij eindige temperatuur en
dichtheid. Daarvoor wordt een statistische analyse gebruikt. Eerst wordt
er ingegaan op hoe dat in zijn werk gaat voor een klassieke theorie,
daarna worden de resultaten veralgemeniseerd voor een quantummechanische
aanpak. Met behulp van het zogenaamde pad-integraal formalisme wordt
uitgelegd hoe dit kan worden gebruikt voor een quantumveldentheorie. In
berekeningen bij eindige temperatuur moeten vaak sommaties over een
oneindig aantal termen worden uitgerekend. Een methode om dat exact te
doen wordt uitgelegd, en er wordt ingegaan op hoe er met oneindigheden,
die in deze berekeningen kunnen optreden, moet worden omgegaan. Ook
wordt ruim aandacht besteed aan hoe deze sommen voor ingewikkelder
gevallen met de computer kunnen worden berekend.

Het derde hoofdstuk behandelt de zogenaamde effectieve potentiaal en de
@xmath benadering. De effectieve potentiaal is een belangrijke
grootheid, aangezien door het minimaliseren van die potentiaal de druk
en de fasediagrammen kunnen worden verkregen. De @xmath benadering is
een methode waarbij inzicht kan worden verkregen in het lage energie
gedrag van de theorieën die in dit proefschrift worden behandeld. Er
wordt uitgelegd hoe deze benadering kan worden afgeleid door het
introduceren van extra velden. Tot slot wordt ingegaan op het feit dat
in berekeningen van de effectieve potentiaal er oneindigheden kunnen
ontstaan die van de temperatuur afhangen. Zulke oneindigheden vormen een
grote bedreiging voor de betekenis en bruikbaarheid van de antwoorden.
Een belangrijk resultaat uit dit proefschrift is dat deze oneindigheden
temperatuursonafhankelijk worden op het minimum van de effectieve
potentiaal. Dat is juist het punt waar de druk en het fasediagram worden
bepaald. In het minimum zijn deze oneindigheden geen probleem omdat ze
dan door subtracties en herdefinities van bepaalde constanten op een
systematische manier kunnen worden verwijderd zonder de betekenis van de
antwoorden te beïnvloeden. Deze procedure wordt ook wel renormalisatie
genoemd.

Het onderwerp van hoofdstuk 4 is de thermodynamica van het niet-lineaire
sigma model in twee dimensies (een ruimte- en een tijddimensie). Dit
model heeft bepaalde aspecten met QCD gemeen, zoals asymptotische
vrijheid. Maar met behulp van de @xmath benadering kan hier het lage
energie gedrag wel analytisch worden berekend. Door dit model te
bestuderen kunnen we iets leren van het gedrag van QCD bij eindige
temperatuur, bijvoorbeeld hoe een asymptotische vrije theorie zich
gedraagt als er van lage naar hoge energie wordt gegaan. In dit
hoofdstuk is de effectieve potentiaal uitgerekend met behulp van de
@xmath benadering tot en met de eerste niet-triviale correctie (ook wel
next-to-leading order (NLO) genoemd). Er worden temperatuursafhankelijke
oneindigheden gevonden, die blijken te kunnen worden gerenormaliseerd op
het minimum. Vervolgens wordt de druk als functie van de temperatuur
uitgerekend. Met dit resultaat kunnen we ondere andere concluderen dat
de @xmath benadering een goede rekenmethode is. Verder lijkt het gedrag
van de druk gedeeld door de druk in the limiet van oneindige
temperatuur, onafhankelijk van @xmath . Een soortgelijk resultaat is
gevonden in computerberekeningen aan QCD.

Hoofdstuk 5 gaat over de thermodynamica van het @xmath model in twee
dimensies. Dit model is een uitbreiding van het niet-lineaire sigma
model waarbij ook elektromagnetisme wordt meegenomen. Ook dit model
heeft weer een aantal aspecten met QCD gemeen, het bevat bijvoorbeeld
net als QCD zogenaamde topologisch niet-triviale vacua. Het effect van
deze vacua op de druk is onderzocht. Daarbij wordt gebruik gemaakt van
dezelfde methoden als in hoofdstuk 4. Uit de berekeningen volgt dat de
topologisch niet-triviale vacua voor temperaturen waarbij de druk
relatief snel stijgt een grote bijdrage leveren. Dit resultaat is een
mogelijke aanwijzing dat deze niet-triviale vacua rond de faseovergangen
in QCD belangrijk zouden kunnen zijn.

In hoofdstuk 6 wordt de thermodynamica van het lineaire en het
niet-lineaire sigma model in een tijd- en drie ruimtedimensies
onderzocht. Algemene wordt aangenomen dat deze modellen een goede
benadering van QCD bij lage energie zijn. Opnieuw is met behulp van de
@xmath benadering de druk uitgerekend tot en met de eerste niet-triviale
correctie. Het belangrijkste resultaat van deze berekening is een
voorspelling van de druk van QCD met twee soorten quarks bij lage
temperaturen. Dit resultaat is vergeleken met eerdere schattingen uit de
literatuur, waarvan geconcludeerd wordt dat ze foutief zijn. Tot slot
wordt er een vrij lage bovengrens gevonden op de massa van het
zogenaamde sigma meson. Deze massa is experimenteel nog niet goed
vastgesteld. Of deze bovengrens een gevolg is van de benaderingsmethode
of ook echt in QCD voorkomt zou verder moeten worden onderzocht.

Hoofdstuk 7 gaat tenslotte over de fasediagrammen van het NJL model. Dit
model geldt ook als een theorie die QCD kan beschrijven bij lage
energieën. Door het minimaliseren van de effectieve potentiaal worden de
fasediagrammen uitgerekend. De berekeningen zijn uitgevoerd voor
situaties waarbij de dichtheden van de up, down en strange quark
verschillend kunnen zijn, zoals bijvoorbeeld in een ster of in een
zware-ionenbotsing. Naast de fase waarin materie zich bij normale
omstandigheden bevindt, zijn verschillende kleur-supergeleidende fasen
en fasen waarin pseudoscalaire mesonen condenseren gevonden. De
resultaten uit dit hoofdstuk zijn een uitbreiding op eerdere
berekeningen uit de literatuur waarin of alleen rekening met de
kleur-supergeleidende fase of met de fase waarin pseudoscalaire mesonen
condenseren wordt gehouden. In dit hoofdstuk worden beide mogelijkheden
meegenomen. Het belangrijkste resultaat is dat de eerdere berekeningen
van fasediagrammen zijn uitgebreid. Verder is de competitie tussen de
twee typen fasen onderzocht, een belangrijk resultaat is dat ze
gescheiden zijn door een zogenaamde eerste-orde faseovergang.
Dit onderzoek heeft er toe geleid dat het begrip van het gedrag van
materie onder extreme omstandigheden iets is toegenomen. Toch blijven er
nog een heleboel zaken onbegrepen, zoals bijvoorbeeld de precieze vorm
van het QCD fasediagram. Hopelijk zullen verbeterde
(computer)berekeningen en nieuwe experimenten (bijvoorbeeld bij CERN in
Genève) ons in de toekomst meer leren.

## Acknowledgments

Hoewel er maar één naam op het kaft van het proefschrift staat hebben
veel mensen op een of andere manier bijgedragen aan dit werk. Allereerst
wil ik mijn copromotor, Daniël Boer bedanken voor de uitstekende
begeleiding en de prettige samenwerking in de afgelopen vier jaar. Ik
vond het fijn dat je bijna altijd tijd voor me had en ik heb veel
geleerd van alle discussies die ik met je gevoerd heb. Ik waardeer het
zeer dat je me zo vrij hebt gelaten. Verder heb ik aan de vele ideeën en
opmerkingen van Jens Andersen veel gehad. Ik vond het leuk om een aantal
artikelen met je te schrijven. Ook mijn promotor Piet Mulders wil ik
bedanken voor zijn ondersteuning.

Mijn werkgever, de Vrije Universiteit, wil ik bedanken voor de prettige
werkomgeving en de financiële ondersteuning die mij het onder meer
mogelijk gemaakt heeft om conferenties te bezoeken.

I would like to thank all members of the reading committee, consisting
of Jens Andersen, Ben Bakker, Dirk Rischke, Jan Smit and Chris van Weert
for taking the time to read the manuscript. All your suggestions were
very welcome.

Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge Rob Pisarski for some useful
discussions. Thanks for giving me the opportunity to present part of my
work at a seminar at Brookhaven National Laboratory. I would also like
to thank the theory group of BNL for the pleasant stay during that week.
Furthermore I would like to thank Krishna Rajagopal for the possibility
to visit the Center for Theoretical Physics of MIT for some days, and
Edward Shuryak for giving me the opportunity to give a seminar at Stony
Brook University.

I also appreciate it very much that the organizers of the national
theoretical high-energy physics seminar, the organizers of the Strong
and Electroweak matter conference in Helsinki, the organizers of the
43rd Cracow School of theoretical physics, and the organizers of the
extreme QCD workshop in Swansea gave me the chance to give a talk about
my work. All these meetings were very useful to me.

Ubel Warringa wil ik bedanken voor het grondig doorlezen van de
Nederlandse samenvatting en zijn nuttige opmerkingen.

Graag wil ik bij deze alle medewerkers van de afdeling theoretische
natuurkunde van de Vrije Universiteit bedanken voor de leuke sfeer en de
vele discussies tijdens de koffiepauzes en op andere momenten, in het
bijzonder Fetze Pijlman, Calina Ciuhu, Miranda van Iersel, Cedran
Bomhof, Erik Wessels, Hugo Schouten, Klaus Scharnhorst, Paul Becherer,
David Fokkema, Paul Visser, Klaas Allaart, Taco Visser, Henk Blok, Ben
Bakker, Alessandro Bacchetta, Philipp Hägler, Gui Milhano, Hartmut
Erzgräber, Adri Lodder en Daan Lenstra.

Tot slot wil ik al mijn vrienden bedanken, mijn familie en niet te
vergeten mijn broertjes en mijn ouders.

Amsterdam, november 2005