The continuous minituarization of integrated circuits is going to affect
the underlying physics of the future computers. This new physics first
came into play as the effect of Coulomb blockade in electron transport
through small conducting islands. Then, as the size of the island @xmath
continued to shrink further, the quantum phase coherence length became
larger than @xmath leading to mesoscopic fluctuations – fluctuations of
the island’s quantum mechanical properties upon small external
perturbations. Quantum coherence of the mesoscopic systems is essential
for building reliable quantum computer. Unfortunately, one can not
completely isolate the system from the environment and its coupling to
the environment inevitably leads to the loss of coherence or
decoherence. All these effects are to be thoroughly investigated as the
potential of the future applications is enormous.

In this thesis I find an analytic expression for the conductance of a
single electron transistor in the regime when temperature, level
spacing, and charging energy of an island are all of the same order. I
also study the correction to the spacing between Coulomb blockade peaks
due to finite dot-lead tunnel couplings. I find analytic expressions for
both correction to the spacing averaged over mesoscopic fluctuations and
the rms of the correction fluctuations.

In the second part of the thesis I discuss the feasibility of quantum
dot based spin- and charge-qubits. Firstly, I study the effect of
mesoscopic fluctuations on the magnitude of errors that can occur in
exchange operations on quantum dot spin-qubits. Mid-size double quantum
dots, with an odd number of electrons in the range of a few tens in each
dot, are investigated through the constant interaction model using
realistic parameters. It is found that the number of independent
parameters per dot that one should tune depends on the configuration and
ranges from one to four. Then, I study decoherence of a quantum dot
charge qubit due to coupling to piezoelectric acoustic phonons in the
Born-Markov approximation. After including appropriate form factors, I
find that phonon decoherence rates are one to two orders of magnitude
weaker than was previously predicted. My results suggest that mechanisms
other than phonon decoherence play a more significant role in current
experimental setups.
