##### Acknowledgements. \ssp First and foremost, I would like to thank
my adviser Prof. Harold U. Baranger for his thoughtful guidance on every
aspect of my research and for the funding of my work all these years. I
am also grateful to Prof. Konstantin A. Matveev for investing so much
time in my education and his guidance on my first research project at
Duke. Prof. Eduardo R. Mucciolo has been a wonderful collaborator and
friend. He gave me the confidence that I can publish in Physical Review
B. Without him this thesis would have been much thinner. I am grateful
to Profs. Berndt Müller and M. Ronen Plesser for helping me to secure TA
positions when I needed them most. I am grateful to the members of my
Ph.D. committee: Profs. Shailesh Chandrasekharan, Albert M. Chang, Gleb
Finkelstein, and Weitao Yang for finding time to be on my committee and
valuable comments on the manuscript. During my years at Duke, I
benefited from stimulating discussions with Alexey Bezryadin,
Alexander M. Finkelstein, Martina Hentschel, Alexei Kaminski, Eduardo
Novais, Stephen W. Teitsworth, Denis Ullmo, Gonzalo Usaj, and Frank K.
Wilhelm. I would like to thank my friends: Sven Rinke, Alex Makarovski,
Kostya Sabourov, Anand Priyadarshee, Sung Ha Park, Ji-Woo Lee, Martina
Hentschel, Gonzalo Usaj, Eduardo Novais, Ribhu Kaul, and Oleg Tretiakov.
Thank you, guys, for being there for me even when I did not ask. It is
always fun to be around you! Finally, a special thank you goes to my
parents, grandparents, and my wife Elena whose patience helped me to get
the job done. And, certainly, life makes much more sense because my
daughter Tanya is around.

###### Contents

-    1 Overview
-    2 2D Lateral Quantum Dots
-    3 Constant Interaction Model and Single-Particle Hamiltonian
-    4 Constant Exchange And Interaction Model
-    5 3D Quantum Dots
-    6 Overview
-    7 Introduction
-    8 The Model
-    9 Linear Conductance in the Spinless Case
-    10 Application to Tunneling Through Quantum Hall Edge States in a
    Quantum Dot
-    11 Linear Conductance in the Spin- @xmath Case
-    12 Conclusions
-    13 Overview
-    14 Introduction
-    15 The Hamiltonian
-    16 Plan of the Calculation
-    17 Doublet-Triplet-Doublet Spin Sequence: Calculation of the
    Spacing Between Peaks
    -    17.1 Zeroth Order: Isolated Quantum Dot
    -    17.2 Second Order: Contribution From Virtual Processes
-    18 Ensemble Averaged Correction to the Peak Spacing
-    19 RMS of The Correction to Peak Spacing due to Mesoscopic
    Fluctuations
-    20 Conclusions
-    21 Overview
-    22 Introduction to Quantum Computation
-    23 Mathematical Basis of Quantum Computations
    -    23.1 Quantum Bits and Entangled States
    -    23.2 Steps in Quantum Computation and Quantum Gates
    -    23.3 Quantum Parallelism
    -    23.4 Important Remarks
-    24 DiVincenzo’s Criteria of Physical Implementation
-    25 Quantum Computing Proposals
    -    25.1 Liquid State NMR
    -    25.2 Spintronic Quantum Dot Proposal by Loss and DiVincenzo
-    26 Overview
-    27 Introduction
-    28 Model System
-    29 Errors in Exchange Operations
-    30 Results
    -    30.1 Mesoscopic Effects
    -    30.2 Relevance for Real Quantum Dots
-    31 Conclusions
-    32 Introduction
-    33 Formulation of the Problem
-    34 General Solution
-    35 @xmath and Born Approximations
-    36 Markov Approximation on Top: Redfield Equation
-    37 Overview
-    38 Introduction
-    39 Model System
-    40 Decay of Charge Oscillations
-    41 Bias Pulsing
-    42 Conclusions
-    43 General Overview
-    44 Main Conclusions of My Work
-    45 Possible Directions of Future Research
-    A Introduction
-    B Deformation Potential Contribution to the Electron-Phonon
    Coupling
-    C Piezoelectric Contribution to the Electron-Phonon Coupling
-    D Combining Two Mechanisms

{dedication}

To my grandmother Vorozhtsova, Tatyana Ivanovna (1917-1987)

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction to Quantum Dot Physics

### 1 Overview

Quantum dot research [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] has developed into an exciting
branch of mesoscopic physics. Many novel phenomena were observed in
transport measurements through quantum dots: Coulomb blockade [ 5 ] ,
even-odd asymmetry in Coulomb blockade peak spacings [ 6 , 7 ] , and
Kondo effect [ 8 , 9 ] to name just a few. The field has kept
researchers busy for about twenty years now and still continues to
surprise us.

By no means can I provide a detailed introduction to the entire field in
this thesis (even restricting myself to quantum dot physics alone) and I
do not think it is necessary as there are quite a few nice review papers
available [ 5 , 10 , 11 , 12 ] . Instead, I give just enough
introductory material on 2D lateral and 3D quantum dots so that the
reader can jump into the chapters where the original results of my
research are presented.

### 2 2D Lateral Quantum Dots

Recent advances in materials science made possible the fabrication of
small conducting devices known as quantum dots. In particular, in 2D
lateral quantum dots from one to several thousand electrons are confined
to a spatial region whose linear size is from about 40 @xmath nm to 1
@xmath m [ 2 , 13 ] . These quantum dots are typically made by
(i) forming a two-dimensional electron gas on the interface of
semiconductor heterostructure and (ii) applying electrostatic potential
to the metal surface electrodes to further confine the electrons to a
small region (quantum dot) in the interface plane [ 4 ] , see Fig. 1 .

The transport properties of a quantum dot can be measured by coupling it
to leads and passing current through the dot. The electron’s phase is
preserved over distances that are large compared with the size of the
system (quantum coherence), giving rise to new phenomena not observed in
macroscopic conductors.

The coupling between a quantum dot and its leads can be experimentally
controlled. In an open dot, the coupling is strong and the movement of
electrons across dot-lead junctions is classically allowed. However,
when the point contacts are pinched off, effective barriers are formed
and conduction occurs only by tunneling. In these almost-isolated or
closed quantum dots, the charge of the dot is quantized and the dot’s
low-lying energy levels are discrete with their widths smaller than the
spacing between them, see Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade,
Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence .

The advantage of these artificial systems is that their transport
properties are readily measured and all the parameters – the strength of
the dot-lead tunnel couplings, the number of electrons in the dot, and
the dot’s size and shape – are under experimental control.

To observe quantization of the quantum dot charge, two conditions have
to be satisfied. Firstly, the barriers must be high enough so that the
transmission is small. This gives the following condition for the
conductance: @xmath , that is, the dot must be almost or completely
isolated. Secondly, the temperature must be low enough so that the
effects of charge quantization are not washed out. The quantum dot’s
ability to hold charge is classically described by its average
capacitance @xmath . Since the energy required to add one electron is
approximately @xmath , we find the following condition: @xmath .

The tunneling of an electron onto the dot is normally blocked by the
classical Coulomb repulsion with the electrons already in the dot;
hence, the conductance is very small. This phenomenon is known as the
Coulomb blockade. However, by changing the voltage of the back-gate
@xmath one can compensate for this repulsion and, at the appropriate
value of @xmath , the charge of the dot can fluctuate between @xmath and
@xmath electrons leading to a maximum in the conductance. Thus, one can
observe Coulomb-blockade oscillations of the conductance as a function
of the back-gate voltage, see Fig. 5 . At sufficiently low temperatures
these oscillations turn into sharp peaks that are spaced almost
uniformly in @xmath . Their separation is approximately equal to the
charging energy @xmath .

### 3 Constant Interaction Model and Single-Particle Hamiltonian

Electron-electron interactions in a quantum dot in the Coulomb-blockade
regime are conventionally described by the constant interaction (CI)
model [ 5 ] . In this model the Hamiltonian of the system is given by a
sum of two terms: (i) the electrostatic charging energy, which depends
only on the total number of electrons in the dot @xmath and (ii) the
Hamiltonian of free quasiparticles:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath and @xmath is the annihilation operator of a quasiparticle
(electron) on orbital level @xmath with spin @xmath .

Single-particle dynamics inside real 2D lateral quantum dots with more
than 40 electrons has no particular symmetry due to irregular boundaries
(chaotic quantum dot) or the presence of impurities (disordered quantum
dot). In both of these cases, free quasiparticles inside the dot can be
described by random matrix theory (RMT): The Hamiltonian is chosen “at
random” except for its fundamental space-time symmetry [ 14 , 15 , 16 ,
17 , 18 , 10 ] . Random matrix theory is applicable if the dimensionless
conductance of the dot @xmath is large: @xmath , where @xmath is the
Thouless energy and @xmath is the mean level spacing in the quantum dot.
For a ballistic quantum dot @xmath , where @xmath is the Fermi velocity
of the electrons and @xmath is the linear size of the dot. A large value
of @xmath indicates that the dot can be treated as a good conductor.

The spacings between conductance peaks contain two contributions as
well. The first one, due to the charging energy, does not fluctuate
much. The second contribution is proportional to the spacing between
discrete energy levels in the quantum dot. This term does fluctuate and
obeys the Wigner-Dyson statistics. Spin degeneracy of each one-particle
energy level in the quantum dot leads to the even-odd parity effect: the
second contribution appears only when we promote an electron to the next
orbital.

### 4 Constant Exchange And Interaction Model

More careful treatment shows that the interactions between electrons in
a quantum dot should be correctly described by the “universal”
Hamiltonian [ 19 , 12 ] .

In the basis of eigenfunctions @xmath of the free-electron Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

the two-particle interaction takes the form

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the random potential determined by the shape of the
quantum dot and @xmath and @xmath are the spin indices for the fermionic
operators. The generic matrix element of the interaction is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

The matrix elements of the interaction Hamiltonian have a hierarchical
structure. Only a few of these elements are large and universal, whereas
the majority of them are proportional to the inverse dimensionless
conductance @xmath ( @xmath for a @xmath quantum dot) and, therefore,
small [ 19 , 12 ] . As a result, the Hamiltonian [Eq. ( 3 )] can be
broken in two pieces:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

The first term here is universal – it does not depend on the quantum dot
geometry and does not fluctuate from sample to sample (for samples
differing only by realization of disorder). The second term in Eq. ( 5 )
does fluctuate but it is of order @xmath and, hence, small. This term
only weakly affect the low-energy @xmath properties of the system.

The form of the universal term in Eq. ( 5 ) can be established using the
requirement of compatibility of this term with the RMT [ 19 , 12 ] .
Since the random matrix distribution is invariant with respect to an
arbitrary rotation of the basis, the operator @xmath may include only
the operators which are invariant under such rotations. In the absence
of the spin-orbit interaction, there are three such operators:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

– the total number of electrons,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

– the total electron spin of the dot, and the operator

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

which corresponds to the interaction in the Cooper channel.

Gauge invariance requires that only the product @xmath of the operators
@xmath and @xmath may enter the Hamiltonian. At the same time SU(2)
symmetry dictates that the Hamiltonian may depend only on @xmath and not
on the separate spin components. Taking into account that the initial
interaction Hamiltonian [Eq. ( 4 )] is proportional to @xmath we find
the “universal” Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the redefined value of the charging energy [ 19 , 7 ]
and @xmath is the exchange interaction constant. The constants in this
Hamiltonian are model-dependent. The first two terms represent the
dependence of the energy on the total number of electrons and the total
spin, respectively. Because both the total charge and the total spin
commute with the free-electron Hamiltonian, these two terms do not have
any dynamics for a closed dot. The situation changes as one couples the
dot to the leads.

The third term vanishes in the Gaussian Unitary (GUE) random matrix
ensemble. GUE corresponds to the absence of time-reversal invariance, or
placing the quantum dot into an external magnetic field. One can say
that the Cooper channel is suppressed by a weak magnetic field (it is
sufficient to thread a unit quantum flux @xmath through the
cross-section of the dot).

Thus, in the absence of superconducting correlations, the universal part
of the interaction Hamiltonian consists of two parts:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

This is the so-called constant exchange and interaction (CEI) model [ 20
, 7 ] . Its dominant part depends on the QD charge number @xmath – the
corresponding energy scale @xmath is related to the capacitance of the
QD, @xmath , and exceeds parametrically the mean level spacing @xmath .
The second part depends on the total spin @xmath – the corresponding
energy scale @xmath is less than @xmath .

If the level spacings did not fluctuate, then the smallness of @xmath
would automatically imply that the spin of the QD can only take the
values of @xmath (if @xmath is even) or @xmath (if @xmath is odd).
Fluctuations in the level spacings may lead to a violation of this
periodicity [ 21 , 22 , 19 ] . However, the Stoner criterion; @xmath ,
guarantees that the total QD spin is not macroscopically large; that is,
it does not scale with the QD volume.

In the presence of the back-gate electrode capacitively coupled to the
QD, the CEI model and free quasiparticle Hamiltonian become

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the dimensionless back-gate voltage and @xmath is the
dot-backgate capacitance.

### 5 3D Quantum Dots

A 3D quantum dot is just a metal nanograin. There are numerous methods
to synthesize them [ 23 ] . At the time of writing, metal nanoparticles
of down to about 1 nm in diameter are commercially available.

To form a single electron transistor one has to trap a nanograin between
two leads. To create a narrow gap between two conductors, the
electromigration technique is often implemented [ 24 ] . In this
technique one takes a conductor of a small cross-section and gradually
increases the voltage and, hence, the current through it until cracking
occurs. Using this method, one can create very narrow nanometer size
gaps. To trap a nanoparticle the potential difference between two leads
is applied. Then the nanoparticle gets polarized and attracted to the
region of high electric field. This is called the electrostatic trapping
technique. Thus, the nanoparticle is attached to two leads via oxide
tunnel barriers. As an example, in the recent experiment by Bolotin and
coworkers an ultra-small gold nanograin, 5 nm in diameter, was
incorporated into a gap between two leads. Thus, a single-electron
transistor was formed, and Coulomb blockade oscillations were observed
for more than ten charge states of the grain.

Although these metal nanograins are similar to semiconductor quantum
dots, there are a number of important differences [ 11 ] . (i) Metals
have much higher densities of states than semiconductors; hence, they
require much smaller sample sizes (less than 10 nm) before discrete
energy levels in the QD become resolvable. The ratio @xmath is usually
larger for nanograins; therefore, mesoscopic fluctuations have
significantly less impact on their quantum properties. (ii) For
nanograins, the tunnel barriers to the leads are formed by insulating
oxide layers. Therefore, they are insensitive to applied voltages,
whereas for 2D quantum dots they can be tuned by changing voltages on
the electrodes.

## Chapter \thechapter Coulomb Blockade Oscillations of Conductance at
Finite Energy Level Spacing in a Quantum Dot

### 6 Overview

In this chapter we find an analytical expression for the conductance of
a single electron transistor in the regime when temperature, level
spacing, and charging energy of a grain are all of the same order. We
consider the model of equidistant energy levels in a grain in the
sequential tunneling approximation.In the case of spinless electrons our
theory describes transport through a dot in the quantum Hall regime. In
the case of spin- @xmath electrons we analyze the line shape of a peak,
shift in the position of the peak’s maximum as a function of
temperature, and the values of the conductance in the odd and even
valleys.

### 7 Introduction

Recent progress in mesoscopic fabrication techniques has made possible
not only the creation of more sophisticated devices but also greater
control over their properties. Electron systems confined to small space
regions, quantum dots, and especially their transport properties have
been studied extensively for the last decade [ 11 , 5 ] . In particular,
an individual ultra-small metallic grain of radius less than 5 nm was
attached to two leads via oxide tunnel barriers, thus forming a single
electron transistor (SET) [ 11 ] . Applying bias voltage, @xmath ,
between two leads allows one to study transport properties of the
system, Fig. 2 .

Alternatively, a SET can be formed by depleting two-dimensional electron
gas at the interface of GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure by applying negative
voltages to the metallic surface gates [ 5 ] .

In this chapter we will assume that the bias voltage is infinitesimally
small, @xmath . This corresponds to the linear response regime. In order
to tunnel onto the quantum dot, an electron in the left lead has to
overcome a charging energy, @xmath , where @xmath is the elementary
charge; @xmath is the capacitance of the quantum dot. If @xmath then
conductance through the system is exponentially suppressed. This
phenomenon is called the Coulomb blockade. However if we apply a
voltage, @xmath , to the additional gate capacitively coupled to the
dot, the Coulomb blockade can be lifted. Indeed, changing @xmath one can
shift the position of energy minimum so that energies of the quantum dot
with @xmath and @xmath electrons will become equal and an electron can
freely jump from the left lead onto the dot and then jump out into the
other lead. Thus, current event has occurred and a peak in the
conductance, @xmath , corresponding to this gate voltage is observed. By
changing the gate voltage one can observe an oscillation of the
conductance or Coulomb blockade oscillations.

One-particle energy levels in the quantum dot, @xmath , are given by the
solution of the Schrödinger equation in the quantum dot’s potential. The
mean spacing between these energy levels is @xmath . The conventional
assumption that @xmath is not valid in the case of sufficiently small
dots. In fact, in the recent experiments [ 25 , 26 , 27 ] , where a
@xmath molecule has acted as a quantum dot, the level spacing is of
order charging energy. Experiment [ 25 , 26 ] was performed at @xmath as
well as at room temperature. In other experiments [ 28 , 29 ] with
quantum dot formed by depleting 2DEG [ 28 ] and ropes of carbon
nanotubes acting as a quantum dot [ 29 ] , charging energy is only three
times larger than the spacing @xmath .

Though Coulomb blockade oscillations have been studied in a number of
important limiting cases [ 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 ] , the problem in the case
when values of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are all of the same order
has not been theoretically addressed. Let us note that energy levels of
the quantum dots are random and obey Wigner-Dyson statistics with the
fluctuation of order of their mean [ 18 ] . Nonetheless to go as far as
possible in the analytical treatment of the problem we have to assume
that energy levels in the quantum dot are equidistant. In this chapter
we derive an analytical expression for the linear conductance, @xmath ,
in the case of spinless as well as spin- @xmath fermions.

In Section 8 we describe our model and the assumptions involved. We
write the model assuming spin- @xmath fermions. In Section 9 we consider
the linear conductance in the case of spinless fermions. We obtain an
analytical expression for the conductance and analyze its limiting
cases. In Section 10 we consider one possible application of the Section
9 results, namely tunneling through the edge states in a quantum dot
placed into a strong magnetic field. In Section 11 the linear
conductance as well as its properties in the case of spin- @xmath
fermions is considered. In Section 12 we summarize our findings.

### 8 The Model

Hamiltonian of the system in question is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here, the first term is the Hamiltonian of noninteracting electrons in
the left and right leads:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

where a continuum of states in each lead, @xmath , @xmath is assumed;
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are the energies and electron
annihilation operators in the left and right leads, respectively; @xmath
stands for the @xmath -component of spin. The chemical potentials of the
leads, @xmath , are shifted according to the bias voltage, @xmath ,
applied, Fig. 3 . We will assume that leads are in thermal equilibrium
at temperature @xmath and, thus, occupied according to the Fermi-Dirac
distribution.

The second term in Eq. ( 12 ) is the Hamiltonian of the quantum dot:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

where first term is the kinetic energy of electrons in the quantum dot:
@xmath is a discrete set of the quantum dot’s energy levels; @xmath ’s
are the annihilation operators. The second term, @xmath describes the
electron-electron interaction in the quantum dot. We adopt the simplest
model for the interaction, namely, the constant interaction model. In
this model the Coulomb interaction of the electrons depends only on the
total number of electrons in the quantum dot:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the total number of excess electrons; @xmath is the
total number of positively charged ions. The second term is the
contribution from external charges. They are supplied by the ionized
donors and the gate: @xmath , where @xmath is a function of the
capacitance matrix elements of the system. Thus, @xmath can be varied
continuously by changing gate voltage, @xmath . @xmath can be rewritten
as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the dimensionless gate voltage.

The third term in Eq. ( 12 ) is the tunneling Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are matrix elements of tunneling into the left
and right leads, respectively.

We assume that the dot is weakly coupled to the leads; that is, the
conductances of the dot-lead junctions are small: @xmath , where @xmath
is Planck’s constant. Equivalently, the widths of the quantum dot’s
energy levels contributing to the conductance, @xmath , must be small
compared to spacing between them: @xmath . This, together with @xmath
assumption, allows us to characterize the state of the dot by a set of
occupation numbers, @xmath [ 33 ] .

### 9 Linear Conductance in the Spinless Case

The model formulated above has been studied by Beenakker in the
sequential tunneling approximation [ 33 ] ; that is, conservation of
energy was assumed in each tunneling process, and cotunneling was
neglected. Therefore, to find the stationary current, kinetic equation
considerations can be applied. In the linear response regime an
analytical formula for the conductance has been obtained. In the case of
spinless fermions [ 33 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are widths of the quantum dot’s level @xmath associated with tunneling
into the left and right leads, respectively; @xmath is the equilibrium
probability that the quantum dot contains @xmath electrons; @xmath is
the occupation number of level @xmath given that the dot contains @xmath
electrons; @xmath is the Fermi-Dirac distribution; and @xmath is the
chemical potential in the leads.

The quantity @xmath in ( 18 ) is the most non-trivial one to calculate.
It is the occupation number of the level @xmath in the canonical
ensemble ( @xmath is fixed). In the limit @xmath , @xmath becomes a
Fermi-Dirac distribution with the appropriately chosen chemical
potential: @xmath , where @xmath corresponds to the energy of the last
occupied energy level at @xmath , Fig. 4 (a); @xmath corresponds to the
energy of the first empty energy level at @xmath . In the opposite limit
@xmath , the Fermi-Dirac distribution with @xmath apparently breaks
down: the occupation number of level @xmath , for example, see Fig. 4 a,
is @xmath , not @xmath as the Fermi-Dirac distribution would predict [
33 ] .

The occupation number in question is [ 33 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the equilibrium probability of the @xmath state of the
quantum dot; @xmath ; and the detailed definition of @xmath will follow.
The reason for writing this equation is to show that analytical
calculation of the occupation numbers is hardly possible for arbitrary
quantum dot’s energy level structure, @xmath .

The only way to overcome this difficulty is to assume that energy levels
in the quantum dot are equidistant. Then one can use the bosonization
technique [ 34 ] (see Appendix Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade,
Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence ) to find the exact
analytical expression for the occupation numbers in the canonical
ensemble. It was done by Denton, Muhlschlegel, and Scalapino [ 35 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath , @xmath is the energy corresponding to the highest occupied
energy level at @xmath plus @xmath , Fig. 4 (a). This quantity @xmath is
somewhat similar to the chemical potential of a dot, though, strictly
speaking, the chemical potential is not well-defined for a dot in the
canonical ensemble. The difference, @xmath , is a linear function of the
gate voltage. Therefore, by properly adjusting “zero” value of the gate
voltage it can be put to zero. Hereinafter, we assume that @xmath .

To calculate the conductance we also need to know @xmath , the
probability that the dot, in thermodynamic equilibrium with the
reservoirs, contains @xmath electrons. It can be calculated in the grand
canonical ensemble:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the grand partition function; @xmath is the
thermodynamic potential of the quantum dot. It can be expressed via free
energy of the dot’s internal degrees of freedom, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

hence,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the partition function in the canonical ensemble. In the last
expression the sum is taken over all possible states, @xmath of the
quantum dot. To calculate @xmath explicitly we need to assume that
energy levels of the dot are equidistant:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath corresponds to the equilibrium number of the excess
electrons @xmath ; @xmath is the partition function of the thermal
excitations. Now, let us substitute Eq. ( 25 ) in Eq. ( 24 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here, we have extended one limit of the sum to infinity since the Fermi
energy is the largest energy scale of the problem.

Thus, we are well-equipped to calculate the conductance in the case of
equidistant energy levels in the quantum dot at arbitrary ratio @xmath .
The widths of energy levels, @xmath and @xmath , in the quantum dot are
energy dependent, random quantities. Let us assume that quantum dot is
weakly coupled to the leads via multichannel tunnel junctions: @xmath ,
where @xmath is the number of channels; @xmath is the conductance of one
channel. Experimentally, this situation corresponds to the metallic
grain coupled to the leads via oxide tunnel barriers [ 11 ] . This setup
allows one to decrease fluctuations of the energy levels’ widths, @xmath
and @xmath , by a factor of @xmath . We also assume that the widths are
slowly changing functions of the energy, @xmath . Then, @xmath and
@xmath can be considered constants and evaluated at the chemical
potential: @xmath ; @xmath . There is a simple relation between these
widths and conductances of the corresponding junctions. In the case of
spinless fermions:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

Let us substitute Eq. ( 26 ) in Eq. ( 18 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (29)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

To take advantage of the expression for occupation numbers, Eq. ( 20 ),
we need to map the sum over @xmath onto the sum over @xmath . As
illustrated in Fig. 4 , the mapping rule depends on the total number of
excess electrons, @xmath (compare with Eq. ( 21 ) written for @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the energy of the highest occupied energy level in the
dot with @xmath excess electrons at @xmath plus @xmath . We will also
use the following identities:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath ;

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

has been chosen so that @xmath corresponds to the maximum of the
conductance peak; and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

Substituting these results in Eq. ( 29 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath ; @xmath is the classical, @xmath , limit of the conductance. We
have also used the identity: @xmath . Eq. ( 33 ) is the general
expression for the linear conductance in the spinless case for
equidistant energy levels in the quantum dot at arbitrary values of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

One can immediately prove the following properties of the conductance,
Eq. ( 33 ). First of all, @xmath , where @xmath is an integer. In the
gate voltage units, @xmath is a period of the conductance oscillations.
This property reflects symmetry with respect to adding (removing) an
electron to the quantum dot. Secondly, due to the electron-hole
symmetry, conductance is an even function of @xmath : @xmath .

The linear conductance, Eq. ( 33 ), as a function of the dimensionless
gate voltage @xmath at @xmath is plotted in Fig. 5 for different
temperatures. At low temperatures there are sharp Coulomb blockade
peaks. At high temperatures, @xmath , Coulomb blockade is lifted and
small oscillations of the conductance can be observed. These
oscillations are slightly non-sinusoidal and given by the following
asymptotic formula:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the average value of the conductance. The second term in
Eq. ( 35 ) is due to inherently non-sinusoidal nature of the conductance
oscillations, see Fig. 5 . To derive this expression one can use
Poisson’s summation formula.

To study the line shape of a separate peak let us consider the limit of
large charging energy: @xmath or, equivalently, @xmath in the
dimensionless units. In Eq. ( 33 ) only @xmath terms in the sum over
@xmath give substantial contribution to the conductance near @xmath ;
all other terms are exponentially suppressed. Besides, the sum over
@xmath at the @xmath is @xmath and, therefore, can also be neglected.
Hence, line shape of the conductance peak at @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is more instructive to rewrite this equation as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath ; @xmath is chosen so that @xmath corresponds to center of
the conductance peak. In the classical regime [ 30 ] , @xmath , line
shape of the conductance peak is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the opposite limit of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

The exact line shape of the conductance peak, Eq. ( 37 ), at @xmath is
shown in Fig. 6 . On the same figure we also plotted two conductance
peaks in the limiting cases, Eqs. ( 38 ) and ( 39 ), out of their
validity region at @xmath . Nevertheless, it is interesting that the
exact conductance peak is higher than both of the limiting cases peaks.
The peak’s height is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

Temperature dependence of the conductance peak’s height was numerically
calculated in the Ref. [ 33 ] , see Fig. 2 there.

### 10 Application to Tunneling Through Quantum Hall Edge States in a
Quantum Dot

Formulas for the linear conductance in the case of equidistant energy
levels in a dot and spinless fermions derived in Section 9 can be
applied to a number of physical problems.

Let us consider, for example, a quantum dot formed by confining a
two-dimensional electron gas by a circularly symmetric electrostatic
potential, @xmath . We assume that @xmath is zero at the origin and
takes large value at @xmath , where @xmath is the radius of the dot,
Fig. 7 (a). Let us apply a strong magnetic field, @xmath , perpendicular
to the plane of the dot. This situation corresponds to the quantum Hall
regime and was reviewed in Ref. [ 36 ] .

To solve the one-electron Schrödinger equation in this geometry it is
convenient to choose the symmetric gauge. Then, angular momentum is,
clearly, an integral of motion. In each Landau level, @xmath , states
with larger angular momentum, @xmath , are localized further from the
origin, near a circle with radius @xmath , where @xmath is the magnetic
length, @xmath is the speed of light. The presence of the confinement
potential leads to an increase in energy for the symmetric gauge
eigenstates with @xmath of order or larger than @xmath (or, @xmath of
order or larger than @xmath , see Fig. 7 (b)). For the states with
@xmath an electron is influenced by both the electric field of the
boundary, @xmath , and strong, perpendicular to the electric, magnetic
field. Thus, near the edge electron executes rapid cyclotron orbits
centered on a point that slowly drifts in the direction of @xmath , that
is, along the boundary. Thus, Quantum Hall edge states are formed, Fig.
7 (a). It is important to notice that in this closed geometry electron
system has only one edge. In this consideration we also assume that
@xmath .

For simplicity let us consider the case when only the zeroth Landau
level crosses the chemical potential, that is, there is only one type of
edge states. This corresponds to a sufficiently strong magnetic field so
that filling factor, @xmath is equal to @xmath , Fig. 7 (b).

Now, we are ready to consider transport through this type of quantum dot
in the strong magnetic field. Let us weakly couple it to two leads and
apply an infinitesimally small bias voltage between them. An electron
from the left lead can now tunnel into dot’s edge state and then tunnel
into the right lead as illustrated by dashed lines in Fig. 7 (a).

The energy spectrum of edge states can be linearized as follows

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, energy levels of the edge states are equally spaced with the
spacing [ 36 ]

  -- -- -- ------
           (42)
  -- -- -- ------

This fact makes formulas derived in Section 9 applicable to this
problem. Essential assumption here is that dispersion curve, Fig. 7 (b)
is almost linear in the range of angular momentums: @xmath , where
@xmath .

In the case at hand, spacing, @xmath is inversely proportional to the
size of a dot just like charging energy, @xmath . Hence, their ratio
does not depend on the size of a dot and is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the dielectric constant of the media around the
interface; @xmath is the fine structure constant. Therefore, in this
case oscillations of the conductance given by Eq. ( 33 ) are determined
by only one parameter @xmath .

In conclusion, let us consider the case of an arbitrary shaped quantum
dot. In this case, @xmath is just the index of an edge state and no
longer associated with the angular momentum. The phase along the
boundary for the @xmath -th edge state is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the corresponding wave vector, @xmath parametrizes the
boundary, and @xmath is its length. The phase difference between two
consecutive edge states is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath is a drift speed along the boundary. Then, the
spacing between edge states’ energy levels is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

Though the electric field @xmath at the boundary slightly changes as one
goes from one edge state to the other, this effect is small and we
neglect it. Therefore, the energy levels of the edge states are
equidistant with the spacing given by Eq. ( 46 ).

In the case of the circularly symmetric quantum dot, @xmath is constant,
and one can easily perform the integration in Eq. ( 46 ). This leads to
the previously obtained expression for the level spacing, Eq. ( 42 ).

### 11 Linear Conductance in the Spin-@xmath Case

Formula ( 18 ) for the linear conductance in the spinless case can be
easily generalized to the spin- @xmath case by counting each energy
level twice [ 33 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (47)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the occupation number of the quantum dot’s energy level
@xmath with a spin-up electron, ( @xmath ) in the canonical ensemble:
number of electrons in the dot, @xmath , is fixed.

As in the spinless case, to carry out analytical consideration we have
to assume that energy levels in the quantum dot are equally spaced.
Presence of the spin degeneracy makes the calculations more complicated.

First of all, let us find the occupation number @xmath . Let us consider
spin-up and spin-down electron subsystems. Ground state energy of the
system is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the number of excess electrons in the spin- @xmath
subsystem; @xmath is chosen even. @xmath is the total number of excess
electrons in the quantum dot; @xmath is @xmath -component of the total
electron spin. Using these identities, one can find that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

While @xmath is subjected to the thermodynamic fluctuations, @xmath is
fixed.

The occupation number in question, @xmath , is known if, in addition to
@xmath , the @xmath -component of the total spin, @xmath , is fixed. In
the case of an even number of electrons, parameter @xmath for the
spin-up electron subsystem is equal to @xmath , given @xmath , see Figs.
8 (a) and 8 (b). Occupation numbers in the spin-up subsystem at fixed
@xmath are given by Eq. ( 20 ) with the appropriately chosen parameter
@xmath : @xmath .

However, @xmath -component of the total spin, @xmath , is not fixed but
subjected to the thermodynamic fluctuations. Therefore, to find the
occupation numbers, @xmath , we have to account for all possible values
of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

is the probability that @xmath -component of the total spin of the
quantum dot is equal to @xmath . Substituting Eqs. ( 50 ) and ( 20 )
into Eq. ( 49 ) we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since number of electrons in the quantum dot is even, @xmath may take
only integer values. Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we extended limits of the sum over @xmath to infinities since the
Fermi energy is the largest energy scale in the problem. Separating
@xmath and @xmath parts of the sum, where @xmath is a positive integer,
we obtain final expression for the occupation numbers in the case of
even number of electrons:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In two limiting cases

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Analytical expression for the high-temperature limit of @xmath can be
obtained using Poisson’s summation formula.

One can easily prove the following properties of the occupation numbers
@xmath valid at arbitrary temperature:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

They are valid due to the electron-hole symmetry and similar to the
following properties of the Fermi-Dirac distribution: @xmath and @xmath
@xmath .

Similarly, one can find occupation numbers in the case of odd number of
electrons in the quantum dot, @xmath . Energy level which contains one
electron at @xmath will be referred to as @xmath level. In this case
electron-hole symmetry corresponds to @xmath transformation. Parameter
@xmath of the spin-up electron subsystem at a given @xmath is equal to
@xmath , see Figs. 8 (c) and 8 (d). Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since number of electrons in the quantum dot is odd, @xmath may take
only half-integer values. Separating odd and even parts of the sum over
@xmath , we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

Property of the electron-hole symmetry reads as follows: @xmath .

It turns out that there exists simple relation between @xmath and @xmath
occupation numbers:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

This property is the analog of @xmath one of the Fermi-Dirac
distribution. It will allow us to get rid of @xmath occupation numbers
in the final expression for the conductance.

Now we are in a position to find the probability that a dot, in
thermodynamic equilibrium with the reservoirs, contains @xmath
electrons, @xmath . Eq. ( 24 ) written for the spinless case is still
applicable if we keep in mind that energy levels in the quantum dot are
doubly degenerate. Partition function of the dot’s internal degrees of
freedom in the canonical ensemble is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (58)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

is the partition function of the spin-up electron subsystem in the
canonical ensemble. Mathematically, expression for @xmath is identical
to the one for @xmath in the spinless case. Thus, one can directly apply
the result obtained previously, Eq. ( 25 ):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the equilibrium number of electrons in the spin-up
subsystem. Similar result is valid for the partition function of the
spin-down electron subsystem, @xmath . Substituting these results in
Eq. ( 58 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The exponent can be simplified as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in the second equality we took advantage of the delta symbol. Sum
in the last line is taken over integer values of @xmath if @xmath is
even or half-integer values of @xmath if @xmath is odd. Limits of the
sum over @xmath can be extended to infinities since we assume that
@xmath . According to Eq. ( 24 ) probability that quantum dot, in
thermodynamic equilibrium with the reservoirs, contains @xmath electrons
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath ; and we used the fact that @xmath and @xmath have the same
parity since @xmath is chosen even. Therefore, sums over @xmath and
@xmath are taken over @xmath and @xmath values, respectively. At this
point in the calculation we need to specify whether the total number of
electrons in the dot is even or odd:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now we are prepared to calculate the conductance, Eq. ( 47 ), in the
case of the equidistant double degenerate energy levels in the dot at an
arbitrary @xmath and @xmath ratios. Similarly to the consideration in
the spinless case we assume that quantum dot is weakly coupled to the
leads via multichannel tunnel junctions, and tunneling widths of the
energy levels in the quantum dot, @xmath and @xmath , are slowly
changing functions of the energy, @xmath .

Then, these tunneling widths can be considered constants and evaluated
at the chemical potential: @xmath ; @xmath . Furthermore, they can be
expressed via conductances of the corresponding junctions:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

There is an additional factor of @xmath here compared to the spinless
case, Eq. ( 28 ), due to the double degeneracy of each energy level in
the quantum dot. First of all, let us break the sum over @xmath in Eq. (
47 ) in two parts: @xmath and @xmath , and apply Eqs. ( 63 ) and ( 61 ):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

To take advantage of the occupation numbers we derived, Eqs. ( 51 ) and
( 56 ), we need to map each of the sums over @xmath onto the sum over
@xmath . The first sum over @xmath in Eq. ( 64 ) is taken at even number
of excess electrons, see Figs. 9 (a) and 9 (b), hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Remember that by properly choosing “zero” of the gate voltage we put
@xmath . The second sum over @xmath is taken at odd number of excess
electrons, see Figs. 9 (a) and 9 (c), therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will also use the following identities:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath ;

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

is the dimensionless gate voltage, @xmath corresponds to a position of
the conductance peak; and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting these results in Eq. ( 64 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (66)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath is the high-temperature, @xmath , limit of the conductance. To
eliminate @xmath from the final expression we used useful property of
the occupation numbers given by Eq. ( 57 ).

Formula ( 66 ) is the main result of this chapter. It is the analytical
expression for the linear conductance in the spin- @xmath case for
equidistant energy levels in the quantum dot. One can use Eq. ( 66 ) to
plot Coulomb blockade oscillations of the conductance as a function of
the dimensionless gate voltage, @xmath , at arbitrary values of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Particularly, when all energy scales are of the same
order: @xmath , numerical calculation is a breeze, Fig. 10 .

One can immediately notice the following properties of the linear
conductance. First of all, @xmath , where @xmath is an integer. In other
words, @xmath is the conductance period in the gate voltage units. This
property reflects symmetry with respect to adding (removing) two
electrons to (from) the quantum dot. Secondly, conductance is a
symmetric function with respect to the center of a valley, @xmath ,
where @xmath is an integer. That is, @xmath . This is a reflection of
the electron-hole symmetry. These properties of the conductance
oscillations are not generic. They are valid due to the assumption of
equally spaced energy levels in a quantum dot.

At high temperatures, @xmath , conductance peaks overlap and their
maximums become almost equidistant, Fig. 10 . As a result, instead of
separate peaks, the conductance in this limit has oscillatory behavior.

Let us find temperature dependence of the conductance in the valleys. In
the sequential tunneling approximation the conductance in the valleys
decays exponentially as @xmath , Fig. 11 . At low temperature number of
electrons in a dot in the valleys is almost quantized. We will call the
valley “odd” (“even”) if it corresponds to odd (even) number of
electrons in the dot. We find that at any temperature the conductance in
the odd valley is larger than that in the even one, Fig. 11 . This
feature is robust with respect to the distribution of energy levels in a
quantum dot.

However, it is important to mention that at low temperatures, @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

cotunneling [ 9 ] will dominate sequential tunneling contribution to the
conductance in the valleys. Therefore, temperature dependence of the
conductance in the valleys, Fig. 11 , is valid only for the temperatures
@xmath .

Let us analyze the limit of large charging energy: @xmath or,
equivalently, @xmath in the dimensionless units. In this limit, two
adjacent peaks in the conductance have exponentially small, @xmath ,
overlap with each other. Thus, it makes perfect sense to study the line
shape of a separate peak. Let us determine line shape of the conductance
peak near @xmath . In the numerator of Eq. ( 66 ) only the @xmath term
in the sum over @xmath survives; moreover, at @xmath second term in
square brackets is @xmath . In the denominator, only the @xmath terms
matter. Hence, the line shape of the conductance peak near @xmath at
arbitrary @xmath ratio is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we used the following identity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, @xmath corresponds to @xmath . In the classical regime, @xmath
, the line shape of the conductance peak is given by [ 30 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

Formally, this equation is identical to that of the spinless case, Eq. (
38 ). Nonetheless, the values of @xmath are different in these two cases
by a factor of @xmath . This is due to spin degeneracy of each energy
level in the spin- @xmath case, compare Eqs. ( 28 ) and ( 63 ). In the
limit of @xmath [ 31 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

This peak has its maximum at

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

and is symmetric with respect to this value: @xmath . The exact line
shape of the conductance peak, Eq. ( 70 ), at @xmath and two limiting
cases conductance peaks, Eqs. ( 71 ) and ( 72 ), plotted out of their
validity region at @xmath are shown in Fig. 12 . As in the spinless
case, the exact conductance peak is higher than both of the limiting
cases peaks.

The position of the peak’s maximum, @xmath , is shifted to the left from
its high temperature limit, @xmath . It is determined by the equation
for @xmath : @xmath , where @xmath is given by Eq. ( 70 ). The
dimensionless position of the peak’s maximum, @xmath , as a function of
the temperature, @xmath , is numerically plotted in Fig. 13 .

The conductance peak height is @xmath . In the limiting cases:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

Peak’s height as a function of the temperature, @xmath , can be plotted
numerically, Fig. 14 .

### 12 Conclusions

We have studied Coulomb blockade oscillations of the linear conductance
through a quantum dot weakly coupled to the leads via multichannel
tunnel junctions in the sequential tunneling approximation. To obtain
analytical results we have assumed that the energy levels in the dot are
equally spaced. The electron-electron interaction in a quantum dot has
been described by the constant interaction model; though, thermal
excitations with all possible spins have been taken into account.

The linear conductance in the spinless case is given by Eq. ( 33 ). It
is valid at arbitrary values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The line
shape of an individual conductance peak at arbitrary ratio @xmath is
given by Eq. ( 37 ). Exact conductance peak is higher than both of the
limiting cases peaks at any gate voltage as is illustrated in Fig 6 . An
analytical expression for the height of the conductance peak at any
ratio @xmath is obtained, Eq. ( 40 ).

In Section 10 we applied the spinless case theory result to the problem
of the transport via a dot in the quantum Hall regime. Energy levels in
a dot in this case are equidistant with the spacing given by Eq. ( 46 ).

Linear conductance in the case of spin- @xmath electrons at arbitrary
values of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is given by Eq. ( 66 ). In
particular, this equation allows one to plot the conductance
oscillations in the regime when the charging energy, level spacing in
the dot, and the temperature are all of the same order, Fig. 10 . We
find that the period of Coulomb blockade oscillations is doubled
compared to the model with a continuous electronic spectrum in the dot.
Equation ( 66 ) is the main result of the chapter.

We also find that conductance in the odd valley is larger than that in
the even one at any temperature, Fig. 11 . The difference between
conductances has the largest value at @xmath (at @xmath ). The sign of
the difference is the same as for the quantum dot in the Kondo regime [
9 ] . Kondo effect takes place at very low temperatures, @xmath , where
@xmath is the Kondo temperature, and leads to the logarithmic
enhancement of the conductance in the odd valleys [ 12 ] . Our
consideration shows that even-odd asymmetry exists at much higher
temperatures.

Line shape of the conductance peak is given by Eq. ( 70 ). As in the
spinless case, the conductance peak is higher than both of the limiting
cases peaks at any gate voltage, Fig 12 . As we increase the temperature
peaks’ maximums shift and become more equidistant, Fig 13 . The peak’s
height as a function of the temperature is calculated numerically and
plotted in Fig. 14 .

Though we have found physical system which has equidistant energy levels
in the spinless case, see Section 10 , we are not aware of any such
system in the spin- @xmath case. In the case of a chaotic quantum dot
Wigner-Dyson model gives a fairly good approximation for the
distribution of the energy levels of the dot. If we had assumed
Wigner-Dyson distribution of the quantum dot’s energy levels then we
would have had to give up the hope of finding a solution. It goes back
to the very difficult problem of finding occupation numbers of the dot’s
energy levels in the canonical ensemble. The only way to solve it is to
assume that energy levels in the quantum dot are equally spaced. Then
one can use the bosonization technique to find the occupation numbers.
Assumption of the equidistant energy levels is in line with the level
repulsion property of the Wigner-Dyson distribution. Therefore, the
analytical consideration of this reasonably simplified model, in our
opinion, is a significant step forward in the solution of the general
problem.

Though we do not expect our quantitative results to precisely describe a
quantum dot with random energy levels, they certainly give correct order
of magnitude for the conductance oscillations and their generic
features.

## Chapter \thechapter Coulomb Blockade Peak Spacings: Interplay of Spin
and Dot-Lead Coupling

### 13 Overview

For Coulomb blockade peaks in the linear conductance of a quantum dot,
we study the correction to the spacing between the peaks due to dot-lead
coupling. This coupling can affect measurements in which Coulomb
blockade phenomena are used as a tool to probe the energy level
structure of quantum dots. The electron-electron interactions in the
quantum dot are described by the constant exchange and interaction (CEI)
model while the single-particle properties are described by random
matrix theory. We find analytic expressions for both the average and rms
mesoscopic fluctuation of the correction. For a realistic value of the
exchange interaction constant @xmath , the ensemble average correction
to the peak spacing is two to three times smaller than that at @xmath .
As a function of @xmath , the average correction to the peak spacing for
an even valley decreases monotonically, nonetheless staying positive.
The rms fluctuation is of the same order as the average and weakly
depends on @xmath . For a small fraction of quantum dots in the
ensemble, therefore, the correction to the peak spacing for the even
valley is negative. The correction to the spacing in the odd valleys is
opposite in sign to that in the even valleys and equal in magnitude.
These results are robust with respect to choice of the random matrix
ensemble or change in parameters such as charging energy, mean level
spacing, or temperature.

The work in this chapter was done in collaboration with Harold U.
Baranger.

### 14 Introduction

Progress in nanoscale fabrication techniques has made possible not only
the creation of more sophisticated devices but also greater control over
their properties. Electron systems confined to small regions – quantum
dots (QD) – and especially their transport properties have been studied
extensively for the last decade [ 5 , 11 ] . One of the most popular
devices is a lateral quantum dot, formed by depleting the
two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at the interface of a semiconductor
heterostructure. By appropriately tuning negative potentials on the
metal surface gates, one can control the QD size, the number of
electrons @xmath it contains, as well as the tunnel barrier heights
between the QD and the large 2DEG regions, which act as leads. Applying
bias voltage @xmath between these leads allows one to study transport
properties of a single electron transistor (SET), Fig. 15 (a) [ 5 ] .

We study properties of the conductance @xmath through a QD in the linear
response regime. We assume that the dot is weakly coupled to the leads:
@xmath , where @xmath are the conductances of the dot-lead tunnel
barriers, @xmath is the elementary charge, and @xmath is Planck’s
constant.

To tunnel onto the quantum dot, an electron in the left lead has to
overcome a charging energy @xmath , where @xmath is the capacitance of
the QD, a phenomenon called the Coulomb blockade. However, if we apply
voltage @xmath to an additional back-gate capacitively coupled to the
QD, see Fig. 15 (a), the Coulomb blockade can be lifted. Indeed, by
changing @xmath one can change the electrostatics so that energies of
the quantum dot with @xmath and @xmath electrons become equal, and so an
electron can freely jump from the left lead onto the QD and then out to
the right lead. Thus, a current event has occurred, and a peak in the
conductance corresponding to that back-gate voltage, @xmath , is
observed. By sweeping the back-gate voltage, a series of peaks is
observed, Fig. 15 (b).

In this chapter we calculate the correction to the spacing between
Coulomb blockade peaks due to finite dot-lead tunnel coupling. In recent
years, low-temperature Coulomb blockade experiments have been repeatedly
used to probe the energy level structure of quantum dots [ 5 , 11 , 10 ]
. The dot-lead tunnel coupling discussed here may influence such a
measurement – the presence of leads may change what one sees – and so an
understanding of coupling effects is needed. One dramatic consequence is
the Kondo effect in quantum dots [ 8 , 37 , 9 ] . Here we assume that
@xmath , where @xmath is the Kondo temperature, and, therefore, do not
consider Kondo physics, focusing instead on less dramatic effects that,
however, survive to higher temperature.

We study an ensemble of chaotic ballistic (or chaotic disordered)
quantum dots with large dimensionless conductance, @xmath . The
dimensionless conductance is defined as the ratio of the Thouless energy
@xmath to the mean level spacing @xmath : @xmath [ 10 ] . For isolated
quantum dots with large dimensionless conductance, the distribution of
@xmath energy levels @xmath near the Fermi level and the corresponding
wave functions @xmath can be approximated by random matrix theory (RMT)
[ 38 , 10 , 18 ] . As will be evident from what follows, the leading
contribution to the results obtained here comes from @xmath energy
levels near the Fermi level; thus, if @xmath the statistics of these
@xmath levels can be described by RMT. We furthermore neglect the
spin-orbit interaction and, therefore, consider only the Gaussian
orthogonal (GOE) and Gaussian unitary (GUE) ensembles of random
matrices.

The microscopic theory of electron-electron interactions in a quantum
dot with large dimensionless conductance brings about a remarkable
result [ 19 , 12 ] . To leading order, the interaction Hamiltonian
depends only on the squares of the following two operators: (i) the
total electron number operator @xmath where @xmath are the electron
annihilation operators and @xmath labels spin, and (ii) the total spin
operator @xmath where @xmath are the Pauli matrices. The leading order
part of the Hamiltonian reads [ 19 , 12 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the redefined value of the charging energy [ 19 , 7 ]
and @xmath is the exchange interaction constant. Higher order
corrections are of order @xmath [ 19 , 12 , 20 , 7 ] . The coupling
constants in ( 75 ) are invariant with respect to different realizations
of the quantum dot potential. This “universal” Hamiltonian is also
invariant under arbitrary rotation of the basis and, therefore,
compatible with RMT. In principal, the operator of interactions in the
Cooper channel can appear in the “universal” Hamiltonian for the GOE
case. However, if the quantum dot is in the normal state at @xmath ,
then the corresponding coupling constant is positive and is renormalized
to a very small value [ 19 , 39 ] . The “universal” part of the
Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( 75 ) is called the constant exchange and
interaction (CEI) model [ 20 , 7 ] .

The total Hamiltonian of the quantum dot in the @xmath limit thus has
two parts, the single-particle RMT Hamiltonian and the CEI model
describing the interactions. The capacitive QD-backgate coupling
generates an additional term which is linear in the number of electrons:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the dimensionless back-gate voltage and @xmath is the
QD-backgate capacitance.

The CEI model contains an additional exchange interaction term as
compared to the conventional constant interaction model (CI model) [ 40
, 41 , 5 ] . Exchange is important as @xmath is of the same order as
@xmath , the mean single-particle level spacing. Indeed, in the
realistic case of a 2DEG in a GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure with gas
parameter @xmath , the static random phase approximation gives @xmath [
42 ] . Therefore, as we sweep the back-gate voltage, adding electrons to
the quantum dot, the conventional up-down filling sequence may be
violated [ 21 , 22 ] . Indeed, energy level spacings do fluctuate: If
for an even number of electrons @xmath in the QD the corresponding
spacing, @xmath , is less than @xmath , then it becomes energetically
favorable to promote an electron to the next orbital instead of putting
it in the same one; thus, a triplet state ( @xmath ) is formed. Higher
spin states are possible as well. For @xmath the probability of forming
a higher spin ground state is @xmath and @xmath for the GOE and GUE,
respectively. The lower the electron density in the QD, the larger
@xmath and, consequently, the larger the exchange interaction constant
@xmath .

The back-gate voltage corresponding to the conductance peak maximum
@xmath is found by equating the energy for @xmath electrons in the dot
with that for @xmath electrons: ¹ ¹ 1 More precisely, the conductance
peak has its maximum at the gate voltage corresponding to the maximum of
the total amplitude of the tunneling through many energy levels in a QD:
@xmath , see Ref. [ 43 ] . Therefore, in addition to the dominant
resonant term which gives the charge degeneracy point result for the
peak maximum [Eq. ( 77 )], the total tunneling amplitude includes
elastic cotunneling terms (we assume that @xmath ) with random phases.
However, one can show (see Ref. [ 43 ] for details) that these
cotunneling terms give negligible fluctuating correction to the position
of the peak maximum with @xmath and @xmath . The coefficient in the last
equation corresponds to the CI model.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

As we are interested in the effect of dot-lead coupling on these peak
positions, it is natural to expand the energies perturbatively in this
coupling: @xmath . One possible virtual process contributing to @xmath
is shown in Fig. 16 . Electron occupations of the QD “to the left” and
“to the right” of the conductance peak [see Fig. 15 (b)] are different;
hence, the corrections @xmath to the energies are different. Therefore,
the position of the peak maximum acquires corrections as well, @xmath ,
as does the spacing between two adjacent peaks.

This physical scenario has been considered by Kaminski and Glazman with
the interactions treated in the CI model, i.e. neglecting exchange [ 43
] . The ensemble averaged change in the spacing and its rms due to
mesoscopic fluctuations were calculated. On average, “even” spacings
(that is, spacings corresponding to an even number of electrons in the
valley) increase, while “odd” spacings decrease (by the same amount) [
43 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the dimensionless spacing normalized by @xmath and
@xmath are the dimensionless dot-lead conductances.

In this chapter we calculate the same quantities but with the
electron-electron interactions in the QD described by the more realistic
CEI model. We find that the average change in the spacing between
conductance peaks is significantly less than that predicted by the CI
model. However, the fluctuations are of the same order. In contrast to
the CI result [ 43 ] , for large enough @xmath , we find that “even”
spacings do not necessarily increase (likewise, “odd” spacings do not
necessarily decrease).

The chapter is organized as follows. In Section 15 we write down the
total Hamiltonian of the system and find the condition for the tunneling
Hamiltonian to be considered as a perturbation. In Section 16 we
describe the approach and make symmetry remarks. In Section 17 we
perform a detailed calculation of the correction to the spacing between
Coulomb blockade peaks for the @xmath spin sequence. In Section 18 we
find the ensemble averaged correction to the peak spacing. The rms of
the fluctuations of the correction to the peak spacing is calculated in
Section 19 . In Section 20 we summarize our findings and discuss their
relevance to the available experimental data [ 44 , 45 ] .

### 15 The Hamiltonian

The Hamiltonian of the system in Fig. 15 (a) consists of the QD
Hamiltonian [Eq. ( 76 )], the leads Hamiltonian, and the tunneling
Hamiltonian accounting for the dot-lead coupling:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

The leads Hamiltonian can be written as follows

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the one-particle energies in the left and
right leads, respectively, measured with respect to the chemical
potential (see Fig. 16 ). We assume that the leads are large; therefore
we (i) neglect electron-electron interactions in the leads and (ii)
assume a continuum of states in each lead. The tunneling Hamiltonian is
[ 46 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the tunneling matrix elements.

We assume that @xmath and, therefore, neglect excited states of the QD
concentrating on ground state properties only. We also assume that the
QD is weakly coupled to the leads, treating the tunneling Hamiltonian as
a perturbation. Corrections to the position of the peak maximum can be
expressed in terms of corrections to the ground state energies of the QD
via Eq. ( 77 ). The perturbation series for these corrections contains
only even powers as @xmath is off-diagonal in the eigenbasis of @xmath .
The @xmath correction to the position of the peak is roughly

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, finite-order perturbation theory is applicable if [ 43 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

To loosen this restriction one should deploy a renormalization group
technique which, however, is beyond the scope of this chapter [ 43 , 47
, 48 , 49 ] .

### 16 Plan of the Calculation

As the exchange interaction constant @xmath becomes larger, more values
of the QD spin @xmath become accessible. The structure of the
corrections to the ground state energies depends on the total QD spin
@xmath , and this structure becomes very complicated for large values of
the spin @xmath . Fortunately, for the realistic case @xmath , the
probability of spin values higher than @xmath in an “odd” valley is
small: @xmath for the GUE. Hence, we can safely assume that in the “odd”
valley the spin is always equal to @xmath . In the “even” valley, one
has to allow both @xmath and @xmath states.

The structure of the expression for the spacing between peaks depends on
the allowed spin sequences. For an “even” valley there are only two
possible spin sequences:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the number in the middle is the spin in the “even” valley, while
the numbers to the left and right are spin values in the adjacent
valleys, Fig. 15 (b). For an “odd” valley there are four possibilities:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

To obtain correct expressions for the average spacing between peaks, one
should weight these sequences with the appropriate probability of
occurrence.

Before proceeding with the calculations, we note several general
properties. First, ensemble averaged corrections to the “odd” and “even”
spacings are of the same magnitude and opposite sign, Fig. 15 (b).
Second, the mesoscopic fluctuations of both corrections are equal.
Indeed, the shift in position of an “even-odd” ( @xmath ) peak maximum,
Fig. 15 (b), is determined by the interplay between the @xmath and
@xmath spin sequences. Likewise, the shift of the “odd-even” ( @xmath )
peak is determined by the @xmath and @xmath spin sequences. Now if we
sweep the back-gate voltage in the opposite direction and write the same
peak as @xmath , then the corresponding spin sequences are exactly the
same as they were in the first case: @xmath and @xmath . From this
symmetry argument one can conclude that (i) the ensemble averaged shifts
of the “even-odd” and “odd-even” peaks are of the same magnitude and in
the opposite directions [ 43 ] and (ii) the mesoscopic fluctuations of
both shifts are equal.

Thus, to simplify the calculations we study only the “even” spacing
case. This corresponds to the two spin sequences given in Eq. ( 84 ).
First, we calculate corrections to the spacing between peaks for both
spin sequences. A complete calculation for the doublet-triplet-doublet
spin sequence is in the next section. Second, we elaborate on how to put
these spacings together in the final expression for an “even” spacing.
Finally, we calculate GOE and GUE ensemble averaged corrections to the
spacing and the rms fluctuations.

### 17 Doublet-Triplet-Doublet Spin Sequence: Calculation of the Spacing
Between Peaks

Let us find the correction to the spacing between peaks for a
doublet-triplet-doublet spin sequence. The corresponding electron
occupation of the quantum dot in three consecutive valleys with @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath electrons is shown in Fig. 17 .

For the isolated QD the position of the @xmath conductance peak maximum
is determined by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the ground state energies of dot Hamiltonian
[Eq. ( 76 )]. The corrections due to dot-lead tunneling are different
for the doublet and triplet states. The resultant shift in peak position
is given by [ 43 ]

  -- -- -- ------
           (87)
  -- -- -- ------

Note that for the second-order correction to the position, the ground
state energies are taken at the gate voltage obtained in the
zeroth-order calculation, Eq. ( 86 ).

Analogous equations hold for the @xmath conductance peak. The spacing
between these two conductance peaks is then defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 17.1 Zeroth Order: Isolated Quantum Dot

For the doublet-triplet @xmath sequence Eq. ( 86 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the last temperature dependent term is the entropic correction to
the condition of equal energies [ 31 ] . For the position of the @xmath
peak maximum we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus the spacing between peaks in zeroth order is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath (see Fig. 17 ). Similarly, for the
doublet-singlet-doublet spin sequence the spacing is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that in both cases @xmath depends only on the spacing @xmath .

#### 17.2 Second Order: Contribution From Virtual Processes

Let us consider in detail the second-order correction to the ground
state energy of the triplet for subsequent use in ( 87 ):

  -- -- -- ------
           (93)
  -- -- -- ------

where the sum is over all possible virtual states. @xmath and @xmath are
the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of @xmath , Eq. ( 76 ).

Different terms in Eq. ( 93 ) have different structure depending on the
type of virtual state involved; six possibilities are shown in Fig. 18 .
To take into account all virtual processes, we sum over all energy
levels in the QD and integrate over states in each lead. To simplify the
calculation even further, we assume (just for a moment) that @xmath so
that the Fermi distribution in the leads is a step function. Later we
will see how @xmath reappears as a lower cutoff within a logarithm.

Following the order of terms in Fig. 18 , the second-order correction to
the triplet ground state energy is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (94)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the spin of the QD in the virtual state. One can easily
find @xmath for the first four processes, Figs. 18 (a)-(d), and so
calculate the denominators for the first four terms in ( 94 ): the
values are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively. In the
last two cases, Figs. 18 (e)-(f), the QD spin in the virtual state can
take two values, @xmath or @xmath ; it does so with the following
probabilities

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

The corresponding contributions to the energy correction must be
weighted accordingly. In addition, the energy difference in the
denominators depends on @xmath ; to account for this dependence, we
introduce an additional function

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

appearing in the denominators of the fifth and sixth terms in ( 94 ).

Let us integrate over the continuous energy levels in the lead. The sum
can be replaced by an integral, @xmath , where @xmath is the density of
states in the left lead. Taking the dot-lead contacts to be point-like,
the tunneling matrix elements @xmath depend on the momentum in the lead
@xmath only weakly; hence, @xmath . In addition, as the leads are formed
from 2DEG, their density of states is roughly independent of energy. We
assume that it is constant in the energy band of @xmath near the Fermi
surface. Then the result of integrating over the energy spectrum in the
lead (in schematic form) for the first term in Eq. ( 94 ) is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

This expression diverges, but when we calculate an observable , e.g. the
shift in the position of the peak maximum [Eq. ( 87 )], we encounter the
energy difference between corrections to the triplet and doublet states.
The result for the shift is, therefore, finite:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

In a similar fashion one can calculate the second-order correction to
the ground state energy of the doublet. The difference of these energies
at the gate voltage corresponding to the peak maximum in zeroth order
[Eq. ( 89 )], needed in Eq. ( 87 ), then follows. There is one resonant
term, proportional to @xmath , in which the lower cutoff @xmath appears
because of the entropic term in Eq. ( 89 ). Alternatively, @xmath would
appear as the natural cutoff for the resonant term upon reintroduction
of the Fermi-Dirac distribution for the occupation numbers in the leads.

For a point-like dot-lead contact, the tunneling matrix element is
proportional to the value of the electron wave function in the QD at the
point of contact: @xmath , where @xmath or @xmath . Here, we neglect the
fluctuations of the electron wave function in the large lead. Thus, the
following identity is valid

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the average in the denominator is taken over the statistical
ensemble. Note that by taking the ensemble average of both sides of ( 99
), one arrives at the standard golden rule expression for the
dimensionless conductance.

In our calculations we take advantage of the fact that @xmath and
neglect terms that are of order @xmath . Sums like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

are split using @xmath , and so the last term, which is @xmath , is
dropped. Likewise, expressions like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

are of order @xmath and so neglected.

Thus, for the second order correction to the position of the peak
maximum, we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (102)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath because the total spin of the QD with @xmath electrons is
equal to 1.

In a similar fashion one can find the shift in the position of the other
peak maximum, @xmath . Then, according to ( 88 ), the difference of
these two shifts yields the second-order correction to the spacing for
the doublet-triplet-doublet spin sequence:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (103)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

A potential complication is that the addition of two electrons to the
quantum dot ( @xmath ) may scramble the energy levels and wave functions
of the QD [ 50 , 51 , 7 ] . Since the number of added electrons is
small, we assume that the same realization of the Hamiltonian, Eq. ( 79
), is valid in all three valleys [ 52 , 53 ] .

For the second-order correction to the spacing for the
doublet-singlet-doublet spin sequence we similarly obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (104)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath because the total spin of the QD with @xmath electrons is
equal to @xmath in this case.

Unlike the zeroth-order spacings, the second-order corrections are
functions of many energy level spacings as well as the wave functions at
the dot-lead contact points: @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
are the energy level spacings in the QD normalized by the mean level
spacing @xmath (see Fig. 17 ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expressions for @xmath suggest that the main contribution to their
fluctuation comes from the fluctuation of the energy level @xmath and
the wave functions @xmath . The other spacings, @xmath and @xmath ,
always appear within a logarithm; therefore, their contribution to the
fluctuation of @xmath is small. With good accuracy, one can replace
these levels by their mean value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

Converting to dimensionless units, we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (108)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (109)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . Here, the upper limit in two of the sums is infinity
because the Fermi energy is the largest energy scale.

In summary, the total spacing is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the first term is given by Eqs. ( 91 ) and ( 92 ) and the second
by ( 107 )-( 109 ). The spin of the QD in the even valley, @xmath , can
take two values, @xmath or @xmath , depending on the spacing @xmath .

### 18 Ensemble Averaged Correction to the Peak Spacing

The average and rms correction to the peak spacing can now be found by
using the known distribution of the single-particle quantities @xmath
and @xmath . In what follows, @xmath denotes the average over the wave
functions, @xmath denotes the full average over both wave functions and
energy levels, and @xmath is the distribution of the spacing @xmath .
Since @xmath , @xmath does not depend on @xmath , and the average
‘‘even’’ spacing is ² ² 2 One may think that an additional term due to
shift in the border @xmath between singlet and triplet states should be
present in this equation as well. However, one can show that the
contribution of this term to @xmath (as well as to its rms) is small.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (111)
              @xmath   @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Using the asymptotic formulas

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath in the expressions for @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

valid for @xmath . By carrying out the integration over the distribution
of the spacing @xmath , the final expression is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (115)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath is the probability of
obtaining a singlet ground state while @xmath is the average value of
@xmath given that the ground state is a singlet.

For the CI model, @xmath and, hence, @xmath . In this limit, then, the
ensemble averaged correction to the spacing is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

in agreement with previous work [ 43 ] . The magnitude here is
approximately @xmath @xmath @xmath in units of the mean level spacing.

It is convenient to relate the average change in spacing at non-zero
@xmath to that at @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (117)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The dependence of @xmath on @xmath is fully determined by the parameter
@xmath and the choice of random matrix ensemble.

Figs. 19 and 20 show the results in the GUE ensemble for @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and Fig. 21 shows those for the GOE ensemble at
@xmath . In evaluating these expressions, we use the Wigner surmise
distributions for @xmath , which allow an analytic evaluation of @xmath
and @xmath . As @xmath increases, the average correction to the peak
spacing decreases monotonically in all three cases. (Note, however, that
our results are not completely trustworthy when @xmath because in this
regime higher spin states should be taken into account.) Since @xmath
depends on @xmath and @xmath only logarithmically, the qualitative
behavior of @xmath is very robust with respect to changes in charging
energy, mean level spacing, or temperature.

Similarly the dependence of @xmath on @xmath at @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

Fig. 22 shows results in the GUE case for several values of @xmath .
Thus for the realistic value @xmath , the CEI model gives an average
correction to the peak spacing which is two to three times smaller than
the CI model.

### 19 RMS of The Correction to Peak Spacing due to Mesoscopic
Fluctuations

Mesoscopic fluctuations of the correction to the peak spacing are
characterized by the variance of @xmath . It is convenient to separate
the average over the wave functions from that over the spacing @xmath ,
writing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the contribution due to wave function fluctuations and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the contribution due to fluctuation of the spacing @xmath .

We start by considering the fluctuations of the wave functions. As the
number of electrons in the dot is large, the distance between the left
and right dot-lead contacts is large, @xmath where @xmath is the Fermi
wavelength. Therefore, the wave functions at @xmath and @xmath are
uncorrelated [ 54 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath and @xmath . The fluctuation of @xmath can then be
written entirely in terms of the properties of a single lead:

  -- -- -- -------
           (124)
  -- -- -- -------

The cross terms here disappear because, according to RMT, wave functions
of different energy levels are uncorrelated even at the same point in
space,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) for the GOE (GUE) case. In fact, only the @xmath
and @xmath terms contribute, as one can see by using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

valid for @xmath . Integrating ( 124 ) over the distribution of @xmath
according to Eq. ( 121 ) (keeping in mind @xmath ), we obtain

  -- -- -- -------
           (127)
  -- -- -- -------

In the contribution to the variance due to fluctuation of the level
spacing @xmath , Eq. ( 122 ), @xmath can be taken from the previous
section. Since the average eliminates the dependence on the lead @xmath
, we have immediately

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath are given by Eq. ( 114 ). Using these
expressions in Eq. ( 122 ), we obtain

  -- -- -- -------
           (129)
  -- -- -- -------

Explicit expressions for the coefficients are given below once we reach
the final result.

The dependence on @xmath and @xmath of the two contributions to the
variance is different. In particular, the contribution due to
fluctuations of the wave functions [Eq. ( 127 )] is proportional to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term has the same form as the contribution ( 129 ) from
fluctuations of @xmath . It is convenient to write the total variance as
a sum of symmetric and antisymmetric parts. Our final result for the
variance is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (132)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with the coefficients @xmath and @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (134)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (135)
     @xmath   @xmath                     (136)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (137)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The constant @xmath introduced in Eq. ( 134 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the CI model, @xmath and @xmath ; hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term is due to fluctuation of the wave functions at the
dot-lead contacts, and the second term comes from the fluctuation of the
level spacing @xmath . The presence of the second term was missed in
previous work [see Eq. (44b) in Ref. [ 43 ] ]. If @xmath , the first
term vanishes; nonetheless, due to the second term the variance is
always finite.

Let us consider a realistic special case of symmetric tunnel barriers,
@xmath [ 44 ] . Then the asymmetric contribution vanishes, and the rms
fluctuation of the correction to the peak spacing normalized by the
average correction at @xmath [Eq. ( 116 )] is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

Fig. 23 shows this quantity plotted as a function of @xmath for both GOE
and GUE. Notice that (i) the rms is of the same order as the average,
and (ii) its magnitude weakly depends on @xmath . To show the magnitude
of the fluctuations in the correction relative to its average value, we
plot two additional curves in both Fig. 19 and Fig. 20 , namely @xmath .
We find that at the realistic value @xmath , the correction to the even
peak spacing is negative for a small fraction of the quantum dots in the
ensemble.

### 20 Conclusions

In this chapter we studied corrections to the spacings between Coulomb
blockade conductance peaks due to finite dot-lead tunneling couplings.
We considered both GOE and GUE random matrix ensembles of 2D quantum
dots with the electron-electron interactions being described by the CEI
model. We assumed @xmath . The @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath spin states
of the QD were accounted for, thus limiting the applicability of our
results to @xmath .

The ensemble averaged correction in even valleys is given in Eq. ( 115
). The average correction decreases monotonically (always staying
positive, however) as the exchange interaction constant @xmath increases
(Figs. 19 - 21 ). The behavior found is very robust with respect to the
choice of RMT ensemble or change in charging energy, mean level spacing,
or temperature. Our results obtained in second-order perturbation theory
in the tunneling Hamiltonian are somewhat similar to the zeroth-order
results [ 20 , 7 ] in that the exchange interaction reduces even-odd
asymmetry of the spacings between peaks. While the average correction to
the even spacing is positive, that to the odd peak spacing is negative
and of equal magnitude.

The fluctuations of the correction to the spacing between Coulomb
blockade peaks mainly come from the mesoscopic fluctuations of the wave
functions and energy level spacing @xmath in the QD. The rms fluctuation
of this correction is given by Eqs. ( 131 )-( 138 ). It is of the same
order as the average value of the correction (Figs. 19 and 20 ) and
weakly depends on @xmath (Fig. 23 ). Therefore, for a small subset of
ensemble realizations, the correction to the peak spacing at the
realistic value of @xmath is of the opposite sign. The rms fluctuation
of the correction for an odd valley is the same as that for an even one.

We are aware of two experiments directly relevant to the results here.
First, in the experiment by Chang and co-workers [ 45 ] , the
corrections to the even and odd peak spacings due to finite dot-lead
tunnel couplings were measured. It was found that the even (odd) peak
spacing increases (decreases) as the tunnel couplings are increased.
This is in qualitative agreement with the theory, see Eq. ( 115 ). The
magnitude of the effect was measured at different values of the gas
parameter @xmath (and, hence @xmath ) as well. Unfortunately, because
the effect is small and the experimentalists did not focus on this
issue, one can not from this work draw a quantitative conclusion about
the behavior of the correction to the peak spacing as a function of
@xmath .

Second, in the experiment by Maurer and co-workers [ 44 ] , the
fluctuations in the spacing between Coulomb blockade peaks were measured
as a function of the dot-lead couplings with @xmath . Therefore, only
the symmetric part [Eq. ( 132 )] would contribute to the total variance.
Ref. [ 44 ] reported results for two dots: a small one with area 0.3
@xmath m @xmath and a large one with area 1 @xmath m @xmath . From the
area (excluding a depletion width of about 70 nm), we estimate that the
large (small) dot contains about 500 (100) electrons. Measurements on
the large QD found larger fluctuations upon increasing the dot-lead
tunnel coupling, in qualitative agreement with the theory. Though the
temperature was larger than the mean level spacing in the large QD
whereas our theory is developed for @xmath , the theory gives about the
correct magnitude for the peak spacing fluctuations. It is inconclusive
whether the data is in better agreement with the CI or CEI model as the
fluctuations are roughly the same (Fig. 23 ) in both. In the small QD,
there is an anomaly for the strongest coupling in the experiment – the
fluctuations suddenly decrease. In addition, the experimental
fluctuations are one order of magnitude larger than the theoretical
estimate [Eqs. ( 140 ) and ( 116 )]. The reason for this discrepancy is
not clear at this time. Possible contributing factors include scrambling
of the electron spectrum as the charge state of the dot changes, or the
role of the fluctuations when the dot is isolated (i.e., fluctuations in
@xmath ). In order to assess quantitatively the role of dot-lead
coupling in the Coulomb blockade, further experiments are needed.

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction to Quantum Computation with Quantum
Dots

### 21 Overview

This chapter serves as an introduction to the field of quantum
computation (QC). The plan of the chapter is as follows. In Section 22
we explain why QC field deserves our attention. In Section 23 we outline
the mathematical basis of quantum computations. In Section 24 we list
and briefly explain DiVincenzo’s criteria of physical implementation.
Finally, in Section 25 we briefly mention liquid state NMR quantum
computing proposal but mostly concentrate on the spintronic quantum dot
proposal put forth by Loss and DiVincenzo [ 55 ] .

### 22 Introduction to Quantum Computation

Quantum computation (QC) holds out tremendous promise for efficiently
solving some of the most difficult problems in computational science:
integer factorization [ 56 ] , discrete logarithms, and modeling of
quantum mechanical systems [ 57 ] . These problems are intractable on
any present or future conventional computer.

The fact that quantum systems can perform a computation was realized in
1982 by Paul Benioff and Richard Feynman. In 1994 Peter Shor proved that
quantum computer can perform prime factoring in polynomial time as
compared to the classical one which requires exponential time to solve
this problem [ 56 ] . The prime factoring problem is defined as follows:
given number @xmath which we know is a product of two primes @xmath and
@xmath , find @xmath and @xmath . Table 1 gives one a flavor on how
computation times scale with the complexity of the factoring problem for
classical and quantum computers. As one can see for the 400-digits prime
factoring problem even relatively small quantum computer will do much
better than a network of hundreds classical computers. This is attained
due to quantum parallelism discussed in the next section.

Shor’s spectacular result attracted to the field of QC many physicists
and computer scientists alike. Many proposals for physical realization
of QC have been put forth since then. New experimental techniques were
developed to control phase coherence of the quantum mechanical systems
on a nano scale.

Since prime factoring is the most secure encryption scheme in wide use
today, the field of QC enjoyed significant funding from government
agencies in the USA, EU, and Australia.

### 23 Mathematical Basis of Quantum Computations

In this section we review the mathematical basis of quantum
computations.

#### 23.1 Quantum Bits and Entangled States

The bits of information in a quantum computer are formed by two
orthogonal states of a two-level quantum mechanical system @xmath and
@xmath , Fig. 24 . To distinguish between classical and quantum bits
quantum bit was given a special name: qubit .

For example, a nucleus of spin- @xmath (or an electron) can serve as a
natural qubit: @xmath , @xmath . In contrast to the classical bit, qubit
has the following properties [ 58 ] :
(i) The states @xmath and @xmath do not constitute all possible states
of a qubit. In fact, it can be in an arbitrary superposition state:
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are complex numbers with @xmath
constraint.
(ii) Entangled state of two qubits is possible, e.g. :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this state each individual qubit fails to have any state of its own.
The information is, therefore, encoded only in the correlation between
the qubits 1 and 2. Two qubits in an entangled state are also called EPR
pair [ 59 ] .

#### 23.2 Steps in Quantum Computation and Quantum Gates

To perform quantum computation we should [ 58 ]
(i) Prepare a collection of @xmath qubits in the appropriate initial
state at @xmath : @xmath . The initial state is usually taken to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

or a state constructed from this one by application of the appropriate
unitary transformations.
(ii) Let that state evolve under the appropriate unitary transformation
@xmath . @xmath can be realized as the ordinary time evolution of a
physical system with appropriately constructed time-dependent
Hamiltonian @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

(iii) Extract the result of the computation by appropriate measurement
on the final state. Typical final measurement is made on a subset of
individual qubits.

Among all possible unitary transformations there are those acting on a
single qubit, a pair of qubits, a set of three qubits, etc. Let us call
unitary transformations acting only on a single qubit or a pair of
qubits quantum gates . In 1995 Barenco and coworkers proved that any
quantum computation algorithm can be decomposed in a series of quantum
gates : single qubit and two-qubit XOR gates [ 60 ] .

#### 23.3 Quantum Parallelism

The computational basis of @xmath -qubit quantum computer is formed by
@xmath states like this one:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

Each qubit in this ket-vector can be in one of the two possible
eigenstates. Let us denote ket-vector like the one in Eq. ( 144 ) simply
as @xmath , where @xmath is the integer between @xmath and @xmath ,
whose binary expansion gives the corresponding ket-vector. For example,
in the case of Eq. ( 144 ) the binary expansion is @xmath . It
corresponds to @xmath .

The concept of quantum parallelism can be illustrated as follows [ 58 ]
. Consider certain two-qubit entangled state and act on it with a
quantum gate @xmath . Since unitary transformations are linear we
obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

Two important remarks should be made about Eq. ( 145 ): (i) as a result
of quantum computation we obtained the same superposition in the final
state as we had in the initial state and (ii) we performed quantum
computation on all input states simultaneously! This property of quantum
computation is called quantum parallelism . Quantum parallelism gives
quantum computer the potential to do tricks that a classical computer
can perform only with significantly greater computational effort.

Suppose we have a unitary transformation @xmath , associated with a
function @xmath . Function @xmath replaces a computational basis state
@xmath by @xmath , where @xmath can take the following integer values:
@xmath . Since @xmath is a unitary transformation, it is invertible.
Hence, function @xmath is bijective – its action is nothing but a
permutation of integers @xmath . This restriction on the nature of
@xmath is excessively strong. Therefore, let us double the number of
qubits and define @xmath on the @xmath -qubit space as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us call the first set of @xmath -qubits input register and the
second set of @xmath -qubits output register [ 58 ] .

To illustrate the concept of quantum parallelism even further let us
take the input register to be in the state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

This input state can be obtained from the state in Eq. ( 142 ) by
subjecting each qubit to the one-qubit gate that “rotates” each “spin”
90 degrees about the @xmath -axis. Under the action of @xmath

  -- -- -- -------
           (148)
  -- -- -- -------

Notice what just happened: in one run we calculated @xmath on all @xmath
possible inputs. If we would have 100 qubits in our input register, then
@xmath would have been simultaneously calculated on @xmath different
inputs. This massive quantum parallelism is well outside the reach of
any classical computer.

#### 23.4 Important Remarks

Useful information has to be extracted from the output of the quantum
computation, see Eq. ( 148 ). To illustrate how the measurement process
works let us perform a measurement on the final state in Eq. ( 148 ).
Namely, let us measure the individual states of all qubits in the input
and output registers. With the equal probability of @xmath one can find
any state of the input register. Let us assume that we find @xmath as a
result of the measurement on the input register. Then the result of the
measurement on the output register is @xmath . Thus, we calculated the
value of @xmath at the randomly chosen @xmath . All other information
has been lost because we collapsed the whole superposition in Eq. ( 148
) onto a single component @xmath .

If Eq. ( 148 ) was the only quantum algorithm one could come up with,
one would be no better off than just doing single classical computation
on a randomly chosen input. Therefore, the goal of designing quantum
algorithms is to have easily accessible data of interest in the final
state and to make sure that the data can not be generated by a classical
algorithm without enormously greater computational effort. The first
algorithm which satisfies these conditions was created by Peter Shor for
the prime factoring problem.

The other difficulty is to maintain the coherence of an entangled state
of many qubits. Unfortunately, it is impossible to completely isolate
our qubits from the environment during a quantum computation. The
coupling to the environment leads to decoherence or collapse of the
quantum state which is especially severe for the entangled states of
many qubits. The solution to this challenge is to use quantum
error-correcting codes [ 61 ] . We know that these codes can work only
for the sufficiently small decoherence rates. Therefore, one of the main
problems in physical realization of the quantum computer is how to
reduce decoherence due to different couplings to the environment.

### 24 DiVincenzo’s Criteria of Physical Implementation

Five DiVincenzo’s criteria [ 62 ] serve as a general guidance to the
physical implementation of a working scalable quantum computer. They
naturally follow from the mathematical basis of QC discussed in the
previous section and can be formulated as follows:
(i) A collection of the quantum mechanical two-level systems (qubits) is
needed. Each qubit should be separately identifiable and externally
addressable. One should be able to add qubits at will.
(ii) It should be possible to completely (or with very high accuracy)
decouple qubits from one another. One should be able to set the state of
each qubit to @xmath in the beginning of each computation.
(iii) Long decoherence times are required. For the error
correcting-codes to be applicable decoherence time should be at least 4
orders of magnitude larger than the “clock time” of the quantum gates.
(iv) Logic operations should be doable. For example, two-body
Hamiltonians involving nearby qubits should be under independent and
precise external control. One should be able to smoothly (on the time
scale of one clock cycle) turn these Hamiltonians on and off. The
integral of the pulse should be controlled with the accuracy of at least
1 part in @xmath .
(v) Projective quantum measurements on the qubits must be doable. It is
useful, though not necessary, for these measurements to be doable fast
(that is, within few clock cycles) and have high quantum efficiency
(otherwise quantum computation has to be done in an ensemble style).

### 25 Quantum Computing Proposals

#### 25.1 Liquid State NMR

Since the original work by Peter Shor many quantum computing proposals
were put forth in different areas of physics. At the time of writing
liquid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) proposal is well ahead of
its competition. In the experiment by Vandersypen and coworkers [ 63 ]
the custom-synthesized molecule (used as the quantum computer) contained
five @xmath and two @xmath spin- @xmath nuclei as qubits. The quantum
gates were realized by a sequence of spin-selective radio-frequency
pulses. The readout was performed via NMR spectroscopy. For the first
time the simplest instance of Shor’s algorithm: factorization of 15 (
@xmath ) was demonstrated [ 63 ] .

Unfortunately, liquid state NMR proposal lacks scalability, see the
first DiVincenzo’s criterion. Indeed, to realize more complicated
algorithms one has to design and synthesize new molecules.

#### 25.2 Spintronic Quantum Dot Proposal by Loss and DiVincenzo

The experimental progress in solid state QC proposals falls
significantly behind liquid state NMR proposal. Nonetheless, once the
universal gates (one- and two-qubit quantum gates) become sufficiently
error free the scaling of the quantum computer is going to be more or
less straightforward. Among different solid state QC proposals one can
distinguish three major categories: (i) superconducting microcircuits
containing Josephson junctions [ 64 , 65 ] , (ii) nuclear spins of the
impurity atoms in semiconductor QDs [ 66 ] , and (iii) electron spin- or
charge-qubits in semiconductor QDs, see Chapters Quantum Dots: Coulomb
Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence and Quantum
Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence
for the references. Charge qubit in the semiconductor double QD are
discussed in Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic
Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence .

Here we describe the original spintronic quantum dot proposal by Loss
and DiVincenzo [ 55 , 62 ] . They consider an array of coupled 2D
lateral quantum dots, see Fig. 25 . Each QD should contain odd number of
electrons so that spin of an electron on the last occupied orbital
serves as a natural qubit: @xmath and @xmath .

Let us briefly go over five DiVincenzo’s criteria to see if this system
satisfies them and what is needed to be improved as compared to the
modern experimental technologies.

Criterion (i). We have a collection of two-level quantum mechanical
systems and we can add to the system as many new qubits as we want.

For the qubit to be separately identifiable the corresponding quantum
dot should contain odd number of electrons with sufficiently high
accuracy. This electron number can be adjusted by back-gate electrode
voltages shown in Fig. 25 . To make sure that the number of electrons is
odd and hence spin of the QD is equal to @xmath one can employ zero-bias
anomaly measurement in transport through the QD which signals a Kondo
effect.

Criterion (ii). To set the state of each qubit to @xmath it is
sufficient to place the spins in the magnetic field of several Tesla at
the liquid-He temperature. For this @xmath state to be stable upon
removal of the magnetic field the qubits must be decoupled from one
another to a very high accuracy. This can be achieved by setting the
pairs of electrodes between neighboring QDs to high negative voltages so
that the orbital wave-functions overlap is negligible.

Criterion (iii). The experiments on the precession of the electron spin
in a variety of semiconductor materials were performed by Kikkawa and
Awschalom [ 68 ] . In some structures they found spin decoherence times
@xmath up to hundreds of nanoseconds, that is, at least one order of
magnitude larger than charge decoherence times. These results are quite
encouraging. However spin decoherence times are expected to be very
device- and structure-specific. Therefore, more experiments especially
on the QD array setups are necessary.

One must emphasize that what really matters is the ratio @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the clock cycle time which will be defined below.

Criterion (iv). To physically realize one-qubit quantum gates it must be
possible to subject a specified qubit to the localized magnetic field of
proper direction and strength. This can be done by using a scanned
magnetic particle or by the use of magnetized barrier material that the
electron can be inserted in and out of by electric gating, see Fig. 25 .
The experimental realization of both of these ideas is going to be quite
challenging, especially, taking into account the fact that the required
accuracy is 1 part in @xmath .

Fortunately, according to the paper by DiVincenzo and coworkers [ 69 ]
one can completely eliminate one-qubit quantum gates at the expense of
increasing the size of the logical qubit from one to three QDs. In this
scheme two-body Hamiltonians is the only building block necessary to
realize quantum computations.

These two-body Hamiltonians, or two-qubit quantum gates if we go back to
the original Loss and DiVincenzo proposal, can be realized by increasing
the voltages on the electrodes between neighboring QDs. When these
voltages are increased the potential barrier between neighboring QDs is
lowered and the electron wave-functions overlap, see two right-most QDs
in Fig. 25 . This leads (with high accuracy) to the effective spin-spin
Heisenberg interaction @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is the
tunneling matrix element determined by the overlap of the electron
wave-functions in neighboring QDs and @xmath is the Coulomb on-site
repulsion energy. The corresponding “clock time” can be estimated as
follows: @xmath ( @xmath ).

For the error-correcting codes to be applicable Heisenberg spin-spin
interaction @xmath has to be valid with the accuracy of @xmath .
Besides, to avoid correlated errors @xmath should be sufficiently small
in the “off” state of the two-body Hamiltonian. One major source of
errors is the mesoscopic fluctuations. They appear in both the tunneling
matrix element @xmath and the relative position of the energies of the
last occupied orbitals in neighboring QDs. In Chapter Quantum Dots:
Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence we find
that the constraint of having small errors implies keeping accurate
control, at the few percent level, of several electrode voltages.

The other technical problem is to control the area under the two-qubit
gate pulse with the accuracy of @xmath . Especially, taking into account
the fact that the pulse should be adiabatic on the time scale of tens of
picoseconds so that electrons are not excited to the higher-lying energy
levels. This issue is also discussed in details in Chapter Quantum Dots:
Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence .

Criterion (v): A significant progress has been made recently in the one
electron spin readout technique [ 70 , 71 ] . Kouwenhoven and coworkers
have demonstrated single-shot read-out of single- and two-electron spin
states in a QD. An electron was allowed to escape from the QD or not
depending on its spin state (the tunneling was energetically allowed
only for the higher energy state). The charge of the QD was then
measured using a quantum point contact located near the QD. With this
technique they obtained 65% measurement visibility (the corresponding
fidelity was 82.5%). In the other slightly modified scheme they obtained
even better values for the visibility and fidelity: 80% and 90%,
respectively. Thus, high quantum efficiency of the measurement is
reached.

The readout time in the experiment was about @xmath ms, whereas the
energy relaxation time @xmath ms. Although not in principle necessary,
it would be useful for the implementation of the error-correcting codes
to reduce the readout time to about one hundreds of @xmath time.

In conclusion, more experiments are on the way. In particular,
Kouwenhoven and coworkers are planning to realize swapping of the spin
states in adjacent quantum dots. Since two-body Hamiltonian is the main
building block of the spin based quantum computer these experiments will
provide a valuable inside into possible directions of the future
research.

## Chapter \thechapter Spin Qubits in Multi-Electron Quantum Dots

### 26 Overview

In this chapter we study the effect of mesoscopic fluctuations on the
magnitude of errors that can occur in exchange operations on quantum dot
spin-qubits. Mid-size double quantum dots, with an odd number of
electrons in the range of a few tens in each dot, are investigated
through the constant interaction model using realistic parameters. It is
found that the constraint of having short pulses and small errors
implies keeping accurate control, at the few percent level, of several
electrode voltages. In practice, the number of independent parameters
per dot that one should tune depends on the configuration and ranges
from one to four.

The work in this chapter was done in collaboration with Eduardo R.
Mucciolo and Harold U. Baranger.

### 27 Introduction

Since the discovery that quantum algorithms can solve certain
computational problems much more efficiently than classical ones [ 56 ,
72 ] , attention has been devoted to the physical implementation of
quantum computation (QC). Among the many proposals, there are those
based on the spin of electrons in laterally confined quantum dots (QD) [
55 ] , which may have great potential for scalability and integration
with current technologies. For any successful proposal, one must be able
to perform single- and double-qubit operations much faster than the
decoherence time. In fact, all logical operations required for QC can be
realized if these elementary operations are sufficiently error free [ 60
] .

Single qubit operations involving a single QD will likely require
precise engineering of the underlying material or control over local
magnetic fields [ 62 ] ; both have yet to be achieved in practice.
Two-qubit operations, in contrast, are already within experimental
reach. They can be performed by sending electrical pulses to modulate
the potential barrier between adjacent QDs. That permits direct control
over the effective, Heisenberg-like, exchange interaction between the
qubit spins, which is created by the overlap between the electronic
wave-functions of the QDs [ 55 ] . These operations are important
elements in forming a basic two-qubit gate such as the controlled-not [
73 ] and in the propagation of quantum information through QD arrays [
55 ] . In fact, using three QDs instead of just one to form a logical
qubit would allow one to perform all logical operations entirely based
on the exchange interaction [ 69 ] . Thus, exchange operations will
likely play a major role in the realization of QD qubits. A quantitative
understanding of errors that occur during an exchange operation will
help in designing optimal systems.

The first proposal for a QD spin qubit [ 55 ] relied on having a single
electron in a very small laterally confined QD. One advantage of such a
system is that the Hilbert space is nominally two-dimensional. Leakage
from the computational space involves energies of order either the
charging energy or the single-particle excitation energy, both of which
are quite large in practice ( @xmath meV @xmath K). Working
adiabatically – such that the inverse of the switching time is much less
than the excitation energy – assures minimal leakage. The large
excitation energy implies that pulses of tens of picoseconds would be
both well within the adiabatic regime and below the dephasing time
@xmath (which is typically in the nanosecond range since orbital degrees
of freedom are involved). However, in practice, it is difficult to
fabricate very small tunable devices [ 74 ] . Moreover, one-electron QDs
may offer little possibility of gate tuning due to their rather
featureless wave functions.

Alternatively, a qubit could be formed by the top most “valence”
electron in a QD with an odd number of electrons [ 75 ] . In this case,
electrons filling the lower energy states should comprise an inert
shell, leaving as the only relevant degree of freedom the spin
orientation of the valence electron. Large QDs with 100-1000 electrons,
while much simpler to fabricate than single electron QDs, are unsuitable
because the excitation energy is small ( @xmath eV @xmath K), leading to
leakage or excessively slow exchange operations. On the other hand,
mid-size QDs, with 10-40 electrons, are sufficiently small to have
substantial excitation energies, yet both reasonable to fabricate and
tunable through plunger electrodes. For these dots, a careful analysis
of errors is necessary.

Perhaps the best example of an exchange operation is the swap of the
spin states of the two qubits. For instance, it causes up-down spins to
evolve to down-up. Maximum entanglement between qubits occurs when half
of a swap pulse takes place – a square-root-of-swap operation. Several
authors have treated the problem of swap errors in QD systems [ 76 , 77
, 78 , 79 , 80 , 81 ] . A primary concern was the occurrence of double
occupancy (when both valence electrons move into the same QD) during and
after the swap. However, no study so far has considered another
intrinsic characteristic of electronic states in multi-electron QDs,
namely, their marked dependence on external perturbations such as
electrode voltage or magnetic field. This sensitivity gives rise to
strong sample-to-sample fluctuations arising from the phase-coherent
orbital motion [ 5 ] . These features can make the precise control of
energy levels, wave functions, and inter-dot couplings a difficult task.

In this chapter we study errors and error rates that can take place
during the exchange operation of two spin qubits based in multi-electron
QDs. We consider realistic situations by taking into account an extra
orbital level and fluctuations in level positions and coupling matrix
elements. These lead to deviations from a pre-established optimal swap
operation point, especially when a single-particle level falls too close
to the valence electron level. Reasons for such fluctuations can be, for
instance, (i) the lack of a sufficient number of tuning parameters
(i.e., plunger electrodes), or (ii) the cross-talk between the tuning
electrodes. Our results set bounds on the amount of acceptable detuning
for mid-size QD qubits.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 28 , we introduce and
justify the model Hamiltonian. The states involved in the exchange
operation are presented in Section 29 , where we also discuss the pulses
and the parameters involved in the exchange operations. In Section 30 we
present the results of our numerical simulations. We also discuss the
impact of mesoscopic effects on errors and put our analysis in the
context of actual experiments. Finally, in Section 31 we draw our
conclusions.

### 28 Model System

We begin by assuming that the double QD system can be described by the
Hamiltonian [ 12 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are the number operators for the single-particle
states in the QDs (named @xmath and @xmath ), @xmath denotes the
single-particle energy levels, @xmath are the tunneling amplitudes
between the dots, and @xmath is the charging energy ( @xmath and @xmath
run over the single-particle states). Typically, for mid- to large-size
QDs, the charging energy is larger than the mean level spacing.

In the literature of Coulomb blockade phenomena in closed QDs, the
Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 150 ) is known as the constant interaction model.
It provides an excellent description of many-electron QDs, being
supported by both microscopic calculations and experimental data [ 5 ,
12 , 82 , 20 , 7 , 83 , 84 ] . The reasoning behind its success can be
understood from two observations. First, mid- to large-size QDs, with
more than ten electrons, behave very much like conventional disordered
metals in the diffusive regime. Wavelengths are sufficiently small to
resolve irregularities in the confining and background potentials,
leading to classical chaos and the absence of shell effects in the
energy spectrum. In this case, the single-particle states obey the
statistics of random matrices, showing complex interference patterns and
resembling a random superposition of plane waves. This is in contrast
with the case of small, circularly symmetric, few-electron QDs, where
shell effects are pronounced [ 75 , 85 ] .

Second, for realistic electron densities, the QD linear size is larger
than the screening length of the Coulomb interactions. In the presence
of random plane waves, the screened interaction can then be broken up
into a leading electrostatic contribution characterized by the QD
capacitance plus weak inter-particle residual interactions [ 12 , 84 ] .
This description becomes more accurate as the number of electrons gets
larger since the residual interactions become weaker. The electron
bunching is reduced as wave functions become more uniformly extended
over the QD. Also, the increase in the number of oscillations in the
wave functions leads to a self-averaging of the residual interactions.
In this limit, one arrives at the so-called “universal Hamiltonian” for
QDs, containing only single-particle levels, the charging energy, and a
mean-field exchange term [ 5 , 12 ] . This Hamiltonian can be derived
explicitly via a random-phase approximation treatment of the Coulomb
interaction and the use of random-matrix wave functions [ 12 , 84 ] .

According to these arguments, interaction effects beyond the charging
energy term are omitted in Eq. ( 150 ). In addition, the intra-dot
exchange interaction, which tends to spin polarize the QD, is also
neglected. The reason for that is the following. One can show that the
intra-dot exchange term only affect states where there is double
occupancy of a level. Thus, the exchange interaction constant always
appears side-by-side with the charging energy. But in multi-electron
dots, the exchange energy (which is at most of order of the mean level
separation) is much smaller than the charging energy. Thus, intra-dot
exchange effects are strongly suppressed by the charging energy. We have
verified that their inclusion does not modify appreciably our final
results. We expect the exchange interaction to become important for
two-qubit operations only in the case of small QDs with only a few
electrons, when all energy scales (including the mean level spacing) are
of the same order.

Thus, the simple picture where single-particle states are filled
according to the Pauli principle up to the top most level is an
appropriate description of multi-electron dots [ 5 , 12 , 82 , 20 , 7 ,
83 , 84 ] . In order to define the spin- @xmath qubits, both QDs should
contain an odd number of electrons (say, @xmath 1 and @xmath 1). The QD
spin properties are then dictated by the lone, valence electron
occupying the highest level. The remaining electrons form an inert core,
provided that operations are kept sufficiently slow so as not to cause
particle-hole excitations to other levels.

Experimentally, the two-qubit exchange operations also require the
capability of isolating the QDs from each other, so that a direct
product state can be prepared, such as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the kets represent only the spin of the valence electron on each
QD.

### 29 Errors in Exchange Operations

We focus our study on errors that appear after a full swap operation
(which should result in no entanglement). Although it could in principle
seem more sensible to look at the square-root-of-swap operation (which
creates entanglement and is therefore a building block of logical
gates), error magnitudes for the latter are straightforwardly related to
those of the full swap operation, as we will show. We leave the
discussion of the square root of swap to Section 30 .

The ideal full swap operation exchanges the valence electrons of the QD
system. For instance, it takes the product state @xmath into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

Physically, the full swap can be implemented by starting with isolated
QDs, turning on the inter-dot coupling for a time @xmath (the pulse
duration), and then turning it off, isolating the QDs again. For weakly
coupled QDs ( @xmath ), one finds @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath here
represent typical values for the coupling matrix element and the
charging energy, respectively (throughout we assume @xmath ). To
quantify the amount of error that takes place during the operation, we
use the probability of not reaching @xmath asymptotically, namely,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

We solved numerically the time-dependent Schrödinger equation that
derives from Eq. ( 149 ) for the particular but nevertheless realistic
case shown in Fig. 26 . We assumed that voltage tuning allows one to
place the top most electron of QD @xmath into an isolated
single-particle state of energy @xmath aligned with the energy of the
top most electron in QD @xmath , @xmath . However, limited tuning
ability leaves an adjacent empty state close in energy in QD @xmath :
@xmath . Therefore, while we can approximately neglect all levels but
one in QD @xmath , for QD @xmath we needed to take two levels into
account, having hopping matrix elements denoted by @xmath and @xmath . ³
³ 3 Though we assume time-reversal symmetry (real @xmath and @xmath ),
we have checked that its violation does not modify our results. To
facilitate the analysis, we assumed that the dots have the same
capacitance, @xmath , so that @xmath .

The Hamiltonian of Eq. ( 149 ) conserves total spin. Assuming that
filled inner levels in both QDs are inert (forming the “vacuum” state
@xmath ), we can span the @xmath Hilbert subspace with nine two-electron
basis states. According to their transformation properties, they can be
divided into “singlet”

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (155)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and “triplet”

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

classes, with @xmath .

The final states that correspond to an error have either double
occupancy ( @xmath , @xmath ), or an electron in the @xmath -level of QD
@xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ). ⁴ ⁴ 4 While such states can lead to the
full spin swap (with probability equal to @xmath ), they will induce
severe detuning errors in subsequent operations. In addition, a return
to the initial state is also considered an error. It is worth noticing
the difference between our treatment of the problem and that of Ref. [
80 ] . In our case, errors come mainly from either ending in the excited
single-particle state after the operation is over (i.e., states @xmath
and @xmath ), or from “no-go” defective operations. In Ref. [ 80 ] ,
errors come from having double occupancy in the final state. Double
occupancy errors can be exponentially suppressed by adiabatically
switching the pulse on and off on time scales larger than the inverse
charging energy [ 55 , 77 , 78 , 80 ] . Making pulses adiabatic on the
time scale of the inverse mean level spacing for multi-electron quantum
dots is more challenging, especially because the spacings fluctuate
strongly both from quantum dot to quantum dot and upon variation of any
external parameter (mesoscopic fluctuations). Therefore, multi-electron
quantum dots require extra tunability to get around such problems.

Very small errors, below @xmath – @xmath , can, in principal, be fixed
by the use of error correction algorithms [ 61 ] . The pulses,
therefore, should be sufficiently adiabatic for errors to remain below
this threshold. We adopted the following pulse shape:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the switching time. The pulse will remain both
well-defined and adiabatic provided that @xmath . Notice that this pulse
is equivalent to that adopted in Ref. [ 80 ] up to exponential accuracy,
@xmath , with @xmath . There is no particular reason to believe that
either performs better than the other; our choice was dictated by
technical convenience.

### 30 Results

We used a standard numerical method, the so-called Richardson
extrapolation [ 86 ] , to solve the Schrödinger equation for @xmath .
The first step in our analysis was to find the optimal value of @xmath
which minimized the full swap error, as defined in Eq. ( 154 ), for a
given set of parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (we used @xmath and
took @xmath ). The second step was to study how this minimal error
depends on @xmath . There is actually an optimal interval for @xmath ,
since small switching times spoil adiabaticity, while large ones
compromise the pulse shape (when @xmath is relatively short).
Empirically, we find that errors related to switching times become
negligible once @xmath reaches values of about @xmath , provided that
@xmath . In what follows, we fix @xmath .

#### 30.1 Mesoscopic Effects

Figure 27 shows the full swap error as a function of @xmath when @xmath
is fixed to its optimal value for @xmath . Such a situation would arise
experimentally if the pulse is optimized for a certain configuration,
but a fluctuation in level spacing occurs. Notice the sharp increase in
error as @xmath decreases. While increasing @xmath reduces this error
(by making the switching more adiabatic), very small level spacings
would be problematic, since @xmath can not be larger than @xmath without
sacrificing pulse shape and effectiveness. In order to make space for an
adiabatic switching time for small @xmath , one would also have to
increase pulse duration. This is clear in the case of @xmath (see Fig.
27 ): Even moderate couplings, @xmath , lead to larger errors, which can
then be suppressed by decreasing @xmath by a factor of two; however,
that causes a fourfold increase in pulse width which may be problematic
in terms of decoherence.

The dependence of errors on fluctuations in the coupling amplitude
@xmath is shown in Fig. 28 . Again, the pulse duration used is the
optimal value obtained when @xmath . As expected, the error grows as
@xmath increases. Errors related to large values of @xmath can also be
minimized by increasing the switching time, but the same issues raised
above appear.

Figure 29 presents the error for two situations involving pulses with
duration of about @xmath , corresponding to the square-root-of-swap
operation. The cases shown are: (i) one, and (ii) two consecutive
square-root-of-swap pulses. For comparison, the curve corresponding to a
full swap pulse is also shown. The error for the square-root-of-swap
operation is given by Eq. ( 154 ) with @xmath replaced by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can observe from Fig. 29 that error rates are nearly the same after
a full swap operation and after two consecutive square root of swap
operations. This insensitivity of the error to the pulse duration led us
to concentrate our effort on the full swap operations.

In order to establish an upper bound for QD tuning accuracy, we have
performed simulations where both @xmath and @xmath were allowed to vary.
The spacing between the levels in QD @xmath was taken from a Gaussian
distribution centered at @xmath , with standard deviation @xmath (
@xmath was kept fixed). For the coupling amplitude, we generated
Gaussian distributed level widths @xmath , with average @xmath and
standard deviation @xmath . The pulses had their widths optimized for
the typical case where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . For fixed
values of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , we generated 10,000
realizations of @xmath and @xmath and each time calculated the error
after the application of the full swap pulse. In Fig. 30 we show how the
probability of having an error larger than the @xmath threshold depends
on the energy level accuracy, @xmath . Two cases are considered, namely,
plain and limited control of the inter-dot coupling constant ( @xmath
and @xmath , respectively). The data indicates that frequent,
non-correctable errors will happen if an accuracy in @xmath of better
than 10 percent is not achieved.

#### 30.2 Relevance for Real Quantum Dots

To make a quantitative estimate of the impact of these results, let us
consider the double QD setup of Jeong and coworkers [ 87 ] . In their
device, each QD holds about 40 electrons and has a lithographic diameter
of 180 nm (we estimate the effective diameter to be around 120 nm, based
on the device electron density). The charging energy and mean level
spacing of each QD are approximately 1.8 meV and 0.4 meV, respectively
(thus @xmath ). If we allow for a maximal inter-dot coupling of @xmath
(which yields a level broadening of about @xmath ), we find minimal full
swap pulse widths of about 100 ps. These values match those used in Fig.
30 . For this case, switching times of 10 ps would be long enough to
operate in the adiabatic regime and also provide an efficient and
well-defined pulse shape. Thus, the combined times should allow for 8-10
consecutive full swap gates before running into dephasing effects
related to orbital degrees of freedom [ 88 ] . While these numbers are
yet too small for large-scale quantum computation, they could be
sufficient for the demonstration of QD spin qubits. Based on Fig. 30 ,
we find that accuracies in @xmath of about 10% would make operations
only limited by dephasing, and not by fluctuation-induced errors.
However, as shown in the inset, even for small QDs (typically having
small @xmath ratios), the occurrence of large errors is quite frequent
when level detuning is large.

An important issue for multi-electron QDs is their strong mesoscopic,
sample-to-sample fluctuations in energy level position and wave-function
amplitudes. Our results so far indicate how big an effect a given change
in energy or wave-function will produce; now we go further and discuss
how mesoscopic fluctuations more generally affect a collection of
qubits.

In experiments, several electrodes are placed around the QD surroundings
and their voltages are used to adjust the lateral confining potential,
the inter-dot coupling, and the coupling between QDs and leads. These
voltages are external parameters that can be used to mitigate the
effects of mesoscopic fluctuations by tuning energy levels and
wave-functions to desired values. Having that in mind, our results
indicate two different scenarios for QD qubit implementations.

First, if one is willing to characterize each QD pair separately and
have them operate one by one, mesoscopic fluctuations will be
irrelevant. It will be possible, with a single parameter per QD, say, to
isolate and align energy levels reasonably well. Errors can be further
minimized by decreasing the inter-dot coupling (thus increasing @xmath
). But since QDs are not microscopically identical, each pair of QDs
will require a different pulse shape and duration. Multi-electron QDs
are tunable enough, easy to couple, and much easier to fabricate than
one-electron dots; therefore, multi-electron QDs are most appropriate
for this case.

Second, if the goal is to achieve genuine scalability, one has to
operate qubits in a similar and uniform way, utilizing a single pulse
source. In this case, @xmath and @xmath should be the same for all QD
pairs. Based on our results above, one should strive to maximally
separate the top most occupied state from all other states, occupied or
empty, so as to reduce the possibility of leakage during operations with
a fixed duration. At the same time, it is important to reduce inter-pair
cross-talk induced by capacitive coupling between electrodes, as well as
all inter-dot couplings except between the top most states of each QD.
One should bear in mind that not all electrodes act independently – in
most cases a search in a multidimensional parameter space has to be
carried out. Thus, four tuning parameters per QD may be necessary to
achieve the following goals: (i) find isolated, single-occupied energy
level (two parameters); (ii) align this level with the corresponding
level in an adjacent QD (one parameter); (iii) control the inter-dot
coupling (one parameter). For parameters involved in (i) and (ii), an
accuracy of a few percent will likely be required. Finally, control over
the inter-dot coupling parameter, (iii), must allow for the application
of smooth pulse shapes in the picosecond range. Our simulations also
show that the pulse width must be controlled within at least @xmath
accuracy. Although these requirements seem quite stringent, recent
experiments indicate that they could be met [ 89 ] .

### 31 Conclusions

In summary, our analysis indicate that mid-size QDs, with ten to a few
tens of electrons, while not allowing for extremely fast gates, are
still good candidates for spin-qubits. They offer the advantage of being
simpler to fabricate and manipulate, but at the same time require
accurate, simultaneous control of several parameters. Errors related to
detuning and sample-to-sample fluctuations can be large, but can be kept
a secondary concern with respect to dephasing effects provided that a
sufficient number of independent electrodes or tuning parameters exists.

## Chapter \thechapter Time Evolution of the Reduced Density Matrix

### 32 Introduction

One of the most fundamental problems in theoretical physics is that of a
quantum mechanical system coupled to the bosonic (or fermionic) bath [
90 , 91 ] . One such example is presented in the next chapter where we
consider double QD charge qubit coupled to the acoustic phonon bath.
Formal solution to the problem can be found [see Eqs. ( 175 ) and ( 176
) below], nonetheless to do any practical calculation one has to
(a) make simplifying assumptions like Born and Markov approximations in
the derivation of the Redfield equation [ 92 , 93 ] or (b) implement
sophisticated numerical integration procedure like QUAPI (quasiadiabatic
propagator path integral) [ 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 ] .

Time evolution of the isolated quantum mechanical system is governed by
the Schrödinger equation. Therefore, (i) its energy is conserved and
(ii) its phase coherence is preserved over time. Coupling to the bath
leads to the energy relaxation – decoherence and loss of phase coherence
– dephasing. These processes are important for quantum computations
because they may potentially destroy the phase coherence of both
unentangled single qubit states and especially entangled states of many
qubits.

In our treatment of the problem we choose to go along the lines of Born
and Markov approximations which eventually lead us to the Redfield
equation [ 92 , 93 ] because (i) we are interested in time evolution of
the reduced density matrix at sufficiently long times and (ii) this
formalism allows us to obtain analytical expressions for both qubit
decoherence and dephasing rates. These analytical expressions contain
valuable information about the dependence of the rates on different
parameters of the double QD setup.

In this chapter we give formal derivation of the Redfield equation
making simplifying assumptions along the way. We employ the projection
operator technique [ 99 ] as it provides the most transparent way of the
derivation.

The plan of this chapter is as follows. In Section 33 we formulate the
problem. In Section 34 we find formal solution of the problem. In
Section 35 we assume that the quantum mechanical system and the bath are
unentangled at @xmath and also make Born approximation. Finally, in
Section 36 we make Markov approximation and finalize the derivation of
the Redfield equation.

### 33 Formulation of the Problem

The Hamiltonian of the total system is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the system, @xmath is the Hamiltonian
of the bath, and @xmath is the Hamiltonian of their interaction. We
assume that it can be factorized as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the operators in the system’s of interest Hilbert space
and @xmath are the operators in the bath Hilbert space. Time evolution
of the total system obeys Schrödinger equation for the density matrix:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our goal is to find similar equation for the time evolution of the
reduced (system’s of interest) density matrix @xmath .

### 34 General Solution

Let us write @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can always do this because no assumption is made about @xmath . Now
let us substitute Eq. ( 162 ) into Eq. ( 161 ). We obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

To find the equation on @xmath let us trace left and right hand sides of
Eq. ( 164 ) over bath degrees of freedom. The following identities are
useful in simplifying the traces:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last identity should be valid for the most practical applications
(it is certainly valid for the phonons coupled to the electric charge,
for example). Then the equation for the reduced density matrix becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -- -------

However there is one problem: Eq. ( 166 ) contains @xmath as well.
Therefore, one has to find the second (coupled to the first one)
equation on @xmath . This can be done by acting with the projection
operator @xmath on both sides of Eq. ( 164 ). A little bit more involved
calculation leads to the following result:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can write Eqs. ( 166 ) and ( 168 ) in a more compact form as
follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (169)
     @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the Liouvillian operators: @xmath
, @xmath , etc.

Our further plan is as follows. Firstly, let us solve Eq. ( 170 ), that
is, find the solution for @xmath – it is going to have some functional
dependence on @xmath . Secondly, let us substitute the solution in Eq. (
169 ) and simplify the expression obtained.

Eqs. ( 169 ) and ( 170 ) have the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

This differential equation has a standard solution which can be written
as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is a time-ordering operator. How do we understand @xmath term
in Eq. ( 173 ), for example? It should be understood as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an anti-time-ordering operator. Eq. ( 173 ) solves Eq. (
170 ). Let us substitute the solution in Eq. ( 169 ). Thus, we obtain
closed form differential equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

An important note is due at this time. At @xmath : @xmath . Therefore,
if system and bath are not entangled at @xmath then @xmath and second
term in Eq. ( 175 ) simply vanishes.

### 35 @xmath and Born Approximations

Eq. ( 175 ) may look simple but it is difficult to solve mainly due to
complex structure of the @xmath matrix. Let us make a couple of
simplifying assumptions. Firstly, let us assume that @xmath then second
term in Eq. ( 175 ) vanishes. Secondly, let us assume that the system is
weakly coupled to the bath ( @xmath is small) and keep only the leading
term in powers of @xmath expansion of the third term (Born
approximation):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, in @xmath and Born approximations, Eq. ( 175 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the first term on the right hand side is the conventional
Liouvillian term corresponding to the time reversible dynamics and the
second term is a dissipative term (or time irreversible part).

The dissipative term can be further simplified. First, let us simplify
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the dissipative term becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -- -------

Further calculations should be performed in the following order:
(i) substitute @xmath ; (ii) take advantage of @xmath – define bath
correlation functions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (181)
     @xmath      (182)
     @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -- -------

(iii) to transform @xmath to @xmath use: ⁵ ⁵ 5 Eq. ( 184 ) implies the
validity of the Markovian approximation as well.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

The final form of the equation for the time evolution of the reduced
density matrix in @xmath and Born approximations is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (186)
              @xmath   @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The structure of @xmath -matrices is quite complex. Moreover, at each
time slice in the integration of Eq. ( 185 ) one has to numerically
calculate @xmath -matrices all over again.

### 36 Markov Approximation on Top: Redfield Equation

One conventional way to simplify Eq. ( 187 ) and make Eq. ( 185 ) local
in time is to assume that bath has no memory . That is, bath correlation
time @xmath is the smallest time scale in the problem. This is called
Markov approximation. In this approximation one can only find evolution
of the system at sufficiently long times: @xmath . Since @xmath for
@xmath , only small values of @xmath contribute in Eq. ( 187 ). Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

and upper limit of the integration over @xmath in Eq. ( 187 ) can be
extended to @xmath . Thus, @xmath -matrices in Born-Markov approximation
can be written as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eq. ( 185 ) with @xmath -matrices given by Eq. ( 189 ) is local in time
and called Redfield equation [ 92 , 93 , 99 , 100 ] .

## Chapter \thechapter Phonon Decoherence of a Double Quantum Dot Charge
Qubit

### 37 Overview

In this chapter we study decoherence of a quantum dot charge qubit due
to coupling to piezoelectric acoustic phonons in the Born-Markov
approximation. After including appropriate form factors, we find that
phonon decoherence rates are one to two orders of magnitude weaker than
was previously predicted. We calculate the dependence of the @xmath
-factor on lattice temperature, quantum dot size, and interdot coupling.
Our results suggest that mechanisms other than phonon decoherence play a
more significant role in current experimental setups.

The work in this chapter was done in collaboration with Eduardo R.
Mucciolo and Harold U. Baranger.

### 38 Introduction

Since the discovery that quantum algorithms can solve certain
computational problems much more efficiently than classical ones [ 101 ]
, attention has been devoted to the physical implementation of quantum
computation. Among the many proposals, there are those based on the
electron spin [ 55 , 69 ] or charge [ 102 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 81 , 106 ]
in laterally confined quantum dots, which may have great potential for
scalability and integration within current technologies.

Single qubit operations involving the spin of an electron in a quantum
dot will likely require precise engineering of the underlying material
or control over local magnetic fields [ 62 ] ; both have yet to be
achieved in practice. In contrast, single qubit operations involving
charge in a double quantum dot (DQD) [ 107 ] are already within
experimental reach [ 88 , 108 , 109 ] . They can be performed either by
sending electrical pulses to modulate the potential barrier between the
dots (tunnel pulsing) [ 104 , 105 , 106 ] or by changing the relative
position of the energy levels (bias pulsing) [ 88 , 108 ] . In both
cases one acts on the overlap between the electronic wave functions of
the dots. This permits direct control over the two low-energy charge
states of the system – the basis states @xmath and @xmath of a qubit:
Calling @xmath ( @xmath ) the number of excess electrons in the left
(right) dot, we have that @xmath and @xmath .

The proposed DQD charge qubit relies on having two lateral quantum dots
tuned to the @xmath transition line of the Coulomb blockade stability
diagram (see Fig. 31 ). Along this line, an electron can move between
the dots with no charging energy cost. An advantage of this system is
that the Hilbert space is two-dimensional, even at moderate
temperatures, since single-particle excitations do not alter the charge
configuration. Leakage from the computational space involves energies of
order the charging energy which is quite large in practice ( @xmath meV
@xmath K). In the case of tunnel pulsing, working adiabatically – such
that the inverse of the switching time is much less than the charging
energy – assures minimal leakage. The large charging energy implies that
pulses as short as tens to hundreds of picoseconds would be well within
the adiabatic regime. However, the drawback of using charge to build
qubits is the high decoherence rates when compared to spin. Since for
any successful qubit one must be able to perform single- and
double-qubit operations much faster than the decoherence time, a
quantitative understanding of decoherence mechanisms in a DQD is
essential.

In this chapter, we carry out an analysis of phonon decoherence in a DQD
charge qubit. During qubit operations, the electron charge movement
induces phonon creation and annihilation, thus leading to energy
relaxation and decoherence. In order to quantify these effects, we
follow the time dependence of the system’s reduced density matrix, after
tracing out the phonon bath, using the Redfield formalism in the Born
and Markov approximations [ 99 , 100 ] .

Our results show that decoherence rates for this situation are one to
two orders of magnitude weaker than previously estimated. The
discrepancy arises mainly due to the use of different spectral
functions. Our model incorporates realistic geometric features which
were lacking in previous calculations. When compared to recent
experimental results, our calculations indicate that phonons are likely
not the main source of decoherence in current DQD setups.

The chapter is organized as follows. In Section 39 , we introduce the
model used to describe the DQD, discuss the coupling to phonons, and
establish the Markov formulation used to solve for the reduced density
matrix. In Section 40 we study decoherence in a single-qubit operation,
while in Section 41 we simulate the bias pulsing experiment of Refs. [
88 , 108 ] . Finally, in Section 42 we present our conclusions.

### 39 Model System

We begin by assuming that the DQD is isolated from the leads. The DQD
and the phonon bath combined can then be described by the total
Hamiltonian [ 81 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are individual DQD and phonon Hamiltonians,
respectively, and @xmath is the electron-phonon interaction. We assume
that gate voltages are tuned to bring the system near the degeneracy
point @xmath (Fig. 31 ) where a single electron may move between the two
dots with little charging energy cost. To simplify the presentation,
only one quantum level on each dot is included; @xmath denotes the
energy of an excess electron on the left (right) QD (possibly including
some charging energy). Likewise, spin effects are neglected. ⁶ ⁶ 6 In
the situation we envision, the total number of electrons would be odd:
The ground state of each dot in the absence of the excess electron would
have @xmath , so that the dot with the excess electron would have spin
half. Other situations are, of course, possible, such as the total
number of electrons being even with @xmath for both dots when the qubit
is in state @xmath and @xmath for both in state @xmath ; in the latter
case, there would be a singlet and triplet state of the DQD with a small
exchange splitting. Such complications do not effect the underlying
physics that we discuss, and so we neglect them. Thus, in the basis
@xmath , @xmath , the DQD Hamiltonian reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are Pauli matrices, @xmath is the energy level difference,
and @xmath is the tunneling amplitude connecting the dots. Notice that
both @xmath and @xmath may be time dependent. The phonon bath
Hamiltonian has the usual form ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the dispersion relation @xmath is specified below. The
electron-phonon interaction has the linear coupling form [ 81 , 110 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of excess electrons in the @xmath -th dot and
@xmath , with @xmath and @xmath the dot position vectors, see Fig. 32 .
The dependence of the coupling constant @xmath on the material
parameters and on the wave vector @xmath will be specified below. The
dot form factor is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the excess charge density in the @xmath -th dot. With no
significant loss of generality, we will assume that the form factor is
identical for both dots and, therefore, drop the @xmath index hereafter.
In the basis @xmath , @xmath , after dropping irrelevant constant terms,
the electron-phonon interaction simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . The phonons propagate in three dimensions, while the
electrons are confined to the plane of the underlying two-dimensional
electron gas (2DEG). Notice that the electron-phonon coupling is not
isotropic for the DQD (Fig. 32 ): Phonons propagating along @xmath and
any @xmath do not cause any relaxation, while coupling is maximal along
@xmath direction. We neglect any mismatch in phonon velocities at the
GaAs/AlGaAs interface, where the 2DEG is located.

We now proceed with the Born-Markov-Redfield treatment of this system,
see Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and
Qubit Decoherence . While the Born approximation is clearly justified
for weak electron-phonon interaction, the Markov approximation requires,
in addition, that the bath correlation time is the smallest time scale
in the problem. These conditions are reasonably satisfied for lateral
GaAs quantum dots, as we will argue below.

Let us assume that the system and the phonon bath are disentangled at
@xmath . Using Eqs. ( 191 ), ( 192 ), and ( 195 ), we can write the
Redfield equation for the reduced density matrix @xmath of the DQD (see
Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and
Qubit Decoherence ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term on the right-hand side yields the Liouvillian evolution
and the other terms yield the relaxation caused by the phonon bath. The
auxiliary matrix @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the bath correlation function, @xmath , and @xmath ,
with @xmath the inverse lattice temperature ( @xmath ).

Using Eq. ( 192 ) in the definition of the bath correlation function, we
find that the latter can be expressed in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Bose-Einstein distribution function and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (200)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the spectral density of the phonon bath.

We now specialize to linear, isotropic acoustic phonons: @xmath , where
@xmath is the phonon velocity. Moreover, we only consider coupling to
longitudinal piezoelectric phonons, neglecting the deformation potential
contribution. For bulk GaAs, this is justifiable at temperatures below
approximately 10 @xmath (see Appendix Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade,
Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence ). Thus,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the piezoelectric constant in dimensionless form (
@xmath for GaAs [ 110 , 111 ] ) and @xmath is the unit cell volume.

The excess charge distribution in the dots is assumed Gaussian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is certainly a good approximation for small dots with few
electrons, but becomes less accurate for large dots. The resulting form
factor reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that this expression differs from that in Refs. [ 104 , 105 , 106 ]
where a three-dimensional Gaussian charge density was assumed.

Using Eqs. ( 201 ) and ( 203 ), as well as the DQD geometry of Fig. 32 ,
we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is instructive to inspect the asymptotic limits of this equation. At
low frequencies, @xmath ; thus, the phonon bath is superohmic. At high
frequencies,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that the spectral function does not have the exponential decay
familiar from the spin-boson model, but rather falls off much more
slowly: @xmath . This should be contrasted with the phenomenological
expressions used in Ref. [ 81 ] .

The characteristic frequency of the maximum in @xmath is @xmath . For
typical experimental setups, @xmath nm while @xmath m/s for GaAs,
yielding @xmath ps ( @xmath eV). Thus, the Markovian approximation can
be justified for time scales @xmath and if all pulse operations are kept
adiabatic on the scale of @xmath .

### 40 Decay of Charge Oscillations

One can operate this charge qubit in two different ways: (i) by pulsing
the tunneling amplitude @xmath keeping @xmath constant, or (ii) by
changing the energy level difference @xmath keeping @xmath constant
(bias pulsing). Tunnel pulsing seems advantageous as it implies fewer
decoherence channels and less leakage. However, a recent experiment used
a bias pulsing scheme [ 88 , 108 ] .

Our system’s Hilbert space is two-dimensional by construction [see Eq. (
191 )], hence there is no leakage to states outside the computational
basis. We can, therefore, use square pulses instead of smooth, adiabatic
ones. This not only allows us to analytically solve for the time
evolution of the reduced density matrix, Eq. ( 197 ), but also renders
our results applicable to both tunnel and bias pulsing. Indeed, in both
regimes one has @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , taking that the pulse
starts at @xmath . Let us assume that the excess electron is initially
in the left dot: @xmath and @xmath . In this case, since the
coefficients on the right-hand side of ( 197 ) are all constants at
@xmath , we can solve the Redfield equation exactly (see Appendix
Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit
Decoherence for details). As @xmath has only three real independent
components, the solution is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (207)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (208)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (210)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (211)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath . We extract the customary energy and phase relaxation
times, @xmath and @xmath , by rotating to the energy eigenbasis @xmath ,
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (213)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (214)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Then, the damping of the oscillations in the diagonal matrix elements is
the signature of energy relaxation, while the phonon-induced decoherence
is seen in the exponential decay of the off-diagonal elements. For the
DQD, we find @xmath and @xmath for the decoherence time.

The quality factor of the charge oscillations in Eq. ( 207 ) is @xmath .
Using Eqs. ( 210 ), ( 211 ), and ( 204 ), we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (215)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The @xmath -factor depends on the tunneling amplitude
@xmath , lattice temperature @xmath , dot radius @xmath , and interdot
distance @xmath .

Several experimental realizations of DQD systems recently appeared in
the literature [ 88 , 108 , 109 , 87 , 89 ] . In principle, all these
setups could be driven by tunnel pulsing to manipulate charge and
perform single-qubit operations. To understand how the @xmath -factor
depends on the tunneling amplitude @xmath in realistic conditions, let
us consider the DQD setup of Jeong and coworkers [ 87 ] . In their
device, each dot holds about 40 electrons and has a lithographic
diameter of 180 nm. The effective radius @xmath is estimated to be
around 60 nm based on the device electron density. Therefore, @xmath .
The lattice base temperature is 15 mK. Introducing these parameters into
Eq. ( 215 ), one can plot @xmath -factor as a function of @xmath or,
equivalently, as a function of the period of the charge oscillations
@xmath . This is shown in Fig. 33 .

To stay in the tunnel regime @xmath should be smaller than the mean
level spacing of each QD, approximately 400 @xmath eV in the experiment
[ 87 ] . Therefore, in Fig. 33 we only show the curve for @xmath up to
100 @xmath eV. One has to recall that at these values the Markov
approximation used in the Redfield formulation is not accurate (see end
of Section 39 ), and so our results are only an estimate for @xmath .
For strong tunneling amplitudes, when @xmath , the largest value we find
for @xmath is close to 100. For weak tunneling with @xmath , the
situation is more favorable and larger quality factors (thus relatively
less decoherence) can be achieved. Nevertheless, the one-qubit operation
time, which is proportional to the period, grows linearly with @xmath in
the region of @xmath , as shown in the inset of Fig. 33 . Therefore, at
a certain point other decoherence mechanisms are going to impose an
upper bound on @xmath .

The minimum of @xmath in Fig. 33 occurs when @xmath coincides with the
frequency at which the phonon spectral density is maximum. It
corresponds to the energy splitting between bonding and anti-bonding
states of the DQD, @xmath , being approximately equal to the frequency
of the strongest phonon mode @xmath : @xmath .

From Fig. 33 , it is evident that one can reach certain values for the
@xmath -factor (say, @xmath ) at both weak ( @xmath eV @xmath mK) and
strong ( @xmath eV @xmath K) tunneling. However, these two regimes are
not equally convenient. From Eq. ( 215 ), it is clear that the
temperature dependence of the @xmath -factor is fully determined by the
bonding-antibonding splitting energy @xmath : @xmath . We notice that
@xmath if @xmath ; therefore, the @xmath -factor is less susceptible to
temperature variations for strong tunneling (Fig. 34 ). Another
parameter that influences the @xmath -factor is the dot radius, which
controls the frequency of the strongest phonon mode, @xmath . In the
strong tunneling regime (dashed curve in the inset to Fig. 34 ), one has
to increase the QD size to improve the @xmath -factor. This would reduce
the energy level spacing, hence only moderate improvement in @xmath
-factor is possible. In contrast, in the weak tunneling regime (solid
curve in the inset to Fig. 34 ) one has to reduce the QD size. This can
lead to a significant (up to one order of magnitude) @xmath -factor
improvement.

### 41 Bias Pulsing

In a recent experiment [ 88 , 108 ] , Hayashi and coworkers studied
charge oscillations in a bias-pulsed DQD. In this regime the energy
difference between the left and right-dot single-particle energy levels
is a function of time: @xmath . A typical profile used for pulsing is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath represents the pulse width and @xmath controls the rise and
drop times. During bias pulsing, the tunneling amplitude is kept
constant. In Refs. [ 88 , 108 ] , the difference in energy levels was
induced by applying a bias voltage between left and right leads (and not
by gating the dots separately). For their setup, the maximum level
splitting amplitude was @xmath and @xmath , corresponding to an
effective ramping time of about 100 ps. ⁷ ⁷ 7 The value of @xmath is
obtained by fitting Eq. ( 216 ) to the experimental pulse with an
effective ramping time of @xmath , Ref. [ 112 ] . The tunneling
amplitude was kept constant and estimated as @xmath , which amounts to
charge oscillations with period @xmath . The lattice temperature was
@xmath . Each quantum dot contained about 25 electrons and the effective
dot radius is estimated to be around @xmath based on the device electron
density. From the electron micrograph of the device one finds @xmath ,
hence @xmath . When substituting these values into Eq. ( 215 ), one
finds @xmath .

However, from the experimental data one observes @xmath . Low @xmath
-factors were also obtained by Petta and coworkers in an experiment
where coherent charge oscillations in a DQD were detected upon exciting
the system with microwave radiation [ 109 ] . Other mechanisms of
decoherence do exist in these systems, such as background charge
fluctuations [ 113 ] and electromagnetic noise emerging from the gate
voltages. Our results combined with the recent experiments indicate that
these other mechanisms are more relevant than phonons.

We now turn to yet another possible source of decoherence: Leakage to
the leads when the pulse is on. ⁸ ⁸ 8 For another source of decoherence
due to coupling to the leads, see Ref. [ 114 ] . To illustrate this
alternative source of damping of charge oscillations, we simulate the
bias-pulsing experiment of Refs. [ 88 , 108 ] by implementing a rate
equation formalism similar to that used in Ref. [ 112 ] . The formalism
is based on a transport theory put forward for the strongly biased limit
[ 115 , 116 ] . First, we find the stationary current @xmath through the
DQD structure when the pulse is off (that is, the bias is applied) [ 116
] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the elementary charge. @xmath is the partial width of
the energy level in the left (right) dot due to coupling to the left
(right) lead (when the bias is applied); in the experiment [ 88 , 108 ]
, @xmath . On the other hand, when the pulse is on, the stationary
current is zero. We now apply the pulse @xmath and measure the current
@xmath . In the experiments, the level widths @xmath decrease upon
biasing the system. To include that effect here, we also pulse them:
@xmath and analogously for @xmath , where @xmath is the residual leakage
to the left (right) lead when the pulse is on. We use @xmath , even
though the real leakage in the experiment was likely much smaller. To
obtain the response current one subtracts the stationary component:
@xmath .

Figure 35 (a) shows the response current for a pulse of width @xmath ns
and @xmath ps. The latter is approximately twice as large as in the
experiment and is chosen to enhance the effect. In Refs. [ 88 , 108 ] ,
pulses were applied at a frequency @xmath MHz. The average number of
electrons transfered from the left to the right lead per cycle minus
that in the stationary regime is [ 112 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -- -------

(In the simulations there is no need to apply a sequence of pulses.)
Notice that @xmath oscillates as a function of the pulse width @xmath
[see Fig. 35 (b)] as observed in the experiment. Two main conclusions
can be drawn from our simulation. First, the larger @xmath , the smaller
the visibility of the charge oscillations [ 112 ] . Second, the larger
the leakage rates @xmath when the pulse is on, the stronger the damping
of the oscillations. While the damping due to leakage is presumably too
weak an effect to discern in the data presented in Refs. [ 88 , 108 ] ,
the loss of visibility due to finite @xmath is likely one of the causes
of the small amplitude seen experimentally.

### 42 Conclusions

The main conclusion of the chapter is that, under realistic conditions,
phonon decoherence is one to two orders of magnitude weaker than
expected [ 81 , 104 , 105 , 106 ] . The analytical expression for the
@xmath -factor given in Eq. ( 215 ) was found using an expression for
the phonon spectral density, Eq. ( 204 ), which takes into account
important information concerning the geometry of the double quantum dot
system. In a previous work [ 81 ] an approximate, phenomenological
expression, @xmath , was utilized in the treatment of charge qubits.
There is a striking difference between these two expressions in both the
high- and low-frequency limits. Moreover, an arbitrary coupling constant
was adopted in Ref. [ 81 ] to model the electron-phonon interaction
while our treatment uses a value known to describe the most relevant
phonon coupling in GaAs. On the other hand, other previous work [ 104 ,
105 , 106 ] assumed a spherically symmetric excess charge distribution
in the dot while we have assumed a two-dimensional pancake form. These
differences account for most of the discrepancy between the present and
previous results.

Based on these findings we conclude that phonon decoherence is too weak
to explain the damping of the charge oscillations seen in recent
experiments [ 88 , 108 , 109 ] . Charge leakage to the leads during bias
pulsing is an additional source of damping, as shown in Fig. 35 (b);
however, for realistic parameters [ 88 , 108 , 112 ] , it turns out to
be a weak effect as well. Hence, other decoherence mechanisms, such as
background charge fluctuations or noise in the gate voltages, play the
dominant role [ 113 ] .

There are two distinct ways to operate a double quantum dot charge
qubit: (i) by tunnel pulsing or (ii) by bias pulsing. Tunnel pulsing
seems advantageous due to the smaller number of possible decoherence
channels. In addition, the bias pulsing scheme, in contrast to tunnel
pulsing, introduces significant loss of visibility in the charge
oscillations.

In this chapter we did not attempt to study leakage or loss of fidelity
due to non-adiabatic pulsing, which are both important issues for spin
-based quantum dot qubits (see Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade,
Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and Qubit Decoherence ). Moreover, we have not
attempted to go beyond the Markov approximation when deriving an
equation of motion for the reduced density matrix. Both of these
restrictions in our treatment impose some limitations on the accuracy of
our results, especially for large tunneling amplitudes.

Finally, it is worth mentioning that some extra insight would be gained
by measuring the @xmath -factor as a function of the tunneling amplitude
@xmath experimentally. Such a measurement would allow one to map the
spectral density of the boson modes responsible for the decoherence.
This would provide very valuable information about the leading
decoherence mechanisms in double quantum dot systems.

## Chapter \thechapter Conclusion

### 43 General Overview

The continuous minituarization of the integrated circuits is going to
affect the underlying physics of the future computers. This new physics
first came into play as the effect of Coulomb blockade in the electron
transport through the small conducting island. Then, as the size of the
island @xmath continued to shrink further, quantum phase coherence
length @xmath became larger than @xmath leading to the mesoscopic
fluctuations – fluctuations of the island’s quantum mechanical
properties upon small external perturbations. Quantum coherence of the
mesoscopic systems is essential for building reliable quantum computer.
Unfortunately, one can not completely isolate the system from the
environment and its coupling to the environment inevitably leads to the
loss of coherence or decoherence. All these effects are to be thoroughly
investigated as the potential of the future applications is enormous.

### 44 Main Conclusions of My Work

In Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and
Qubit Decoherence I studied Coulomb blockade oscillations of the linear
conductance through a quantum dot weakly coupled to the leads via
multichannel tunnel junctions. To obtain analytic results I have assumed
that the energy levels in the QD are equally spaced. The
electron-electron interactions in the QD have been described by the
constant interaction model, though thermal excitations with all possible
spins were taken into account.

Firstly, I found the expression for the linear conductance in the
spinless case [Eq. ( 33 )]. It is valid at arbitrary values of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Then, in Section 10 , I applied the spinless case
theory result to the problem of the transport via quantum dot in the
quantum Hall regime. The quantum dot energy levels in this case are
equidistant with the spacing given by Eq. ( 46 ).

Linear conductance in the case of spin- @xmath electrons at arbitrary
values of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is given by Eq. ( 66 ). It is
plotted in Fig. 10 for the charging energy of the quantum dot equal to
mean level spacing. Eq. ( 66 ) can be used as an experimental data fit
to extract the charging energy and mean level spacing at given
temperature.

Though I do not expect my quantitative results to precisely describe a
quantum dot with random energy levels, they certainly give correct order
of magnitude for the conductance oscillations and their generic
features.

In Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and
Qubit Decoherence I studied corrections to the spacings between Coulomb
blockade peaks due to finite dot-lead tunnel couplings. I considered
both GUE and GOE random matrix ensembles of 2D quantum dots. The
electron-electron interactions in the QD were described by the constant
exchange interaction model. @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath spin states of
the QD were accounted for, thus, limiting the applicability of my
results to not so large exchange interaction constants: @xmath . I also
assumed that @xmath .

I calculated the ensemble averaged correction to the Coulomb blockade
peak spacing in the even valley, Eq. ( 115 ). At @xmath my result
coincide with that in Ref. [ 43 ] . I found that the averaged correction
decreases monotonically (nonetheless, staying positive) as the exchange
interaction constant @xmath is increased, see Figs. 19 , 20 , and 21 .
These dependences are very robust with respect to the choice of RMT
ensemble or change in the following parameters: charging energy, mean
level spacing, or temperature. The averaged correction to the odd
spacing is of the same magnitude and opposite sign.

I calculated the rms of the correction fluctuations, see Eqs. ( 131 )-(
138 ). It is of the same order as the average value of the correction,
see Figs. 19 and 20 , and weakly depend on @xmath , see Fig. 23 . For a
small subset of the quantum dot ensemble realizations, at the realistic
value of @xmath , the correction is of the opposite sign, see Figs. 19
and 20 . The rms of the correction fluctuations in the odd valley is the
same as that in the even one.

In the experiment by Jeong and co-workers [ 45 ] the corrections to the
even and odd peak spacings due to finite dot-lead tunnel couplings were
measured. It was found that the even (odd) peak spacing increases
(decreases) as the tunnel couplings are increased. This is in the
qualitative agreement with the theory, see Eq. ( 115 ). The magnitude of
the effect was measured at different values of the gas parameter @xmath
(and, hence @xmath ) as well. Unfortunately, from these measurements one
can not draw any conclusion about the behavior of the correction to the
peak spacing as a function of @xmath . Hence, more experiments are
needed to confirm my theory. To measure the ensemble averaged correction
to the peak spacing and its fluctuations as a function of @xmath one
should fabricate a set of 2D lateral quantum dots with different values
of @xmath . Then carry out the measurements on each device under similar
conditions.

In Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and
Qubit Decoherence I studied the effect of mesoscopic fluctuations on the
magnitude of errors that can occur in exchange operations on quantum dot
spin-qubits. I considered mid-size double quantum dots, with an odd
number of electrons in the range of a few tens in each dot. My results
indicated two different scenarios for quantum dot qubit implementations.

First, if one is willing to characterize each quantum dot pair
separately and have them operate one by one, mesoscopic fluctuations
will be irrelevant. In this scenario, each pair of QDs will require a
different pulse shape and duration since QDs are not microscopically
identical. Multi-electron QDs are tunable enough, easy to couple, and
much easier to fabricate than one-electron dots; therefore,
multi-electron QDs are most appropriate for this case.

Second, if the goal is to achieve genuine scalability, one has to
operate qubits in a similar and uniform way, utilizing a single pulse
source. In this case, pulse duration time @xmath and switching time
@xmath [Eq. ( 157 )] should be the same for all QD pairs. Thus, four
tuning parameters per QD may be necessary to achieve the following
goals: (i) find isolated, single-occupied energy level (two parameters);
(ii) align this level with the corresponding level in an adjacent QD
(one parameter); (iii) control the inter-dot coupling (one parameter).
For parameters involved in (i) and (ii), an accuracy of a few percent
will likely be required. Finally, control over the inter-dot coupling
parameter, (iii), must allow for the application of smooth pulse shapes
in the picosecond range. Although these requirements seem quite
stringent, recent experiments indicate that they could be met [ 89 ] .

In summary, my analysis indicate that mid-size QDs, with ten to a few
tens of electrons, while not allowing for extremely fast gates, are
still good candidates for spin-qubits. They offer the advantage of being
simpler to fabricate and manipulate, but at the same time require
accurate, simultaneous control of several parameters. Errors related to
detuning and sample-to-sample fluctuations can be large, but can be kept
a secondary concern with respect to dephasing effects provided that a
sufficient number of independent electrodes or tuning parameters exists.

In Chapter Quantum Dots: Coulomb Blockade, Mesoscopic Fluctuations, and
Qubit Decoherence I studied decoherence of a quantum dot charge qubit
due to coupling to piezoelectric acoustic phonons in the Born-Markov
approximation. I calculated the dependence of the @xmath -factor on
lattice temperature, quantum dot size, and interdot coupling. The
analytical expression for the @xmath -factor given in Eq. ( 215 ) was
found using an expression for the phonon spectral density, Eq. ( 204 ),
which takes into account important information concerning the geometry
of the double quantum dot system. The main conclusion is that, under
realistic conditions, phonon decoherence is one to two orders of
magnitude weaker than expected [ 81 , 104 , 105 , 106 ] . Based on these
findings I conclude that phonon decoherence is too weak to explain the
damping of the charge oscillations seen in recent experiments [ 88 , 108
, 109 ] . Hence, other decoherence mechanisms, such as background charge
fluctuations or noise in the gate voltages, play the dominant role [ 113
] .

There are two distinct ways to operate a double quantum dot charge
qubit: (i) by tunnel pulsing or (ii) by bias pulsing. Tunnel pulsing
seems advantageous due to the smaller number of possible decoherence
channels. In addition, the bias pulsing scheme, in contrast to tunnel
pulsing, introduces significant loss of visibility in the charge
oscillations.

Finally, it is worth mentioning that some extra insight would be gained
by measuring the @xmath -factor as a function of the tunneling amplitude
@xmath experimentally. Such a measurement would allow one to map the
spectral density of the boson modes responsible for the decoherence.
This would provide very valuable information about the leading
decoherence mechanisms in double quantum dot systems.

### 45 Possible Directions of Future Research

In my opinion, the theory of the Coulomb blockade phenomena in the
quantum dots is in very good shape. I believe there is no experimental
result in the last 5 years which comes as a surprise. Moreover, in most
instances there is a quantitative agreement between experimental results
and the theory. Therefore, one can say that the Coulomb blockade
phenomenon provide an important tool for analyzing quantum mechanical
properties of the quantum dot.

The correction to the spacing between Coulomb blockade peaks due to
dot-lead tunnel couplings turned out to be very small – both the value
averaged over mesoscopic fluctuations and its rms. I expect that it is
going to be quite challenging to discern this effect in the experiment.

Mesoscopic fluctuations are proved to be an important limiting factor
for implementation of the quantum dot spin-qubits. However, it should be
possible to demonstrate basic spin swapping between two quantum dots in
the laboratory provided that enough independent electrodes (tuning
parameters) exist. Besides, the commercial pulse generating technique
should be significantly improved so that shorter pulses with the
well-controlled area could be generated. The experiments on the exchange
operations in the quantum dot spin-qubits are currently on the way. The
industrial applications require the accuracy of @xmath and, therefore,
are very much questionable at this point.

I find that phonon decoherence is too weak to explain the damping of the
charge oscillations seen in recent experiments. Hence, more theoretical
work needs to be done to quantify other decoherence mechanisms. In my
opinion, the following mechanisms can play the dominant role:
(i) background charge fluctuations and/or (ii) noise in the gate
voltages. On the experimental side, one should measure the decoherence
rate as a function of the tunneling amplitude. Such a measurement would
allow one to map the spectral density of the boson modes responsible for
the decoherence. In general, more work needs to be done to reduce charge
decoherence in double quantum dot setups.

In conclusion, I think the field of quantum computing will continue to
stimulate both the theoretical research and advancements in experimental
techniques for years to come.

## Chapter \thechapter Occupation Numbers in the Canonical Ensemble

In the canonical ensemble, where the total number of particles, @xmath ,
is fixed, it is difficult to calculate fermionic occupation numbers,
Eq. ( 19 ), directly. This is true even in the case of equidistant
energy levels separation.

Fortunately, the bosonization technique allows one to express fermionic
field annihilation and creation operators, @xmath and @xmath , in terms
of the bosonic annihilation and creation, @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s, and
ladder, @xmath and @xmath , operators [ 34 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the length of the artificial system; @xmath is the Fermi wave
vector; @xmath is the number of excess electrons operator; @xmath is the
wave vector; and @xmath is the coordinate. Since these bosons naturally
exist in the grand canonical ensemble, one can fix total number of
excess electrons, @xmath , and calculate occupation numbers in the
bosonic basis, Eq. ( 20 ).

Occupation numbers, Eq. ( 20 ), have the following properties:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -- -------

They are similar to @xmath and @xmath ones of the Fermi-Dirac
distribution and reflect the electron-hole symmetry. Combining these two
properties one can get the recursion relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit of low temperature, @xmath , for @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the high temperature limit, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -- -------

thus, we find first correction to the Fermi-Dirac distribution. The form
of the correction remains valid even for the slightly non-equidistant
energy levels in the dot. If this is the case we need to define ratio
@xmath in the last expression as @xmath , where @xmath is the mean level
spacing.

## Chapter \thechapter On the Electron-Phonon Coupling in GaAs quantum
dots

The material in this appendix is largely based on Ref. [ 117 ] .

## Appendix A Introduction

There are two types of phonon modes in GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures that
we need to worry about: deformation potential and piezoelectric. The
former is always present in all semiconductor materials, while the
latter is due to the lack of inversion symmetry in the zinc-blend
lattice structure of GaAs. Optical phonons do not usually couple
strongly to electrons at low temperatures (with some exceptions, like in
the Peierls stability problem). Acoustic phonons, particularly
longitudinal ones, do couple more effectively to electrons at low
temperatures (transversal phonons do not usually couple to electrons in
the absence of Umklapp processes).

## Appendix B Deformation Potential Contribution to the Electron-Phonon
Coupling

The deformation potential only makes sense in the long wavelength,
acoustic branch limit (see Section 4.12 in Ref. [ 118 ] or Section 6.14
in Ref. [ 119 ] ), where the phonons are associated to compression waves
of the ion displacement field. Let @xmath be the displacement field in
the continuum limit (so, the crystal is considered as a continuum
elastic medium). Then, the relative volume change due to the compression
wave is given by @xmath . This volume compression causes a local change
in the lattice constant, which, in turn, leads to a local variation of
the conduction band lower edge, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (225)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is called the deformation potential constant (the upper
edge of the valence band would shift in the opposite direction). Thus,
for a plane wave @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -- -------

So, it is clear now that only longitudinal deformation potential phonons
are important. We can put that into a more convenient form for the
electron-phonon Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (227)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can rewrite the displacement field in terms of normal modes (phonons)
and introduce bosonic creation and annihilation operators:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the ion mass density, @xmath is a normalization volume,
and @xmath is the polarization unit vector. Also, we can go from first
to the second quantized representation for the electrons by recalling
that, for the Bloch momentum (neglecting Umklapp processes)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a result,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (231)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the electron-phonon coupling matrix element is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -- -------

Obviously, this is an oversimplification of the problem since the
deformation potential constant is actually a tensor in any non-cubic
crystal. But since we are only interested in the longitudinal modes and
have assumed the medium to be approximately isotropic, the
simplification should be good enough. Notice that @xmath when @xmath .
Thus the coupling between electrons and deformation potential phonons is
suppressed at long wavelengths. This is valid, for example, at low
temperatures.

## Appendix C Piezoelectric Contribution to the Electron-Phonon Coupling

In III-V compounds, there is an electric polarization field associated
with the strain (displacement) field:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (233)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is called the piezoelectric tensor and @xmath is the strain
tensor,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to find the associate electric potential energy, we need to
solve Poisson’s equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (235)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recalling Eq. ( 228 ) and assuming a normal mode decomposition of the
electric potential, namely,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (236)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -- -------

Following the same steps as in the previous section, we can then write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (238)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the piezoelectric matrix element is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have assumed an isotropic dielectric function ( @xmath ). Now,
notice that @xmath for @xmath . Therefore, the coupling between
electrons and piezoelectric phonons gains importance at low
temperatures. Also notice that @xmath is real while @xmath is imaginary.
Therefore, these two electron-phonon amplitudes are out of phase by
@xmath and do not interfere.

## Appendix D Combining Two Mechanisms

While the piezoelectric coupling constant is intrinsically tensorial, we
can try to use an isotropic approximation in order to estimate its
magnitude. We introduce the substitution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the average over all orientations of @xmath at
fixed @xmath . Thus, for the longitudinal acoustic phonons, one can
write the total electron-phonon coupling as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression should be used with caution since for the averaged
piezoelectric contribution it actually mixes longitudinal and
transversal phonon modes. Bruus and coworkers [ 111 ] go into some
details when explaining how the parameter @xmath (called the
piezoelectric coupling) should actually be calculated in terms of phonon
velocities and the dominant component of the piezoelectric tensor.

It is convenient to rewrite the electron-phonon coupling Hamiltonian in
terms of the electron density operator in the momentum representation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -- -------

According to experimental data compiled by Bruus and coworkers [ 111 ]
for GaAs

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, one can see that the crossover phonon wavelength, where the
piezoelectric contribution begins to dominate over the deformation
potential, is equal to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (244)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we recall that @xmath m/s for the longitudinal sound waves in GaAs,
we find that @xmath corresponds to a temperature of @xmath K.

Thus, in the milli-Kelvin range, one can safely neglect the deformation
potential contribution.

## Chapter \thechapter Derivation of Eqs. (207)-(209)

For @xmath , Eq. ( 191 ) is time-independent: @xmath . Since the @xmath
matrix is also time-independent [Eq. ( 196 )], the matrix @xmath defined
by Eq. ( 198 ) is time-independent as well. After some straightforward
operator algebra, we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (245)
     @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can rewrite Eq. ( 246 ) as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (247)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ’s are real coefficients:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (248)
     @xmath      (249)
  -- -------- -- -------

The density matrix @xmath is a @xmath Hermitian matrix with unit trace.
Hence, it has three real independent components and can be written as
follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us substitute Eqs. ( 250 ) and ( 247 ) into the Redfield equation
[Eq. ( 197 )] and use that @xmath and @xmath . A simple algebraic
manipulation leads to three differential equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (251)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (252)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The initial conditions are @xmath and @xmath . Eq. ( 251 ) decouples
from Eqs. ( 252 ) and ( 253 ). Its solution is given by Eq. ( 208 ),
where we used the following identity: @xmath . Eqs. ( 252 ) and ( 253 )
form a closed system. Their solution is given by Eqs. ( 207 ) and ( 209
).

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath [Eqs. ( 211 ) and ( 212 ),
respectively] are calculated using Eqs. ( 248 ), ( 249 ), and ( 199 ).

\ssp