Research in quantum games has flourished during recent years. However,
it seems that opinion remains divided about their true quantum character
and content. For example, one argument says that quantum games are
nothing but ‘disguised’ classical games and that to quantize a game is
equivalent to replacing the original game by a different classical game.
The present thesis contributes towards the ongoing debate about quantum
nature of quantum games by developing two approaches addressing the
related issues. Both approaches take Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR)-type
experiments as the underlying physical set-ups to play two-player
quantum games. In the first approach, the players’ strategies are unit
vectors in their respective planes, with the knowledge of coordinate
axes being shared between them. Players perform measurements in an
EPR-type setting and their payoffs are defined as functions of the
correlations, i.e. without reference to classical or quantum mechanics.
Classical bimatrix games are reproduced if the input states are
classical and perfectly anti-correlated, as for a classical correlation
game. However, for a quantum correlation game, with an entangled singlet
state as input, qualitatively different solutions are obtained.
Reproducing the properties of quantum correlation games appears to be
conceptually impossible within the framework of classical games. The
second approach in the present thesis is based on the fact that all
derivations of the Bell inequalities assume local hidden variable (LHV)
models which produce a set of positive-definite probabilities for
detecting a particle with a given spin orientation. In recent years it
has been shown that when the predictions of a LHV model are made to
violate the Bell inequalities the result is that some probability
measures assume negative values. With the requirement that classical
games result when the predictions of a LHV model do not violate the Bell
inequalities, our analysis looks at the impact which the emergence of
negative probabilities has on the solutions of two-player games which
are physically implemented using the EPR-type experiments.

\prevdegrees

BSc (Hons), University of Sheffield, UK, 1995 \department Centre for
Mathematics \thisdegree Doctor of Philosophy \university University of
Hull, Hull, UK \degreemonth January \degreeyear 2006 \chairmanname Dr.
Timothy Scott \chairmantitle Head of the Centre for Mathematics \super
Dr. Timothy Scott \supertitle Senior Lecturer
