Predictive learning has traditionally been a standard inductive
learning, where different sub-problem formulations have been identified.
One of the most representative is classification , consisting on the
estimation of a mapping from the feature space into a finite class
space. Depending on the cardinality of the finite class space we are
left with binary or multiclass classification problems. Finally, the
presence or absence or a “natural” order among classes will separate
nominal from ordinal problems.

Although two-class and nominal classification problems have been
dissected in the literature, the ordinal sibling has not yet received a
lot of attention, even with many learning problems involving classifying
examples into classes which have a natural order. Scenarios in which it
is natural to rank instances occur in many fields, such as information
retrieval, collaborative filtering, econometric modeling and natural
sciences.

Conventional methods for nominal classes or for regression problems
could be employed to solve ordinal data problems; however, the use of
techniques designed specifically for ordered classes yields simpler
classifiers, making it easier to interpret the factors that are being
used to discriminate among classes, and generalises better. Although the
ordinal formulation seems conceptually simpler than nominal, some
technical difficulties to incorporate in the algorithms this piece of
additional information – the order – may explain the widespread use of
conventional methods to tackle the ordinal data problem.

This dissertation addresses this void by proposing a nonparametric
procedure for the classification of ordinal data based on the extension
of the original dataset with additional variables, reducing the
classification task to the well-known two-class problem. This framework
unifies two well-known approaches for the classification of ordinal
categorical data, the minimum margin principle and the generic approach
by Frank and Hall. It also presents a probabilistic interpretation for
the neural network model. A second novel model, the unimodal model, is
also introduced and a parametric version is mapped into neural networks.
Several case studies are presented to assert the validity of the
proposed models.
