# Chapter 2 Hyperbolic Second Order Systems

As soon as one tries to describe a phenomenon in objective terms,
mathematics comes necessarily into play. If the phenomenon is dynamical
it is very likely that one will not be able to proceed without the tool
of partial differential equations. If these equations governing this
dynamical process arise from an action principle (which usually is the
case in mathematical physics) these will naturally form a quasi-linear
(second order) system of partial differential equations. We will find
various examples for such systems (arising from action principles) in
the course of this thesis. It is thus favorable to have a well-oiled
machinery, when it comes to questions concerning well-posedness. To
provide the necessary tools to prove such results for the systems
arising in the context of elasticity in chapter 4 is the aim of this
chapter:

We will essentially state two results. The first is concerned with the
pure initial value problem and is due to Kato et al [ 30 ] . The second
deals with the initial boundary value problem and is due to Koch [ 36 ]
. We will not use these results directly but rather give corollaries,
which will turn out to be more appropriate for later application.

### 2.1 Basics

We start with a some general definitions concerning quasi-linear second
order systems of partial differential equations: the latter are of the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the unknown @xmath appears linearly in the highest order
derivatives, i.e. @xmath . The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are
allowed to depend on lower order derivatives of the unknown and may also
depend on @xmath , the coordinates on the base space. One finds that
most information about the system can be read off from the highest order
terms. We thus define

###### Definition.

The principal part of a system of PDE is the part involving the highest
order derivatives.

For the case of equation ( 2.1 ) the principal part is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition.

The principal symbol corresponding to the principal part ( 2.2 ) (and
thus to the system ( 2.1 )) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally the characteristic polynomial is given by the determinant of the
principal symbol

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let upper case Latin indices range from one to @xmath . Then the
characteristic polynomial is homogenous of order @xmath in the co-vector
@xmath . Note that both the principal symbol and the characteristic
polynomial depend on the unknown @xmath and its first order derivatives.
In this sense the unknown determines the character of the equation. This
fact has to be kept in mind for the following definitions, where the
dependence on the unknown will be suppressed.

In the following we restrict ourselves to a certain type of systems:

###### Definition.

The system ( 2.1 ) is called weakly hyperbolic w.r.t. a co-vector @xmath
, if @xmath and the polynomial @xmath admits only real zeros @xmath for
any choice of @xmath , i.e. if the characteristic polynomial is a
hyperbolic polynomial. Such a @xmath is then called sub-characteristic.

This conditions turns out to be sufficient to obtain well-posedness for
linear systems (see [ 32 ] ), but it is too weak to establish
well-posedness for the quasi-linear equations ( 2.1 ). There are various
stronger concepts of hyperbolicity, which are not equivalent. Without
the attempt to give an overview (which can f.e. be found in [ 3 ] or [
12 ] ) we state the notion used in this thesis.

###### Definition.

We call the system ( 2.1 ) regular hyperbolic if it is regular
hyperbolic w.r.t. a pair @xmath , i.e. if there exist a pair @xmath
satisfying @xmath and constants @xmath such that for arbitrary @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

while

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath satisfying @xmath .

###### Remark.

This is an open condition (it involves real inequalities). Suppose
everything is sufficiently smooth and the system is regular hyperbolic
for the unknown @xmath . Then the system is also regular hyperbolic in
some neighborhood of this @xmath (in a suitable topology).

The second condition in the definition above is of some importance on
its own. For later need we define:

###### Definition.

An objects @xmath is called strongly elliptic if the following
inequality holds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a positive real number @xmath . This condition is also called
Legendre-Hadamard condition or rank one positivity.

The two notions of hyperbolicity given so far are connected via the
following lemma:

###### Lemma 1.

Regular hyperbolicity implies weak hyperbolicity. Every w.r.t. a pair
@xmath regular hyperbolic operator is also weakly hyperbolic w.r.t the
co-vector @xmath .

A proof of this statement can be found f.e. in [ 3 ] . In short the
argument works like this: Hyperbolicity is defined as a condition on the
zeros of a determinant. This is equivalent to an eigenvalue problem,
which due to the symmetry of the involved objects can be shown to admit
only real eigenvalues.

There exists another even weaker notion of hyperbolicity:

###### Definition.

A co-vector @xmath is called non-characteristic, if @xmath . In turn a
co-vector @xmath , for which @xmath is called characteristic.

Clearly a sub-characteristic co-vector is non-characteristic but not the
contrary has not necessarily to be true. This can be seen directly from
the definitions.

###### Remark.

Note that hyperbolicity in the forms given here is a point-wise (i.e.
local in particular) condition.

To get used to the notation we discuss the scalar wave equation on
Minkowski space as an easy example:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The principal part is simply given by the d’Alembert operator acting on
the unknown: @xmath . Thus the principal symbol is @xmath . Because we
are only dealing with the scalar case in this example, the
characteristic polynomial coincides with the principal symbol. We find
that light-like co-vectors are characteristic and that all other
co-vectors are non-characteristic. Choosing @xmath we get that the zeros
of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

are all real. Since we can always find coordinates such that @xmath at a
certain point for time-like @xmath , we find that the wave equation is
weakly hyperbolic w.r.t. every time-like co-vector. (Thus every
time-like co-vector is sub-characteristic.) It is easy to see that it is
not weakly hyperbolic w.r.t. any space-like or light-like vector.
Finally we note that the wave equation is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. any
pair @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are both time-like.

We have mentioned, that the notion of weak hyperbolicity is not strong
enough to guarantee well-posedness of the Cauchy problem. In the next
sections we will see that regular hyperbolicity is a sufficient
assumption for that matter.

### 2.2 Local existence with no boundaries present

The ultimate goal of this section is to give a local existence result
based purely on the concept of regular hyperbolicity. To this purpose we
first state a local existence result which is a simplification of a
theorem due to Kato et al. [ 30 ] and then modify it. The final
corollary will in some sense be weaker than the original theorem, but
will be more natural from a space-time point of view, since no preferred
foliation is included. For this purpose we make use of an domain of
dependence result due to Christodoulou [ 12 ] . The original theorem by
Kato et al. reads as follows:

Given a quasi-linear second order system

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

for an unknown @xmath which is a mapping from @xmath to @xmath . Greek
indices run from @xmath to @xmath , where @xmath . The coefficients
@xmath and @xmath depend smoothly on the unknown, its first order
derivatives as well as on time @xmath and on the point @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is an open set. We assume that @xmath take values in @xmath
.

In addition to these differentiability properties we require the
principal part to show the following symmetry:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also assume that the principal part is regular hyperbolic w.r.t.
@xmath for some reference state in @xmath . This means that there exists
a real @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath as well as for all @xmath and all @xmath .

Under these assumptions the Cauchy problem with initial conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is considered, where we assume that @xmath . Then the following theorem
holds:

###### Theorem 1.

Assume @xmath and let the preceding assumptions hold. Then the Cauchy
problem for ( 2.10 ) is well-posed in the following sense: Given @xmath
such that @xmath , there is a neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath
and a positive number @xmath such that, for any initial conditions in
@xmath , ( 2.1 ) has a unique solution @xmath for @xmath with @xmath .
Moreover @xmath for @xmath and the map @xmath is continuous in the
topology of @xmath uniformly in @xmath .

A proof of a more general version can be found in [ 30 ] .

We will alter this result in two directions. On the one hand we would
like to generalize it to arbitrary regular hyperbolic systems. This on
the other hand brings up a new problem, namely the need for a version of
the theorem, which is local in space. This need arises since regular
hyperbolicity in general does not lead to a situation covered directly
by the theorem. This will be seen in the next lemma. Then we will show
in a final lemma how to deal with this problem by giving a way how to
continue initial data on an open set @xmath to initial data on all of
@xmath in a proper way so that the theorem can still be applied. But
first we show how the requirement of regular hyperbolicity locally leads
to a problem of the above type.

###### Lemma 2.

Assume that the system ( 2.10 ) obeys the symmetry ( 2.12 ) and is
regular hyperbolic w.r.t. a pair @xmath . If the coefficients are
regular (smooth for example) there exists a coordinate system, every
point of space-time has a neighborhood where we can find coordinates
such that the requirements of the theorem are met.

In the proof we will not deal with the differentiability requirements
but will only care about the geometry. First note that the symmetry (
2.12 ) is unchanged under coordinate transformations. The goal is that
of finding a foliation, such that @xmath is the co-normal and @xmath is
tangent to the time-flow, i.e. a coordinate system in which @xmath .
Having this picture in mind, we first assume that @xmath is closed, i.e.
that @xmath . This implies that @xmath for a scalar potential @xmath .
By choosing this @xmath as new time coordinate, we obtain @xmath . For
the other coordinates we have to solve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means the new coordinate has to be constant along the flow of
@xmath . Let @xmath denote this flow. Then (since @xmath is time-like)
the equation @xmath uniquely determines the parameter @xmath . Now we
define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defined this way, @xmath is constant along the integral curves of @xmath
and thus obeys the above equation. Hence @xmath constitute a coordinate
system satisfying the claims of the lemma.

If @xmath is not closed we have to proceed along a slightly different
route. Fix an arbirtary point on the manifold we can find a
hyper-surface with co-normal @xmath such that at the chosen point @xmath
coincides with @xmath . Since we assumed the system to be regular
hyperbolic w.r.t. @xmath , by continuity there exists a neighborhood of
the chosen point, where the system is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. the pair
@xmath . Since @xmath is hyper-surface-orthogonal by definition, we can
use the first part of the proof to conclude the result of the lemma.

###### Remark.

For a regular hyperbolic system we can find data, such that the
requirements of the theorem are locally met. To apply the theorem, we
have to extend the initial data to all of @xmath . This is the gaol of
the following lemma.

###### Lemma 3.

Let @xmath be a non-empty open subset of @xmath and let @xmath be small
initial data on @xmath , i.e. a pair of functions satisfying the
requirements for the theorem restricted to the open set @xmath . Let
@xmath be a non-empty open subset of @xmath . We also assume the
existence of a reference solution, which induces initial data in the
sense of the theorem on all of @xmath . Then there exists a pair of
functions @xmath , which is an initial data set in the precise sense of
the theorem with the property that @xmath in @xmath . The development of
the initial data in the domain of dependence of @xmath is independent of
the continuation and depends solely on the choice for @xmath .

###### Remark.

This lemma allows us to use the theorem also for the case when data are
only given in a subregion of @xmath . For the notion of ”domain of
dependence” we refer to [ 12 ] . For the given context we might sloppily
translate the last part of the lemma as: ”there exists a unique local
solution”.

We denote the initial data on @xmath coming from the reference solution
by @xmath . Then on @xmath we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

One could think of multiplying this with the characteristic function for
@xmath and adding this then to @xmath . These data would satisfy the
algebraic conditions, but would not meet the differentiability
requirements in general. We thus have to smoothen these data. Let @xmath
be a smooth nonnegative function on all of @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath is defined on all of @xmath and has the required
differentiability. Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

has the required differentiability too. We have to check that the
hyperbolicity conditions are not violated. By assumption they obviously
hold in @xmath and @xmath . They also hold in the region @xmath , since
the contribution of @xmath can be made arbitrarily small by choosing
@xmath small enough (in the proper norms, f.e. the supremum norm). This
works by the smoothness of @xmath . In the region @xmath @xmath and
@xmath clearly coincide. This proves the first part of the lemma. The
second part of the lemma (concerning domain of dependence) is actually
proven in theorem 5.10 of [ 12 ] which we can directly apply to the
given setup.

###### Corollary 1.

Given a regular hyperbolic system of the form ( 2.10 ). Then the Cauchy
problem is locally well-posed in the sense, that for local (in space)
initial data there exists a unique local (in space and time) solution
for the initial value problem, which depends continuously on the data.

The involved function spaces are the same as in the theorem.

###### Remark.

Note that strong ellipticity of the spatial part (i.e. the
Legendre-Hadamard condition) was sufficient to guarantee well-posedness.
In the presence of boundaries the need for more restrictive conditions
will arise.

### 2.3 Local existence in the presence of boundaries

In analogy to the previous section we are going to state a local
existence result on the initial-boundary value problem for quasi-linear
second order systems. The main theorem is due to Koch [ 36 ] . A similar
result by Chrzestzczyk can be found in [ 13 ] , although the Koch
version is much closer to the Lagrangian approach used in this work as
we will see. Although the theorem in its genuine form allows for mixed
boundary conditions we will only state a version involving just one kind
of boundary conditions namely such of Neumann-type. As before we will
first state the main theorem and then discuss some of its properties and
point out the main differences to the unbounded case.
Let @xmath be a bounded domain in @xmath with smooth boundary @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath denote the outer co-normal
to @xmath . Greek indices run from zero to three, while Latin indices
range from one to three. The independent variables are @xmath .

Suppose we are given a system of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

in @xmath subjected to the boundary condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

at @xmath . Here both @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath , the
unknown @xmath and its first order derivatives @xmath . Thus the given
system is quasi-linear. We seek solution for the following initial
conditions at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume that @xmath for @xmath . The principal part is obtained from
@xmath by variation w.r.t. the gradient of the unknown:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be an open neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath . We assume that
@xmath and @xmath are smooth functions on @xmath . We additionally
assume the following symmetry of the principal part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this relation is automatic, if the system is derived from an
action principle. Now comes the crucial input, namely the hyperbolicity
requirements. From the previous section we expect point-wise positivity
conditions on certain portions of the principal part. This view will
only partly persist. For the time-components we require that for any
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some positive constant @xmath . This is the same condition as we had
before in the unbounded case. The difference comes with the spatial
part: Instead of a point-wise condition we now have the following
coerciveness condition: for any @xmath , @xmath with @xmath there exist
constants @xmath and @xmath , such that for all smooth @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This inequality is usually called Garding inequality (see f.e. [ 54 ] ).

###### Remark.

We will see later in this section, that the Garding inequality implies
the Legendre-Hadamard condition ( 2.7 ). The converse statement however
is in general not true.

If @xmath , then this coercivity condition tells us that the @xmath norm
can be estimated from above by some bilinear form. If @xmath is smooth,
then it is bounded too and the left had side in ( 2.28 ) can itself be
estimates from above by the @xmath norm. Thus the bilinear form
generates an equivalent norm. Along this way, one can try to prove
existence results. In the general case however @xmath and this does not
work immediately.

If one is only interested in Dirichlet boundary conditions, the unknown
can be assumed to vanish at the boundary. In that case the coercivity
condition is equivalent to the Legendre-Hadamard condition. This will be
shown in a lemma following the main theorem.

Since boundaries are present, a smallness assumption on the initial data
will not be sufficient anymore. We will have to guarantee that the
initial data go along with the boundary conditions. This requirement is
reflected in the so called compatibility conditions, which represent
restrictions on the initial data. A discussion of the actual meaning of
these conditions will be given following the theorem.

###### Theorem 2.

Suppose the compatibility conditions are satisfied up to order @xmath .
Then under the above assumptions there exists a unique @xmath and a
unique classical solution @xmath of the system ( 2.22 )-( 2.24 ) with
@xmath if @xmath ( @xmath denotes all derivatives). In addition the
solution depends continuously on the initial data.

###### Remark.

Note that the assumptions of the theorem involve mainly open conditions.
Thus if we can show them to hold for some initial data, we immediately
obtain a neighborhood of the original data as well as admissible data.
Consequently the existence of a reference solution implies the existence
of solutions, which are small perturbations. Then the continuity part of
the theorem tells us, that these solutions remain close to the reference
state at least for short times.

As was mentioned in the introduction, a proof of (an extended version
of) this theorem by Koch can be found [ 36 ] .

We still need to discuss the compatibility conditions. Roughly speaking
they guarantee, that the initial data satisfy the boundary conditions up
to a certain order in time. Higher time derivatives of the initial data
are expressed via the field equations. F.e. we say that the
compatibility conditions are satisfied to zeroth order, if the boundary
conditions hold, where @xmath is substituted by @xmath . It is quite
lengthy to actually write down these conditions for general order, so at
this stage we only give the recipe how they are obtained.

We introduce (suppressing the @xmath -dependence)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

To express the time derivatives in terms of the initial data we use the
differential equations ( 2.22 ) and their time derivatives. @xmath for
example is recovered as a function of the lower time derivatives by
solving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the highest order in time. This is possible, since the coefficient
is given by @xmath which is non-degenerate by the assumptions of the
theorem. The solution is called @xmath . By induction we can eliminate
all higher time derivatives and are left with functions, which are
completely determined by the initial data and their spatial derivatives.
Abusing notation we denote these again by @xmath . Then the
compatibility condition reads

###### Definition.

We say, the compatibility condition is satisfied up to order @xmath ,
provided

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is satisfied for all @xmath .

###### Remark.

This intuitive definition only works if the ingredients are sufficiently
smooth.

In general one will have to deal with non-continuous functions, i.e.
elements of certain Sobolev spaces. In this setup the restriction of a
function to the boundary is not defined in a strict sense. This problem
is overcome by introducing the trace operator (see f.e. [ 19 ] or [ 54 ]
), which assigns boundary values in a proper way. One can show (see [ 19
] p. 259) that the trace of a function @xmath does vanish on the
boundary if and only if @xmath . Using this we give an alternative
definition for the compatibility condition:

###### Definition.

We say, the compatibility condition is satisfied up to order @xmath ,
provided

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

In general it is not clear whether the compatibility conditions can be
satisfied. In the actual case we will show, that under certain
assumptions a large class of initial data can be given satisfying the
compatibility condition. Assume we are given a time-independent
reference solution for the system ( 2.22 )-( 2.23 ). We call this
solution @xmath . It induces initial data of the form @xmath . Further
assume that the principal part satisfies the Legendre-Hadamard condition
w.r.t. the co-normal @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary @xmath and a positive constant @xmath . Then we have the
following lemma

###### Lemma 4.

Assume that @xmath . (There are no mixed components in the reference
deformation.) Then under the two assumptions made above, we can derive
initial conditions close to those for the reference deformation, which
obey the compatibility conditions.

First of all note that the zero-component of the co-normal vanishes
since the co-normal is annihilated by @xmath by virtue of the setup:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us first prove the lemma for the zeroth order. Let @xmath denote a
vector field transversal to the boundary @xmath . (If a metric @xmath is
given we can choose f.e. @xmath ) Then the zeroth order condition reads
@xmath . Clearly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The right hand side is positive definite near the reference solution by
the Legendre-Hadamard condition. Thus the finite dimensional inverse
function theorem (see f.e. [ 41 ] ) allows us to solve @xmath for @xmath
. This means that the zeroth order compatibility condition is satisfied
by a suitable choice of a transversal derivative of the initial data at
the boundary.

For the higher orders we first note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again the Legendre-Hadamard condition allows us to use the implicit
function theorem to solve this for @xmath . This can be rewritten as
@xmath . For @xmath this is nothing but the normal derivative of the
initial datum @xmath . For higher orders @xmath we have to show that
@xmath can be solved for higher normal derivatives of the initial data.
For this we use the differentiated field equation. For @xmath we can
write ( 2.30 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using that @xmath , this can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the terms denoted by may be of the same order but involve @xmath
and thus cause no trouble as we will see. Note that both @xmath and
@xmath are non-degenerated in some neighborhood of the reference
solution by the hyperbolicity conditions. Thus we can iteratively use
the above equation to determine @xmath in terms of normal derivatives.
We have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

for even @xmath where @xmath denotes a non-degenerated matrix formed
from @xmath and @xmath (non-degenerated at least close to the reference
solution). Finally for odd @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we can use the implicit function theorem on both these expressions
because: For the reference solution this equation is identically
satisfied by assumption. The -terms are either lower order in the normal
derivative or do vanish due to the @xmath assumption. On the other hand
@xmath involves only the initial data and first order normal
derivatives. Thus all the requirements are met to apply the implicit
function theorem.

We have found that the compatibility condition can in fact be
interpreted as a condition on the odd-numbered normal derivatives of the
initial data at the boundary. Thus by a suitable choice of these
derivatives, the compatibility conditions can be satisfied. Besides
these restrictions the data can be given freely, as long as they stay in
a certain neighborhood of the reference solution. In particular this
means that the field, its first order time derivative and all of their
even normal derivatives are free data.

###### Remark.

Note that by the above constructions we can choose a large class of
initial data close to those generated by the reference solution, which
satisfy the compatibility condition up to arbitrary order.

In the next lemma we establish the connection between the
Legendre-Hadamard condition ( 2.7 ), which was sufficient for local
well-posedness in the unbounded case and the Garding inequality ( 2.28
):

###### Lemma 5.

Let @xmath be a bounded domain in @xmath . Then the Garding inequality (
2.28 ) for @xmath and the Legendre-Hadamard condition ( 2.7 ) are
equivalent.

First we show, how the Legendre-Hadamard condition implies the Garding
inequality: For this we will follow Giaqunita [ 22 ] . The argument
consists of three parts: first we assume that @xmath is constant, then
we derive the inequality for a finite region and in the last step we
cover @xmath by such regions. The basic tool used for the first step is
Fourier transformation. Because @xmath is the closure of @xmath it
suffices to prove the result for @xmath . By the Plancherel theorem (see
f.e. [ 19 ] ) the @xmath norm of a square-integrable function is
unchanged under Fourier-transform, thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where an upper hat denotes the Fourier transform. Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next suppose that @xmath such that the support is a subset of @xmath .
On @xmath we can add and subtract a term involving @xmath . Using the
inequality above this leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term comes from the Garding inequality for the constant
operator @xmath , while the second is obtained by uniform continuity (on
@xmath , the difference of @xmath from @xmath must not exceed @xmath ).
By choosing @xmath small enough we can obtain @xmath .

Since @xmath is bounded subset of @xmath it is compact and can hence be
covered by a finite number of balls @xmath for @xmath . Then we choose
@xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dots stand for terms which are at most linear in derivatives of
@xmath . Those terms can be handled easily by the triangle inequality
using the fact that both @xmath and @xmath are bounded functions. Thus
we obtain bounds from below by the @xmath norms of @xmath and @xmath
respectively. we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

As indicated above the constants (especially @xmath and @xmath ) depend
on @xmath and the operator @xmath . We now may pull @xmath out of the
bracket in the first term which can lead to a change in @xmath and
@xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath is non-negative in this procedure.We now can apply
Young’s inequality (see f.e. [ 19 ] ) to obtain the desired result.

The other direction is much easier to prove. We only have to find an
appropriate function to insert into the Garding inequality. A good
choice is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes an arbitrary smooth function with support in an
open subset @xmath . Inserting this into the inequality leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The terms denoted by l.o. are those of lower order in @xmath . Note that
the coefficients of the @xmath are all bounded, since we integrate
smooth functions over bounded regions. We get rid of these lower order
terms by a high frequency limit. Since all terms are bounded, there
exists an @xmath such that for all @xmath the above inequality holds
without the lower order terms. We have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that @xmath was taken to be an arbitrary open subset of @xmath .
This implies together with the smoothness of the integrand that the
above estimate holds point-wise. This in turn allows us to drop the
cosine and the function @xmath . The result is the desired
Legendre-Hadamard condition.

Although this section is devoted to boundary value problems, we add the
following remark: the Lemma can be used to prove the analogous result
for @xmath :

###### Corollary 2.

The lemma still holds with the bounded domain @xmath being replaced by
@xmath .

To show that the Legendre-Hadamard condition follows from the Garding
inequality in this more general context we can use the very same
argument as above without any change at all. The only difficulty arises
when we want to prove the other direction. The techniques used in the
proof of the lemma do not carry over, since there we made use of the
compactness of @xmath , which now is not given anymore. We have to work
along a different route.

Let therefore @xmath . Then there exists a compact subset @xmath such
that the support of @xmath is contained within @xmath . Hence by lemma 5
the Garding inequality holds on @xmath . But since @xmath has compact
support all integrals can be taken over all of @xmath . The Garding
inequality on all of @xmath is obtained. The analogous procedure can be
carried out for all @xmath . The desired result follows.

###### Remark.

This lemma tells us that the Legendre-Hadamard condition is still
sufficient to treat the Dirichlet problem.

We conclude this section by stating two other positivity notions beside
the Legendre-Hadamard condition ( 2.7 ) and discussing their relevance
in the given context:

###### Definition.

An objects @xmath is called rank-two-positive if the following
inequality holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a positive real number @xmath . Here @xmath denotes an appropriate
norm, f.e. @xmath . We finally call an object @xmath strong point-wise
stable, if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a positive real number @xmath where @xmath denotes the symmetric
part of @xmath .

Note that by raising or lowering the indices we can write the rank-two
positivity condition as well as the Legendre-Hadamard condition in the
form of the strong-point-wise-stability condition. Then we have the
following picture: The Legendre-Hadamard condition is the weakest of
these three, followed by strong point-wise stability. The strongest
condition is rank-two-positivity.

Note that this rank-two condition is strong enough to guarantee the
validity of the Garding inequality ( 2.28 ). To show this we simply
choose @xmath and integrate ( 2.48 ) over a region @xmath . This
immediately gives the Garding inequality with @xmath .

We will however show in a later chapter that in fact
point-wise-stability suffices to obtain the Garding inequality and hence
satisfies the requirements needed for the theorem.

## Chapter 3 Geometry and Kinematics

There have been several accounts to deal with relativistic elasticity,
the best known maybe that of Carter and Quintana [ 9 ] . We however will
proceed along the route of Beig and Schmidt first published (for the
space-time setup) in [ 5 ] .

In this chapter we will introduce the basic concepts of relativistic
elasticity due to the latter authors. The basic unknown will be the
configuration of the elastic material, which is described as a mapping
between manifolds. We will work in two different settings. On the one
hand we will use the space-time-description (also known as Euler
picture) where we assign to each point of space-time a particle. On the
other hand we will work with the spatial description (or Lagrange
picture), where for every instant of time the spatial position of the
particle is determined. We will write down the Lagrangian for both
cases. Later in chapter 4.1 the field equations will be derived from
these Lagrangians.

As we will see it is more natural to introduce the main objects of the
theory in the space-time picture. This is due to the fact that the
material description requires a foliation of space-time, therefore
lacking the obvious covariance properties of the space-time description.

There are two manifolds naturally involved in the formulation of this
theory. One of them is space-time @xmath , which is a four-dimensional
manifold equipped with a Lorentzian metric @xmath . We assume that
@xmath is time-orientable. Let @xmath ( @xmath ) denote the coordinates
on @xmath .

The other one is called material manifold or simply body. We assign it
the letter @xmath . It is a three-dimensional manifold equipped with a
volume-form @xmath . The coordinates on @xmath are @xmath ( @xmath ).

Other manifolds, which appear in this work are constructed out of these
two.

The material manifold can be viewed as an abstract collection of the
particles making up the continuous material. (It is the idea of the
material, as Platon would say.) Usually people assume @xmath to be a
Riemannian manifold, but we find that the existence of a volume form
(which is of course a weaker assumption) is sufficient. In standard
non-relativistic elasticity the metric on @xmath is used to define the
natural (reference) deformation. In our approach we go the other way
round: the natural deformation (possibly) defines the metric on @xmath .
This is more satisfactory, since one would not expect the natural
deformation to have the same body metric for different space-time
metrics, which would be a consequence of the standard approach.

### 3.1 Space-time description

In this section we treat elasticity in the space-time description. The
unknowns are a set of scalar fields on space-time taking values on the
body. We will define the basic quantities and the energy-momentum tensor
as well as the Lagrangian are derived.

#### 3.1.1 Basic setup

The basic unknown in this setup is @xmath , a mapping from space-time
onto the body:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

###### Assumption.

We place the following restrictions on @xmath :

-   @xmath as a mapping from @xmath has maximal rank.

-    the null space of @xmath is time-like w.r.t. the space-time metric.

###### Definition.

We call @xmath configuration. @xmath will be called configuration
gradient.

Given a configuration @xmath . Then the conditions on the configuration
gradient uniquely determine a time-like direction in the tangent space
@xmath . Thus there exists a unique time-like future-pointing
vector-field @xmath with the properties

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition.

The @xmath as defined above is called four-velocity.

###### Remark.

It is important to note that in this context @xmath is not a given
vector-field, but rather a functional of the configuration.

Next we look at the pullback of @xmath , the volume form on @xmath ,
along the configuration, i.e. we consider

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which by definition is orthogonal to @xmath . Let @xmath be the
volume-form coming from the space-time metric. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is time-like and non-zero. Without loss of generality we assume that it
is future-pointing. One easily finds that is orthogonal to @xmath and
consequently proportional to @xmath . Thus there exists a positive
quantity @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition.

We call @xmath particle number density.

###### Remark.

As was the four-velocity, the particle number density is a functional of
the configuration involving the configuration gradient.

The definition is justified by the following observation: the
vector-field @xmath satisfies a continuity equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be verified using ( 3.7 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term vanishes, since the volume form on space-time is
covariant constant. The second is zero, since @xmath is closed and
whence also @xmath is closed.

Next we define the strain. Similar to a metric (as the name suggests) it
is a measure for the strain arising in the material as a consequence of
configuration.

###### Definition.

The strain @xmath corresponding to the configuration is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath does not in general give rise to a rank two tensor on
@xmath , since it depends on @xmath , the coordinates on space-time.

###### Lemma 6.

A necessary and sufficient condition for the strain to define a tensor
on @xmath is that the four-velocity @xmath is Born-rigid, i.e. that the
Lie-derivative of metric projection orthogonal to @xmath in the @xmath
direction vanishes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The strain as defined in ( 3.10 ) is no tensor, since @xmath is no
diffeomorphism. But if the strain is constant along the flow of the
four-velocity, then the strain is uniquely defined on the quotient (of
space-time along the four-velocity). But the latter clearly is
diffeomorphic to the body if the four-velocity @xmath is geodesic (one
just has to think in terms of initial data). This is the case for
solutions of the field equations as we will see. Thus the strain can be
viewed as a tensor field. If on the other hand the strain really comes
from a tensor field on @xmath , then it must be constant along the flow
of @xmath . Both arguments come down to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the Lie-derivative of the configuration gradient (viewed as a
collection of one-forms on space-time) vanishes according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that this is equivalent to the statement that the Lie-derivative
of the inverse metric lies in the kernel of the configuration gradient:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently there exists a scalar @xmath and a vector @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where without restriction of generality we can assume @xmath to be
orthogonal to @xmath . (Otherwise just split @xmath into a parallel and
an orthogonal part and re-define @xmath and @xmath in the obvious way.)
We can lower the indices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

First note that @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath and @xmath for every vector field @xmath . To compute
@xmath we contract ( 3.16 ) with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is equivalent to the statement of the lemma.

###### Remark.

Note that the Born-rigidity condition constitutes a restriction on the
space-time geometry, since the existence of a Born-rigid vector field is
not trivially given. An example, where a Born rigid four-velocity may
exist, is that of a space-time admitting a time-like Killing vector
field. The existence of a homothetic vector field however turns out to
be too weak.

To see the last point of the remark, we insert

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

into ( 3.11 ). For nonzero @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which contradicts the non-degeneracy of the metric. Note that
Born-rigidity does in turn not imply homotheticity, since contracting (
3.11 ) twice with @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

independent of the values of @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath for
non-zero @xmath , since this would again lead to a contradiction.

Leaving behind the question of functional dependence and Born rigidity
we note some further observations regarding the strain:

-   the strain is positive definite

-   therefore there exists an inverse, denoted by @xmath .

-   since the four-velocity is annihilated by the configuration
    gradient, we have that @xmath for arbitrary real @xmath .

The first statement comes from the fact, that the configuration gradient
in the definition of the strain projects out the (time like) @xmath
-direction, leaving behind the positive definite rest. The other points
follow immediately.

We can use the strain to rewrite the particle number density as the
positive root of the determinant of the strain, taken w.r.t. the volume
form on the body:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be seen by contracting ( 3.7 ) with itself and using the
standard formulas (see f.e. [ 46 ] p.83) to evaluate the @xmath
-tensors.

#### 3.1.2 The space-time Lagrangian

Our field equations will be the Euler-Lagrange equations associated with
an action principle connected with the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lagrangian density @xmath is assumed to be a non-negative function
of the configuration, of the configuration gradient and of the metric.
An explicit @xmath dependence only enters via the space-time metric. We
subject @xmath to the following assumptions:

###### Assumption.

The Lagrangian is covariant under space-time diffeomorphisms, i.e. it
transforms as a scalar for given configurations.

###### Remark.

In non-relativistic elasticity this condition is called “material frame
indifference” (see e.g. [ 23 ] or [ 24 ] ).

An equivalent formulation (see f.e. [ 51 ] ) of this assumption is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary vector fields @xmath . If we write the Lie-derivatives in
terms of partial derivatives we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

By contraction with @xmath this implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This by the symmetry of the expression in turn implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some @xmath . From this the following is clear:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary real @xmath . Let @xmath . We claim that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The objects on both sides are symmetric. We verify the claim by
contracting with @xmath and @xmath respectively. For both cases it is
easy to verify the claim. Since those form an orthonormal basis of
@xmath , the claim is proved.

The above formula then tells us that the Lagrangian can be rewritten as
a function of the configuration, the configuration gradient and the
strain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging this into equation ( 3.26 ) we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the configuration gradient is assumed to be of maximal rank, the
first term has to vanish. Thus @xmath is in fact explicitly independent
of the configuration gradient (Of course it still enters implicitly via
the strain). Keeping this in mind, we spit the Lagrangian @xmath into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where by definition @xmath is a positive function depending solely on
the configuration and the strain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

This factorization is justified, since the particle number density
@xmath can be written as the determinant of the strain (see ( 3.23 )),
thus involves only the strain and (via the volume form on the body) the
configuration. The action ( 3.24 ) takes its final form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

depends solely on points of the base space (via the metric), on the
strain and on the configuration.

###### Definition.

We call @xmath stored energy function or simply stored energy.

The stored energy function contains all the information about the
material under consideration. Knowing it is equivalent to knowing the
equation of state.

We can derive some important quantities from the stored energy. First of
all it provides us with an intrinsic definition of stress (depending
only on the material):

###### Definition.

The second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor is defined as the first
variation of the stored energy w.r.t. the strain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

As was the case for the strain, the Piola-Kirchhoff stress is in general
no tensor on the body, since it depends on the space-time coordinates
@xmath . We have the obvious symmetry property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will mainly use this second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor and
whenever we talk about the Piola stress we mean exactly this one unless
said otherwise. For completeness we stress that one can define a first
Piola-Kirchhoff tensor too. Let us denote it by @xmath . In the
space-time description it is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can check that the first and second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensors
are connected via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath .

#### 3.1.3 Elasticity operator

The second variation will turn out to be the most important quantity for
questions of local well-posedness in the neighborhood of stress-free
deformations:

###### Definition.

The second variation of the stored energy w.r.t. the strain is called
elasticity operator. It is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again this does not in general define a tensor field on the body. From
the definition the following symmetries are evident:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark.

Note that the second Piola stress and the elasticity operator are
introduced without referring directly to the configuration. This fact
will allow us to use the very same definitions in the material setup.

Before giving an important example for the elasticity tensor, we give a
short definition concerning symmetries of the material.

###### Definition.

A material is called homogeneous, if the stored energy @xmath depends
solely on the strain and does no more include the configuration itself.
This is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also require the volume form @xmath to be independent of @xmath .

Assume there is given a metric @xmath on @xmath (f.e. coming from the
strain of a special Born-rigid reference configuration). Further assume
that the stored energy is covariant under diffeomorphisms of @xmath .
Then it depends solely on the invariants of the strain taken w.r.t.
@xmath . We cast this into the following definition:

###### Definition.

We call a material isotropic if the stored energy @xmath depends on the
configuration gradient only via its invariants, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

An important special case of such materials are the so called
St.Vernard-Kirchhoff materials (see f.e. [ 14 ] ). They are homogenous
and isotropic and their elasticity tensor is given by (remember that
@xmath denotes some metric on @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants.

One can formally develop the stored energy for an isotropic (not
necessarily homogeneous) material into a Taylor series around the metric
@xmath and find that the quadratic portion can always be written in the
form ( @xmath is the inverse metric)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath being functions on @xmath . If the material is
homogeneous, then they are constant.

###### Definition.

The constants @xmath and @xmath appearing in the quadratic portion of
the Taylor series of the stored energy for a homogenous isotropic
material are called the Lamé constants.

This in particular means that the constants appearing in ( 3.45 ) are
the Lamé constants. For the special case of St.Vernant-Kirchhoff
materials they completely determine the material.

To get used to the notation we apply the three positivity notions
introduced in section 2.1 to the St.Vernard-Kirchhoff elasticity
operator: What one obtains are conditions on the Lamé constants:

For the Legendre-Hadamard condition we have to contract ( 3.45 ) with
@xmath . Then the condition reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

By splitting @xmath in a part parallel and a part orthogonal to @xmath ,
we find that the above condition holds for all choices of @xmath and
@xmath , if the Lamé constants satisfy the inequalities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

These combinations, as we will see in section 4.1.1 , are crucial
entities for the hyperbolicity of the corresponding equations of motion.
We will also see, that these conditions ( 3.48 ) are equivalent to the
statement that plane waves in the linearized theory propagate at real
(and not imaginary) speed.

Next we do this computation for strong point-wise stability ( 2.49 ):
The inequality, we have to satisfy for arbitrary @xmath is (recall that
all finite dimensional norms are equivalent. See f.e. [ 2 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Evaluating both sides leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the trace-free portion of @xmath . The above
conditions are satisfied for all possible choices of @xmath if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that there is a tighter restriction on the possible values of
@xmath .

Finally we come to rank-two-positivity. The corresponding inequality
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the first glance it may look similar to the case of
strong-point-wise-stability, but this is not true, since on the right
hand side antisymmetric terms do appear. But sine on the left hand side
only symmetric terms are involved, the antisymmetric terms on the right
hand side cannot be bounded. Thus there is no possible way to satisfy
rank-two-positivity of the elasticity operator for St.Venant-Kirchhoff
materials (This holds for general isotropic materials. For this check
the following remarks.) Note however that it makes sense to apply the
notion of rank-two positivity to certain combinations involving the
elasticity operator.

###### Remark.

We stress that although we did the above example for the case of
St.Vernant-Kirchhoff materials, the analogous treatment works for
arbitrary isotropic materials.

###### Remark.

Note that @xmath entered in the conditions. It thus may well happen that
the conditions are met for a certain choice of @xmath and cease to hold
for a different choice. We have also seen, that some positivity
conditions may just fail for certain types of materials.

#### 3.1.4 Energy momentum

Next we derive the energy-momentum tensor for this model. We can derive
it from the Lagrangian according to the formula (see f.e. [ 51 ] p.42 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that the Lagrangian @xmath did only depend on the configuration
and the strain. This allows us to write (recall the definition of the
strain ( 3.10 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Beside a factor @xmath this is just the same term. Thus we can rewrite
the energy-momentum tensor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this expression is manifestly symmetric. Contracting with the
four-velocity and using ( 3.27 ) we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the energy-momentum tensor must be of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is symmetric and orthogonal to @xmath , i.e. @xmath . (
@xmath is sometimes called Cauchy-stress.) This in turn implies that
there exists an object @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Remark.

Note that this representation of the energy-momentum tensor allows a
good interpretation for the @xmath entering the Lagrangian. It plays the
role of the total energy density of the material in its rest system.

To compute the actual form of @xmath , we have to use @xmath to write
out the right hand side in ( 3.57 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

To compute the variation of the particle number density, we use a well
known result that connects the variation of the determinant with the
inverse tensor, namely (note that the strain is symmetric and that
@xmath is the inverse strain as defined in section 3.1.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression entering the energy momentum tensor is thus given by the
symmetric tensor @xmath . A closer look shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the four-velocity is annihilated, @xmath acts as identity on the
configuration gradient and hence also on the orthogonal space. We
conclude the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Insertion of this into the expression for the energy-momentum tensor
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

This justifies to call the second Piola-Kirchhoff tensor @xmath stress,
since it is equivalent to the Cauchy stress. Note that there are no
currents involved in the energy-momentum tensor.

###### Remark.

The energy-momentum tensor is divergence-free, if the configuration is
stress-free and the corresponding four-velocity is geodesic.

This can be shown by direct computation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last term is zero, since the configuration is assumed to be
stress-free. The first term vanishes due to the continuity equation (
3.8 ). The second term can be split into three parts:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

All these terms vanish. The last because the configuration is assumed
stress-free, the second because the four-velocity is orthogonal to the
configuration gradient and the first because the four-velocity is
geodesic.

###### Remark.

From the proof of the last remark we can extract another interesting
observation: The divergence of the energy-momentum tensor (this time for
a general configuration) is annihilated by the material velocity. Thus
@xmath are practically only three equations, which are equivalent to
@xmath

This can be seen by contracting ( 3.66 ) with the four-velocity and then
evaluating the resulting expression. We will however proceed along a
shorter route. Since by the Leibnitz rule

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that (using that the four-velocity annihilates the configuration
gradient and is normalized)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can split the total energy density according to @xmath . Then the
first term becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term vanished due to the continuity equation which is
identically satisfied in our theory. The second term gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first is zero because the four-velocity annihilates the
configuration gradient, the second term prevails. We finally obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is altogether zero. To see this we first substitute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the configuration is a collection of scalars, we can use that the
covariant derivative is torsion-free. This leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the two terms in ( 3.72 ) cancel and the statement of the remark is
shown to be true.

#### 3.1.5 Reference state

In the definition of isotropy we needed to assume the existence of a
metric @xmath on the body. We now assume that @xmath is generated by
some special reference configuration:

###### Definition.

We call a configuration @xmath reference configuration whenever it is
stress-free, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the corresponding four-velocity is geodesic. Quantities evaluated at
this reference configuration will be denoted by an upper tilde (like
e.g. @xmath ). Relations, which hold only for this reference
configuration will be denoted by an @xmath above the relation (f.e.
@xmath ). We sometimes refer to the reference configuration more
generally as the reference state of the material (this notation will be
used in the material setup too).

###### Remark.

There is another possible way of defining the reference configuration:
one may assume it to be stress-free and in addition to generate a
divergence-free energy-momentum tensor. Then the four-velocity is
geodesic if the reference deformation solves the field equations. This
can be seen from the following arguments. We shall however stick to our
original definition.

By the last remark of the foregoing section we know that the
energy-momentum tensor for the reference state is divergence-free. We
will see in section 4.1.1 that this is equivalent to the statement that
the reference configuration solves the field equations (which will be
the Euler-Lagrange equations corresponding to the Lagrangian ( 3.36 ).).
But we would like to show that also slight perturbations of this
reference state give rise to solutions. This will be shown to be the
case (at least for the unbounded setup), if the reference configuration
satisfies a certain minimality property, namely that the elasticity
operator satisfies the Legendre-Hadamard condition:

###### Definition.

We call a reference configuration natural, whenever the elasticity
tensor for this reference state satisfies the Legendre-Hadamard
condition ( 2.7 ). In formulas this reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and @xmath and for a positive @xmath .

For most of the following work we will assume the existence of such a
natural configuration.

###### Remark.

These definitions did not claim Born-rigidity for the reference state’s
four-velocity. Thus the reference strain need not define a tensor field
on @xmath . This is a difference between the formulation given here and
the standard (non-relativistic) formulations of elasticity, where a
(flat) metric on the body is assumed throughout.

We have seen in section 3.1.1 that the existence of a Born-rigid vector
field constitutes a restriction on the space-time geometry. We will cast
this statement into a more concrete form in the following lemma:

###### Lemma 7.

If the reference strain defines a tensor field on the body, then
space-time has to be stationary.

We have shown in lemma 6 that the strain defines a tensor if and only if
the Born rigidity condition holds. Thus the problem is the following: we
have to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a four-velocity satisfying @xmath as well as @xmath and the Born
condition ( 3.11 ). The latter implies the Killing equation whenever

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both terms on the right hand side vanish due to the assumptions of the
lemma. This in turn implies the Killing equation to be valid for the
reference four-velocity. Consequently space-time has to admit a
time-like Killing vector field since otherwise one would have a
contradiction. Thus the metric has to be stationary at least.

###### Remark.

This lemma implies that a non-stationary space-time can not admit a
Born-rigid reference four-velocity. In such a setup the reference strain
can never be a tensor on the body.

We end this section with a slight adjustment of the original definition
of isotropy:

###### Definition.

We call a material isotopic (w.r.t. the reference configuration)
whenever it is isotropic w.r.t. the reference strain.

For convenience we slightly change notation in the following way: if the
material is isotropic, we redefine the Lamé moduli introduced in ( 3.45
) according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

This definition of isotropy will be used in the following.

### 3.2 Material description

In this section we introduce the material description. The dependent
variables in this setup are time-dependent mappings from the body onto
space-like hyper-surfaces of space-time. Roughly speaking they are the
instantaneous inverse to the configurations. In this section we will
perform a @xmath decomposition of space-time, translate all main objects
into this new description and finally rewrite the Lagrangian for this
setup.

#### 3.2.1 Basic setup

Assume there exists a foliation of space-time by space-like
hyper-surfaces. This means space-time is the product of a
three-dimensional space-like manifold @xmath with an interval @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let the leafs of the foliation be the level sets of the function @xmath
. Introducing coordinates @xmath ( @xmath ) on @xmath , we can write the
space-time metric (using @xmath as fourth coordinate) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inverse metric reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

All functions depend on @xmath . Clearly we can write every metric in
the given form. This is the ADM-representation of the metric (see [ 15 ]
for details). The function @xmath is assumed to be positive and is
called lapse while @xmath is called shift. The geometrical meaning of
the quantities entering the ADM-representation is the following: @xmath
is the induced metric on the leaf @xmath of the foliation, @xmath is its
inverse, i.e. @xmath . The norm of @xmath is given by @xmath . Thus the
unit co-normal is @xmath . The (future-pointing) unit-normal is @xmath .

###### Remark.

One has to be careful about the notation: although @xmath denote the
spatial components of @xmath , the analogous statement fails to be true
for the inverse metric. There the spatial components involve both lapse
and shift as well as @xmath .

Given a configuration @xmath . Since the corresponding material velocity
@xmath is assumed to be time-like, we have that @xmath . This means that
@xmath is transversal to the foliation. This implies that for each
instant of time @xmath , the configuration is a diffeomorphism between
the hyper-surface @xmath and the body, since the configuration gradient
is assumed to be of maximal rank, thus generating a linear isomorphism
between @xmath and @xmath .

It thus makes sense to write down the inverse of the configuration for
every instant of time. We define

###### Definition.

The deformation @xmath corresponding to the configuration @xmath is
defined by (remember that the coordinates on the body @xmath were
denoted by @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that this definition involves the chosen foliation. We also note
that by the above statements the deformation is well-defined, since we
can solve ( 3.84 ) for it by means of the implicit function theorem. It
is a collection of time dependent scalar maps from the body onto the
leafs of the foliation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Remark.

One could easily construct a diffeomorphism between space-time and
@xmath by extending the configuration and the deformation into
four-dimensional mappings of the form @xmath and @xmath . We will
however (mostly) stick to our original formulation.

###### Definition.

In accordance with the notion of configuration gradient, we call @xmath
deformation gradient. Note that (in contrary to the configuration
gradient) the deformation gradient defined this way is a linear
isomorphism.

From the definition of the deformation ( 3.84 ) we can derive the formal
connection between the configuration gradient and the deformation
gradient: differentiating w.r.t. @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contracting with @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in turn gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that the configuration gradient can be obtained as the inverse of
the deformation gradient and vice versa.

Another consequence of the definition of @xmath is obtained by
differentiating ( 3.84 ) with respect to @xmath , namely (an upper dot
denotes differentiation w.r.t. @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation connects the time derivatives of the configuration and the
deformation.

###### Remark.

From now on we will drop the arguments of the configuration gradient.
Whenever we write it down we understand it as the inverse of the
deformation gradient by means of ( 3.85 ), ( 3.87 ) and ( 3.88 ).

For our purpose it turns out to be more convenient to introduce a
different normalization for the four-velocity which is in accordance
with the foliation. We introduce a new vector field @xmath , which is
parallel to the four-velocity and satisfies @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the four-velocity is annihilated by the configuration gradient,
the same is true for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Subtracting this from equation ( 3.88 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is non-degenerated, this implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Definition.

From now on we use the term four-velocity for @xmath in the context of
the material setup. If we refer to @xmath we will speak of the
normalized four-velocity.

The norm @xmath of the four-velocity is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Introducing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that the four-velocity is time-like if and only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Assumption.

Throughout the rest of this thesis we will assume that this condition
holds.

This equation may be understood as a restriction on the possible choices
for the time flow. Roughly speaking lapse and shift have to be chosen so
that they balance the spatial evolution of the material.

This quantity @xmath will appear throughout the following analysis. We
will also frequently encounter it in the following context:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition ( 3.96 ) is then equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will find that this factor plays a similar role to the @xmath factor
of special relativity. (This can be seen clearly in the Newtonian limit.
We refer to the appendix for details.)

Next we deal with the strain. We can split the configuration gradient
into its spatial part and the rest. Then the strain becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that the first term inside the bracket is the spatial part of the
inverse metric ( 3.83 ). Then we use ( 3.88 ) to replace the time
derivatives of the configuration by those of the deformation. One
obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If one understands the configuration gradient as being the inverse of
the deformation gradient, then this is an expression for the strain only
involving the deformation and the deformation gradient besides the
metric. We have thus successfully translated the strain into the
material description.

###### Remark.

Abusing notation we keep the letter @xmath for the strain both in the
space-time and in the material description, although strictly speaking
those are different objects. The same remark applies to most of the
following cases. But since it is clear from the context, which
description is used, we stick to this simplified notation.

The inverse strain is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To prove this first note that @xmath as defined is clearly symmetric and
positive definite, sice @xmath is bounded from below.

To show that it is indeed the inverse we contract with the strain:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we use ( 3.85 ) and ( 3.87 ) to evaluate the contraction of the
configuration gradient with the deformation gradient. The result of this
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The term in the bracket vanishes due to the definition of @xmath , which
proves that @xmath is indeed the expression for the inverse strain in
the material setup.

#### 3.2.2 Material Lagrangian

To translate the space-time action ( 3.35 ) into the material
description, we have to find expressions for

-   the particle number density ( 3.23 )

-   and the stored energy ( 3.34 ).

-   We also have to transform the volume element in the proper way.

We start with the stored energy. It is a scalar build from the strain
and the configuration, which themselves can be treated as a collection
of scalars. Thus for the material description we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is an advantage of the material description that the dependence of
the stored energy becomes more clear: the energy stored in the material
depends on the strain acting at each point. Different points of the
(non-homogeneous) material react differently to strain.

###### Remark.

From this expression for the internal energy it is clear, that we can
simply use the definition given for the second Piola stress ( 3.37 ) and
the elasticity operator ( 3.41 ). We just have to replace the
configuration @xmath by the image @xmath .

Only the first Piola tensor causes trouble, since it involves a
variation w.r.t. the configuration gradient. For the material setup we
introduce a new definition via the variation of the internal energy
w.r.t. the deformation gradient:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

But again this definition is given just for reasons of completeness.

Coming back to the original problem, namely that of translating the
Lagrangian, we next show how to deal with the particle density. Recall
that we could express it through the determinant of the strain. For the
strain we now have formula ( 3.100 ). All we need to do, is to compute
the determinant of this expression w.r.t. @xmath , the volume form on
the body.

First we introduce @xmath , the three-dimensional analogon of the
strain:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This expression is exactly the non-relativistic version of the strain
(see f.e. [ 23 ] ). In this sense we can understand the @xmath terms in
( 3.100 ) as relativistic corrections to the non-relativistic strain.
The inverse of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which follows from basic linear algebra.

According to ( 3.23 ) the determinant of the strain (apart from a factor
@xmath ) is given by @xmath Using ( 3.100 ) we write this as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath is the volume form on the body, @xmath is a volume form on
the hyper-surface. Thus it must be proportional to the three-dimensional
metric-volume-form @xmath . We define a scalar @xmath to be this
proportionality factor:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will find according to ( 3.111 ) that @xmath is basically given by
the particle density. From the above equation we find that ( 3.108 ) can
be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This (besides the factor @xmath ) is the determinant of @xmath .
Determinants of such objects can be easily computed using traces. The
result is @xmath . Thus the particle density @xmath (which is the square
root of the determinant of the strain) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This equation connects the particle density @xmath with the factor
@xmath .

Finally we turn to the volume form. First we give its expression in ADM
variables, then we apply our transformation ( 3.84 ) on the spatial
part. The result will be a volume form on the body.

The space-time volume form can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now ( 3.109 ) implies that the volume-form on the hyper-surfaces @xmath
can be transformed into @xmath , the volume form on @xmath (modulo
@xmath ).

Collecting all pieces, we can write the action ( 3.35 ) as an integral
over the material manifold times (an interval @xmath of) @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a scalar on the body defined by @xmath . The
corresponding Lagrangian is obviously given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A final word on the functional dependence: @xmath is a scalar on the
body, @xmath depends on time @xmath and on the deformation. The stored
energy is a function on the strain bundle over the body, i.e. it depends
on the points of the body and on the strain. Finally we note that @xmath
depends on time, on the deformation and on the time-derivative of the
deformation. This completes the listing of the basic objects of the
theory in the material description.

#### 3.2.3 Reference deformation

This section gives a definition of reference deformation. We remain as
closely as possible to the definition used for the reference state in
the space-time description:

###### Definition.

A deformation @xmath is called reference deformation, if it is
stress-free, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and if the configuration corresponding to @xmath generates a geodesic
normalized four-velocity.

In analogy to the space-time description a reference deformation is
called natural, if the corresponding elasticity operator ( 3.41 )
satisfies the Legendre-Hadamard condition ( 2.7 ).

This is a rather pragmatic approach, since it involves configurations in
the definition. We have chosen it to keep the definition simple and
intuitive. The following lemma will give a characterization of a
reference state solely using deformations.

###### Lemma 8.

A stress-free deformation @xmath is a reference deformation, if and only
if it satisfies the equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are Christoffel symbols formed from the metric ( 3.126 ).
The explicit form of this condition is given by setting the right hand
side of ( 3.138 ) equal to zero.

We prove the lemma by exploiting the relation between space-time and
@xmath : From what we have learned so far it is quite clear that the
mapping

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.117)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

is a diffeomorphism with inverse

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will apply this diffeomorphism to the geodesic equation for the
normalized four-velocity. The result will be the geodesic equation for
the transformed objects. This equation will be of a particular simple
form, so that the result can be readily read off.

For convenience we combine time @xmath and points @xmath on the body
into a four-dimensional object

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

this notation may seem misleading at the first sight, but it will prove
to be very practical. It will be clear from the context whether Greek
indices belong to space-time or @xmath .

Let the transformation of the normalized four-velocity be denoted by
@xmath . Then by the standard transformation formula for vector fields
we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(Recall the different meaning of @xmath and @xmath in this context). For
the normalized four-velocity this leads to the particular simple
expressions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.122)
     @xmath      (3.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the geodesic equation takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.124)
     @xmath      (3.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Christoffel symbols have to be taken w.r.t. the transformed
metric

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for the transformed metric where @xmath . The first thing we can do is
to determine the factor @xmath . We find that @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this we conclude that @xmath , so that we can write the geodesic
equation as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.129)
     @xmath      (3.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we need the expressions for these Christoffel symbols. Note that we
can rewrite the transformed metric ( 3.127 ) in ADM form using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as three-metric. The inverse is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then for the shift we take

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The lapse finally is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the above calculation also implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we can apply the formulas for the Christoffel symbols in the
ADM-formalism from the appendix to rewrite the expressions entering the
equations as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.137)
                 (3.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this we can show that it is sufficient to look at the second
equation, since it implies the first. This is seen by contraction of (
3.138 ) with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is nothing but @xmath times the right hand side of ( 3.137 ). Thus
( 3.138 ) vanishes if and only if the normalized four-velocity is
geodesic which completes the proof on the lemma.

## Chapter 4 Dynamics of Elastic Materials

This chapter deals with the dynamics of elastic materials. We will
derive the equations of motion governing the evolution of the materials,
which are the Euler-Lagrange equations arising from variation of the
actions given in the previous chapter.

The linearized equations (in the space-time picture; the same is however
true for the material picture, since the linearized equations are the
same in both descriptions) are shown to allow for global solutions,
which will be given in closed form. This will give some insight into the
propagation of elastic distortions. Then we will show that the
non-linear equations are hyperbolic in both descriptions, i.e. that the
Cauchy problem is well-posed.

After this we generalize this result in two directions: First the
self-interaction due to gravitational forces is taken into account by
analyzing the equations of elasticity coupled to the Einstein equations.
This will be done in the space-time description. On the other hand we
introduce boundaries, i.e. we specialize to materials of finite
extension. This will be done in the material picture, since the
boundary-conditions take a much simpler form in that setup. For both
cases (the self-gravitating as well as the finite-volume) we show the
Cauchy-problem to be well defined.

For all the well-posedness results in this chapter we employ the
theorems given in the chapter 2 .

### 4.1 Equations of motion

This section is devoted to the derivation of the equations of motion,
which are the Euler-Lagrange equations arising in the context of the
Lagrangians ( 3.36 ) and ( 3.114 ). Special attention will be given to
the principal part, since we know from chapter 2 that this part of the
equations is the relevant one for well-posedness.

Let @xmath denote a Lagrangian depending on the field @xmath and its
first order derivative. Then (under certain regularity assumptions on
the Lagrangian) @xmath is a critical point of the action if and only if
it satisfies the Euler-Lagrange equations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a quasi-linear system of second order for the unknowns @xmath .
In the following we will derive these equations for both the material
and the space-time description.

#### 4.1.1 Space-time description

We use the Lagrangian ( 3.36 ) to obtain the equations of motion for the
space-time description. Recall the form of this Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the Euler-Lagrange equations can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the lower order terms are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the differentiation in the last term on the right hand side is
a partial differentiation acting on those @xmath entering explicitly
(via the metric). They do not lead to second order expressions.

###### Remark.

Note that we could as well use @xmath instead of @xmath in the principal
part. But this would lead to problems once boundary conditions are
involved. (This can be seen in section 4.6 : there we require a certain
matching between principal part and boundary terms, which is violated
for the considered symmetry assumption) Therefore we stick to the full
principal part.

It is interesting to note that the fact that the principal part comes
from a Lagrangian is reflected in the following symmetry of the
principal part:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

At this stage we pause to note a deep connection between the field
equations as given here and the energy-momentum tensor: In general an
alternative way to derive field equations is to claim
divergence-less-ness of the energy momentum tensor. We have seen in
section ( 3.1.4 ) that @xmath is identically satisfied due to the
continuity equation. In the following lemma we will see, that the
vanishing of the remaining components of the divergence is equivalent to
the field equations derived from the Lagrangian via variation.

###### Lemma 9.

A configuration, which solves the Euler-Lagrange equation has a
divergence-free energy-momentum tensor and vice versa.

As mentioned before we only need to care about the components of the
divergence of the energy-momentum tensor orthogonal to the material
velocity. For this rest we first recall the definition of the
energy-momentum tensor from ( 3.54 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the last equality hods due to the symmetry of the energy-momentum
tensor. The first term on the right hand side can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is already very close to the desired result. As in section 3.1.4 we
can write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

since an explicit @xmath -dependence only entered via the metric in the
strain. The other two terms on the right hand side of ( 4.7 ) can be
written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first term can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This term together with the first two terms in ( 4.8 ) is the desired
result. We have to show, that the second term in ( 4.10 ) cancels the
last term in ( 4.8 ). To see this recall from section 3.1.4 that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Application of this to the two terms in question shows, that they
cancel. The remaining parts can be cast into the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This together with the continuity equation implies the lemma.

We need good information on the principal part in order to apply the
existence theorems from section 2.1 . Thus we will give a more explicit
form of @xmath . In a first step we compute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are basically three parts: The first involves the stored energy,
the second the elasticity tensor, and the last term is linear
homogeneous in the stress. More precisely the following holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a stress-free state @xmath and the principal part consists only of
the first two terms in ( 4.15 ).

To obtain a higher level of detail, we have to compute the involving
partial derivatives. The easiest is the variation of the strain w.r.t.
the configuration gradient. It is straightforward to see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the second variation yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only missing ingredients are the variations of the particle number
density. We have seen in section 3.1.4 that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the inverse strain. Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this expression we can compute the second variation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is the inverse strain, we can use the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into the formula for the second variation gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is where possible antisymmetric (in the upper index-pair) portions
of the principal part enter.

We can further simplify using two observations: first note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the inverse of the configuration gradient on the orthogonal space of
the four-velocity. In formulas this means

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the first equation is immediate from the definition of the @xmath
, the second equality is shown by contracting @xmath (which is symmetric
w.r.t. the metric) with the four-velocity and the configuration gradient
respectively. The first contraction obviously vanishes, while the second
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This proves the given formulas.

On the other hand we can use this new information to simplify the
bracket-terms in ( 4.23 ). We can write them as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the final version for the second variation of the particle density
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this expression at hand, we have all what we need to cast the
principal part into its final appearance:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This will be the form of the principal part relevant in the next
sections. We have the following expression for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that besides the antisymmetric very first term the stress-free part
of the principal part is split into a term in @xmath -direction and a
term orthogonal to the four-velocity. One can continue in this direction
by splitting the stress-terms in a similar manner. Recalling the
definition of the @xmath , we find that we can split the metric
according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also find that the antisymmetric term in the principal part is
orthogonal to the four-velocity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we can split the principal part into two orthogonal components:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note the following symmetry of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other symmetries of the elasticity operator ( 3.1.3 ) are lost by
virtue of the other terms.

We finally give the equations of motion in a convenient form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath again denotes the lower order terms.

#### 4.1.2 Material picture

From the Lagrangian ( 3.114 ) we derive the equations of motion for a
elastic medium in the material description. This Lagrangian had the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the above formula @xmath is the lapse, @xmath is the scalar volume
element and @xmath where @xmath was defined by @xmath , where @xmath is
the shift.

As in section 3.2.3 we combine time @xmath and points @xmath on the body
into a four-dimensional object

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Whenever we use the material picture (and whenever the contrary is not
explicitly emphasized), we apply this notation. Greek indices thus range
from zero to three and denote points on @xmath .

In this notation the Euler-Lagrange equations can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the lower order terms are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

As before in the space-time description we will no longer care about
this lower order terms. They are (as long as they stay smooth) of no
importance for the question of local well-posedness and only come into
play when the longtime-behavior is analyzed which is far beyond the
scope of this thesis.

The principal part reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath only involves the time-derivative of the deformation
and none of its other derivatives. Thus the @xmath can only be found in
the stored energy function (via the strain). With this property of the
Lagrangian variation looks easier than in the space-time-description.
But as we will see, this case is in fact the more complicated one. This
is because the deformation gradients enter the Lagrangian in a less
explicit way, which is a result of the transformations involved in the
transition between the descriptions.

In analogy to the space-time-description the principal part is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is again linear homogeneous in the stress. It is of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for the space-time-description we will derive more explicit formulas
by computing the variations. The expressions finally obtained will be
the counterparts of ( 4.30 ) and ( 4.34 ) in the material description.

In any case we need the variations of @xmath and of the strain. For the
former we first compute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this the second variation can be obtained

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we turn to the variation of the strain: Note that the @xmath
entering the formula ( 3.100 ) for the strain are by means of ( 3.85 )
the inverse of the deformation gradient and thus only depend on @xmath
and not on @xmath .

The first variations are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the variation of ( 3.85 ) w.r.t. the deformation
gradient to compute the variation of @xmath . From the above expressions
for the first variations the second variations follow:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
     @xmath      (4.50)
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these formulas we can write down the principal part. Since the
resulting expressions are rather lengthy we split into time-components,
spatial components and mixed components:

##### Time components

We first compute the time-portion of the principal part ( 4.43 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the formulas we have obtained for the variation of @xmath and of
the strain, we find that this can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the index at @xmath was pulled with the induced three-metric:
@xmath . For application it will be more convenient to replace the
original principal part @xmath by a new object defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the deformation gradient @xmath is an isomorphism, those two
objects can be viewed as equivalent. For example positivity of @xmath
implies positivity of @xmath and vice versa. The reason for introducing
@xmath will be clear, once we write it down. Using the formula ( 3.101 )
for the representation of the inverse strain we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . To complete the time part we note that @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Spatial components

Next we come to the spatial part. This is easily obtained, since @xmath
does not depend on @xmath . It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

This takes the simple form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

which becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

It remains to compute @xmath and @xmath . The former is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this the latter is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

This completes the computation of the spatial terms.

##### Mixed components

Now we turn to the mixed components. They are obtained from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other mixed components then follow from the symmetry of the
principal part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying our formulas to compute the included variations we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally we compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these formulas for the mixed components of the principal part we
can proceed to the final task of this section:

##### Full principal part

We will add up the partial results from the proceeding subsections and
will derive the full principal part including the stress-terms in
analogy to ( 4.34 ). Note that the key point there was to split the
principal part into a portion proportional to the four-velocity and an
orthogonal remainder. Here we will proceed along the same lines. This
means that first of all we have to identify the analogous objects for
the material setup.

The form of the principal part ( 4.43 ) suggests, that one preferred
direction will be @xmath . To give an explanation for this fact we
recall our procedure in section 3.2.3 . There we saw, that the
transformation @xmath given by the diffeomorphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

maps the normalized four-velocity to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus @xmath is nothing but (a multiple of) the normalized four-velocity
mapped to @xmath . From this one can guess that the transformation of
@xmath (viewed as a collection of vector fields on space-time) will
determine the remainder. We find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to the definitions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient entering the definition of @xmath guarantees the
normalization. In order to keep the calculation as simple as possible,
we assume Gaussian coordinates on space-time. This choice makes the
computation a lot easier to overlook.

Even for this simple choice of coordinates the actual calculation is
rather lengthy, we will only catch the most important steps. We find it
more convenient to replace @xmath by @xmath . This new object is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
     @xmath      (4.73)
     @xmath      (4.74)
     @xmath      (4.75)
     @xmath      (4.76)
     @xmath      (4.77)
     @xmath      (4.78)
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

In analogy to ( 4.34 ) we try to decompose this in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

That this is indeed a valid ansatz will be seen in the course of the
computation: we will find that there are indeed no other terms than the
ones given above. In particular there will be no @xmath -terms.

There are in principle two ways to proceed. One may guess @xmath and
then compute @xmath , which is again a check of the validity of the
ansatz for @xmath . On the other hand one may try to construct @xmath by
putting terms into the form @xmath . The remaining terms form then
@xmath . In both cases we have to check that the coefficients of the
elasticity tensor are of the required form. This will be our first task.
The parts involving @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now it is straightforward to find that this is of the desired form. To
discuss the remaining terms we decide to make a proper ansatz for @xmath
since this turns out to be the simplest route. In reminiscence of the
analogy for the part involving the elasticity operator we pick

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both these terms come from the variation twice w.r.t. @xmath . The first
term in the bracket is found immediately. The second requires a little
more care since it appears with the (at the first glance) wrong factor.
This is overcome by splitting @xmath . The remaining terms then are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
     @xmath      (4.85)
     @xmath      (4.86)
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the next step we will evaluate the Kronecker deltas and split
according to the indices of the stress. This leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.88)
     @xmath      (4.89)
     @xmath      (4.90)
     @xmath      (4.91)
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

All left to do, is to simplify the terms in the brackets. The first term
is the easiest: it is proportional to @xmath . The factor is obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other two terms are slightly more difficult but can also be handled
without much trouble. We do the calculation for the second term, the
third works just the same way. We want to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

To prove the validity of this claim we expand the right hand side:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second and the third term match the second and last term in the
bracket in ( 4.89 ). The other terms need some handling.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows that the first term equals the first term in ( 4.89 ). The
remaining last term can be dealt with along the same lines.

The very same arguments show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

So altogether we find that the principal part can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find that the principal part takes the very same form as in( 4.34 ),
apart from the missing @xmath term. Nevertheless we only have the
symmetry

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark.

The same result could be obtained including lapse and shift. One would
just have to replace @xmath by @xmath and add the shift @xmath at the
right places.

As was the case in the space-time-description, the “spatial” portion of
the principal part lacks the full symmetry of the elasticity operator
for general states. Only for special cases, f.e. stress-free states of
the material, this full set of symmetries is given.

This ends the derivation of the field equations. We can now turn to the
discussion of local well-posedness for certain situations. Before doing
so, we make some comments on the existence of conserved quantities.

### 4.2 Conserved quantities

In this section we discuss conserved quantities. By the Noether theorem
(see f.e. [ 51 ] ) we know that the existence of symmetries implies the
existence of conserved quantities. Under the assumption of staticity we
will derive such a conserved quantity, which will be the energy of the
system. We will then linearize this energy at a stress-free reference
solution. We show that the linearized energy is of the form “kinetic
plus potential terms”. We will also show that the linearized material
Lagrangian is of the form “kinetic minus potential terms” with the same
expressions for the kinetic and potential terms, which reflects the
connection between Lagrangian and Hamiltonian of classical mechanics.
Finally we rewrite the linearized potential terms using a covariant
derivative. This allows for a direct comparison with the
non-relativistic case. Note that the derived energy is conserved for
both finite and infinite matter distributions (this last statement of
course depends on the boundary conditions; in particular we will see
that it is true for natural boundary conditions as introduced in section
4.6.2 ).

#### 4.2.1 Symmetries-conserved quantities

Given a Killing vector @xmath , we can contract it with the
Energy-momentum tensor: @xmath . This new object is divergence free, if
the Energy-momentum tensor itself is divergence free, which we assume in
the following. (We have seen that the energy-momentum tensor is
divergence-free for solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equations) We have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Integrating this over a region @xmath in space-time, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can use Stoke’s theorem to convert this into a surface integral

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The volume element on the boundary can be written as @xmath . @xmath is
the outer unit normal, while @xmath denotes the induced metric on @xmath
. We find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Assume @xmath to be a cylinder. Then @xmath consists of three parts: The
bottom and the top and the mantle. If one can show that the integral
over the mantle vanishes (due to boundary or fall-off conditions for the
fields), one finds (taking into account the sign change in the normal)
that the integral over the bottom coincides with the integral over the
top. A conserved quantity is found.

#### 4.2.2 The conserved energy

Assume the space-time to be static and that the Killing vector has norm
@xmath . Then we can introduce coordinates @xmath such that @xmath is
the parameter along the flow of the Killing vector field and the @xmath
are coordinates on the hyper-surfaces @xmath . The metric can be written
in the following form:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Killing vector is then given by @xmath . Integrating over the
world-tube of the material (i.e. the inverse of the body under the
configuration map), we assume that the integral over the mantle of the
tube vanishes. This is guaranteed by fall-off or by the natural boundary
conditions introduced in section 4.6 . Thus the integral of @xmath over
any space-like slice of the world-tube is conserved. By choosing the
slices to have constant @xmath we arrive at an energy, which by
construction is conserved in time:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

here @xmath is the inverse of the body @xmath under the map @xmath at
the instant @xmath . Modulo the determinant of the induced metric the
integrand is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For each value of @xmath this is a scalar on the hyper-surface @xmath .
We can compute its pullback along the deformation map @xmath . We had
the following relations between quantities in the material and spatial
picture:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.107)
     @xmath      (4.108)
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this it follows that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and that we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The pullback of the volume form on the @xmath hyper-surface is given by
(the volume-element on @xmath is chosen such that @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now the energy can be rewritten as an integral over the body @xmath :
(The integral coincides with the integral of the pull-back over the base
space)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the definition of @xmath we can abbreviate this:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This energy is conserved in time. It is built solely from material
quantities.

#### 4.2.3 Linearized energy

In this section we will expand the energy in a neighborhood of a static
and stress-free natural deformation. By this we mean that the reference
configuration (the existence of which we take as given) is assumed to
satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(An equivalent way of putting the above equations is to write @xmath .
It is however useful to stick to the notation used in ( 4.116 ). For
conventions regarding the reference state see section 3.1.5 ) By the
definition of the four-velocity ( 4.116 ) includes that the reference
configuration and hence also the reference deformation is
time-independent:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will find that the first order variation of the energy vanishes and
that the second order terms are of the form kinetic energy plus
potential energy.

###### Remark.

As will be seen in later sections this particular reference state is a
solution of the field equation satisfying the boundary conditions (both
fall-off and natural).

As usual we will write @xmath for relations which only hold for this
natural deformation. The perturbation will be denoted by @xmath .

To see that the first variation of the energy vanishes note that we can
easily compute the following partial derivatives:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.118)
     @xmath      (4.119)
     @xmath      (4.120)
     @xmath      (4.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first variation of the second term in the bracket in ( 4.115 )
vanishes, since it is quadratic in @xmath . There is also the Piola
stress tensor in the third term, so it only contributes to third order.
We may omit it in this analysis. We have found that the expanded energy
is at least quadratic in the deformation field.

We now compute the second variation of the energy: Therefore we need the
second variations of @xmath and the stored energy @xmath : For the
former we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

All other variations vanish for the obvious reason that they still
involve time-derivatives of the field, which are zero for the natural
reference deformation.

The second variation of the stored energy with respect to the
deformation gradient is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can write out the variations of the strain and get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second variation with respect to the deformation reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

writing this in terms of the deformation we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally we need to take care of the mixed term:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These are all the terms entering the second variation of the energy. All
other vanish. Summing up we find that the lowest non-trivial term in the
expansion of the energy is given by the integral over the following
expression:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.130)
     @xmath      (4.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To write this in a more convenient form, we introduce a covariant
derivative:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath are the Christoffel symbols corresponding to the induced
three-metric @xmath . We will show, that we can combine @xmath and
@xmath into this covariant derivative.

We first define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the second term in ( 4.129 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will show that the second term in the brackets coincides with the
connection terms. A short computation indeed gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

All we have to show is that @xmath is the only non-vanishing term left
from the Christoffel symbol @xmath . The rest, which we will prove to
vanish is @xmath . This is antisymmetric in @xmath . We have to show
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is symmetric in this pair of indices. But this is nearly obvious since
the term on the right hand side becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which of course has the desired symmetry by the symmetries of the
elasticity tensor. Thus the antisymmetric part of the Christoffel symbol
is annihilated and we end up with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Together with the partial derivative we can combine this to the
covariant derivative. We finally have the following formula for the
linearized energy (besides the ground state energy @xmath , which is an
additive constant):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that @xmath is of the form kinetic energy plus potential energy.
Besides the covariant derivatives it coincides with the corresponding
non-relativistic quantity. Using the strong point-wise stability
condition (i.e. if the material’s elasticity operator satisfies this
condition) on the elasticity tensor of the natural deformation, we find
that the linearized energy is non-negative. For non-static,
non-isometric deformations it is positive.

This very last remark needs some additional explanation.

###### Definition.

We call a linearized deformation isometric, whenever it is a Killing
vector field w.r.t. the spatial metric @xmath .

Note that it makes sense to speak of the linearized deformation @xmath
as of a vector field, since by its nature it is an element of the
tangential bundle over the hyper-surfaces @xmath . Going back to the
original form of the energy given in ( 4.129 ), we note that the part
involving the elasticity operator vanishes if and only if @xmath . We
will show that this is the case if and only if @xmath is a Killing field
for the spatial metric. First note that @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Viewing @xmath as a field on physical space @xmath rather than on the
body, we find that @xmath . Lowering the indices in the above equation
using the spatial metric leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is exactly the Killing equation @xmath . We have the following
lemma

###### Lemma 10.

Assume that the strong point-wise stability condition holds. Then the
linearized energy is positive if and only if the linearized deformation
is non-static and non-isometric in the above sense.

Taking into account the energy of the natural state, which is the first
(i.e. zeroth order) term in the Taylor series, we find that the energy
increases, whenever one has a non-trivial (i.e. non-isometric)
perturbation of the natural state. This implies that the assumed natural
state (if it exists) minimizes the energy if the strong-point-wise
stability condition holds. This sheds some light into the physical
meaning of this condition.

#### 4.2.4 Linearized material Lagrangian

Here we will derive the linearized material Lagrangian w.r.t. the given
static natural state. We will see that it looks very similar to the
linearized energy. Just the relative sign between the kinetic and the
potential term changes. As was the case for the energy, we will find,
that the first order perturbation of the Lagrangian vanishes and that
the first non-vanishing order is the second.

Recall that the fully non-linear Lagrangian for the material picture is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparison with the energy shows that the first term differs only in the
sign of the exponent of @xmath . The first variation vanishes due to
well known reason: The variation of the internal energy gives the
Piola-stress tensor, while the variation of the @xmath -term holds
time-derivatives of the natural deformation.

The second variations become

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.143)
     @xmath      (4.144)
     @xmath      (4.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Besides the minus in the last line in front of the spatial metric, this
is just the same as we had for the linearization of the energy. We thus
can directly write down the linearized action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This linearized Lagrangian is of the form potential minus kinetic
energy. From this linearized Lagrangian we can read off all the
information needed for the local existence results proven in section 4.4
. If the metric is in addition flat, we can introduce coordinates on
space-time and on the body, such that the configuration gradient and the
strain coincide with the Kronecker Delta. Then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that @xmath coincides with the elasticity tensor in these particular
coordinate systems. But then the linearized relativistic Lagrangian
coincides with the non-relativistic linearized Lagrangian.

###### Remark.

We have seen that for a flat metric (i.e. elasticity on Minkowski space)
there is no way to distinguish between the relativistic and the
non-relativistic theory on the linearized level. Relativistic effects
only enter to third or higher order.

### 4.3 Linearized elasto-dynamics

We linearize the space-time Lagrangian w.r.t. a stress-free static
reference solution. From this linearized Lagrangian we will derive the
corresponding linearized equations of motion. The actual computation
will be similar to the one done in the previous section. There however
we were working in the material description while here the space-time
picture is used. We do not know a priori that these two descriptions
lead to the same formulas in the linearized case. That this is indeed
true will be seen in the following computations.

Then in the second part of this section an explicit solution for this
linear system will be derived for isotropic and homogeneous materials.
For simplicity we assume space-time to be Minkowski space.

#### 4.3.1 Linearized equations of motion

The original nonlinear Lagrangian on Minkowski space is according to (
3.36 ) given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the stored energy @xmath depends solely on the strain @xmath due
to the assumption of homogeneity. The particle number density @xmath
depends again solely on the strain, if the medium is assumed to be
homogeneous. The strain itself is a function purely of the configuration
gradient and the space-time metric which is known. Thus we can develop
both the density and the internal energy into a formal Taylor series:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.149)
     @xmath      (4.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We recall from section 4.1.1 that there always exist @xmath which form
the inverse configuration gradient in the sense that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the metric on the orthogonal space of the four-velocity. We assume
that we can choose coordinates in such a way that @xmath in standard
Minkowski coordinates. This means that the normalized four-velocity is
assumed to be a hyper-surface-orthogonal time-like Killing field. Thus
the corresponding configuration @xmath is a time-independent
diffeomorphism between the body and the hyper-surfaces orthogonal to
@xmath . In addition we assume @xmath to be stress-free, i.e. @xmath .

Using @xmath and the formulas derived in section 4.1.1 for the variation
of the internal energy and the particle number, we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.153)
     @xmath      (4.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus the linearized Lagrangian (omitting the zeroth order term which
does not contribute to the variation) is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This Lagrangian is quadratic in the linearized configuration gradient
@xmath . As in the foregoing section the Lagrangian is of the form
kinetic minus potential terms.

Once the linearized Lagrangian is given it is easy to obtain the
corresponding field equations which are the linearization of the
original Euler-Lagrange equations. We obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Without restriction of generality we set @xmath (this can be obtained by
dividing by @xmath then redefining the elasticity operator). We also use
coordinates on the body, such that @xmath . Then the reference strain
satisfies @xmath . We also specialize to the isotropic case, where the
internal energy depends on the strain only via its invariants. Then the
elasticity tensor is determined by two constants, @xmath and @xmath ,
the so called Lamé constants (see section 3.1.3 ). In the chosen
coordinates we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For convenience we write @xmath instead of @xmath . Then the equation
reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this is hyperbolic if and only if the following two conditions
on the Lamé constants are satisfied:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the following section we will derive an explicit solution for the
Cauchy problem.

#### 4.3.2 Explicit solution

In this section we will derive a solution for equation ( 4.158 ) for
given initial data

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For explicit solutions in a more general setting (but only for the case
@xmath ) we refer to [ 16 ] . There the requirement of isotropy is
dropped. The resulting system still has constant coefficients but is
coupled in a more complicated way.

##### Zero initial configuration

To keep the calculation clear and simple, we first assume that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The other case @xmath will be handled afterwards along similar lines. By
linearity the solution to the full problem is then the superposition of
these two solutions.

Let the Fourier transformation of @xmath be denoted by @xmath . Then the
Fourier transformation (in space only) of ( 4.158 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This equation is of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the (symmetric) matrix @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Indices are lowered and raised using the Kronecker delta (which
coincides with the reference strain in the chosen coordinates). The
solution of the above equation with the Fourier transform of ( 4.161 )
as initial data is of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can be easily verified by direct computation. Note that @xmath is a
matrix, and that in general it is not easy to actually compute this
operator from the given @xmath . But one readily checks that @xmath is
positive definite if the operator ( 4.157 ) is elliptic, i.e. as long as
( 4.159 ) holds. But this is assumed anyway, so the root @xmath is well
defined. For the actual computation we split @xmath into projection
operators:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the projectors

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.167)
     @xmath      (4.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

satisfy the following relations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.169)
     @xmath      (4.170)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using this together with the definition of the sine via its Taylor
series and the uniqueness of the inverse one can show that (recall the
definition of the wave speeds @xmath according to ( 4.159 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.171)
     @xmath      (4.172)
     @xmath      (4.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that in the last expression the operators @xmath and @xmath are not
affected by the sine. When taken together, the above statements imply

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using that @xmath we find that @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.175)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The last term will provide a Dirac delta, the first terms become
Heaviside functions (and later on by partial integration generate
Kronecker deltas too). We first investigate the last integral, since it
is the easier one. We have to compute the following integral:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.176)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By the standard Fourier formulas we can express this as the convolution
of @xmath , the inverse Fourier transformation of @xmath , with the
initial data:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.177)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We thus have to compute the integral kernel @xmath to obtain an explicit
statement. The usual Fourier transformation formula reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.178)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For convenience we introduce some notation: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
where @xmath is the angle between @xmath and @xmath , so that @xmath .
By a suitable choice of coordinate axes we can introduce polar
coordinates such that the above formula becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.179)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can carry out the @xmath integration and obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.180)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The integrand has a primitive, which is not defined at infinity.
Therefore we cannot hope at all to obtain a classical representation of
the above integral. But assuming that the initial datum @xmath is a
smooth function of compact support we can interpret ( 4.177 ) as the
action of the distribution @xmath on the test function @xmath . Thus we
may as well search for distributional @xmath . To do so we note that we
can rewrite @xmath using the Euler formula:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we combine the first and the second term as well as the third and
the last one into integrals over all of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.181)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The integral is basically the well-known formula for the Fourier
transform of the Dirac delta distribution. We thus finally obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.182)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This allows a great simplification in ( 4.177 ). Since we are interested
in the solution for positive @xmath , which corresponds to solving to
the future, the first Dirac delta does not contribute (recall that
@xmath ). The solution is then given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.183)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can use the delta to transform the nominator and get it in front of
the integral:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.184)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One clearly sees that the initial disturbance travels along the
sound-cone given by @xmath . Next we introduce spherical coordinates.
Then we can directly carry out the radial integration. This allows us to
rewrite @xmath as a surface integral over a ball of radius @xmath with
center @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is @xmath times the average integral of the initial datum over the
sphere @xmath . Now we turn to the first two terms in ( 4.175 ). They
are a result of the coupling in the equation ( 4.158 ) and are a little
more complicated to handle. We have to compute

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since this integral consists of two identical parts we will only compute
one of them and then add the analogous expression for the other one.
First we note that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The remaining integral will again be written as convolution of a
function derived from the initial data and an integral kernel obtained
from the sine term.

Let @xmath denote the inverse Fourier transform of @xmath and let @xmath
denote the inverse Fourier transform of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.188)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and consequently

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We first determine @xmath . We claim

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.190)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To prove this we show that by partial integration (recall that @xmath is
assumed to be of compact support)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.191)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath can be put in front of the integral. This proves that the
Fourier transform of @xmath is given by @xmath , which implies the
claim.

It thus only remains to compute the integral kernel @xmath . We proceed
similar to what we did with the last term of ( 4.175 ). Along the same
paths we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.192)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The integrals are nothing but one-dimensional Fourier transformations of
@xmath . Thus we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.193)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can give @xmath a better known appearance by exchanging the @xmath by
the Heaviside step function @xmath . This gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.194)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next we have to take the derivative with respect to @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.195)
  -- -------- -- ---------

There are also Dirac deltas, but they only appear together with the
argument (i.e. as @xmath ) and therefore do not contribute. Taking into
account the terms in the first bracket we end up with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.196)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the constant @xmath only appears as an argument in the
Heaviside functions. Having this expression for @xmath , one half of
@xmath is determined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second half of @xmath is just the negative of this expression only
with @xmath replaced by @xmath . At this stage we assume that @xmath .
When these two expressions are added up, we find that the Heaviside
functions add up in way, which only leaves @xmath as integration domain.
(If @xmath the balls would simply be interchanged.) Thus we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is possible, since (as already mentioned) the wave speeds @xmath
only appear as arguments of the Heaviside function. Now we can add
@xmath to obtain the full solution @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This formula still needs some cosmetics, since there appears a
divergence of the initial data. This problem is easily overcome by
partial integration:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.198)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that in contrary to what was done before, we must not omit the
boundary terms, since integration takes place over a finite domain. In
our case @xmath . Thus the co-normal @xmath is given by @xmath where the
sign depends whether we are at the outer or inner boundary. The
derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.199)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For convenience we introduce

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.200)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At the outer boundary this @xmath coincides with the unit normal and on
the inner boundary it is just the anti-normal. We write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.201)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that the volume term on the right hand side of ( 4.198 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.202)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The surface integral over @xmath splits into two integrals over spheres
of radius @xmath with center @xmath . They are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.203)
     @xmath      (4.204)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding the last three integrals up according to ( 4.198 ) and combining
the result with the original formula, we arrive at the final form for
the unknown @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.205)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

According to this formula, a given initial disturbance at a point @xmath
is noticed by an observer sitting at @xmath in the following way: there
will at first be a sharp signal followed by a continuous wave, which
finally ceases with another sharp signal. There is also a grave
difference in the nature of the sharp signals. One ( @xmath ) wave is
transversal, while the other one ( @xmath ) is longitudinal. Usually the
longitudinal waves are called pressure waves and the transversal waves
are known as shear waves (see f.e. [ 23 ] or another introductory
textbook).

##### Zero initial momentum

In order to complete the picture we investigate the behavior of
solutions to ( 4.158 ) with the following initial data (compare to (
4.161 )):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.206)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Due to the linearity the solution for general initial data is then the
sum of the two solutions obtained for the initial data ( 4.161 ) and (
4.206 ). For the above data, the solution of the Fourier transformed
equations ( 4.162 ) is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.207)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath can again be split into the projection operators @xmath and
@xmath which allows us to explicitly compute @xmath . We finally obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.208)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solution @xmath is the inverse Fourier transform of this expression.
We split into two parts, the first of them being

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.209)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.210)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the inverse Fourier transform of @xmath . Introducing
spherical coordinates we again do the integration over the angles. We
obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.211)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Writing this as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.212)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.213)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This allows us to evaluate @xmath : We can write the @xmath -derivative
in front of the convolution. We also omit the first Dirac delta, since
@xmath . The remaining terms read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.214)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We introduce spherical coordinates and use the Dirac delta to do the
radial integration. This leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.215)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To actually carry out the differentiation we transform the integral in
one over @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.216)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we can interchange the integration with the differentiation, since
the domain @xmath is independent of @xmath . Then we transform the
domain back. This finally gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.217)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the outer normal derivative.

Next we compute the inverse Fourier transform of the remaining terms in
( 4.208 ).We start by computing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.218)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the previous result we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.219)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.220)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Along the meanwhile well known paths we convert this into a
one-dimensional Fourier integral:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The integrals give (modulo constants) the @xmath distributions. Thus
@xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.221)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consequently (since @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.222)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We know from the previous case of initial data ( 4.161 ) how to deal
with the volume integral. By partial integration we can split in up into
a volume integral involving the undifferentiated initial data plus some
surface terms. Rearranging finally yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.223)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the full solution is the superposition of this solution with (
4.205 ).

Note that properly speaking we have not proved the existence of a
solution but have rather derived the form of the solution, if existence
is assumed. In principle we would have to prove that the representation
formulas we derived in this section really solve the system ( 4.158 )
and satisfy the initial conditions. But since this is a rather trivial
task, once the formulas are given, we omit it at this stage.

### 4.4 Unbounded setup

The minimum requirement a mathematical theory should fulfill to be
viewed as physical reasonable is that the equations of motion describing
the dynamics are well-posed in a certain sense. In our case the simplest
non-linear setup is that of an infinitely extended elastic material on a
given background space-time, since in that case we do not have to worry
about effects arising from self-gravitation nor have to care about
boundary terms. It is thus a crucial test for our matter model to
provide this well-posedness for the field equations arising in the said
setup.

In this section we thus take a closer look at the equations of motion
derived in the sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 . We will compute the principal
symbol, and check hyperbolicity of the equations of motion. Finally we
apply the basic existence theorem from section 2.2 to obtain local
well-posedness for the Cauchy problem for data close to those describing
natural states of the material.

Beside the results on well-posedness we will also derive some results on
the underlying geometric structure of the equations.

Throughout the following analysis we assume the internal energy to be a
smooth function of its entries (i.e. of the configuration and the strain
in the space-time description and of the body point and the strain in
the material picture).

We finally note that some of the results of this section can be found in
[ 5 ] , [ 3 ] or [ 8 ] .

###### Remark.

Note that from now on we again deal with the fully non-linear case.

#### 4.4.1 Space-time description

The equations of motion for the configuration took the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.224)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is a quasi-linear second order system for the configuration @xmath
. @xmath denoted the lower order terms and @xmath was linear homogeneous
in the stress.

##### Second order well-posedness

We will show that the principal part is regular hyperbolic in the
neighborhood of a natural configuration. The existence of this natural
configuration will be assumed in the following.

To prove regular hyperbolicity for configurations close to the natural
one (in a proper topology of course) it suffices to show that the
natural configuration itself has the required property. By continuity
(f.e. in the @xmath topology) the same is then true for all
configurations sufficiently close. Remember that regular hyperbolicity
implied weak hyperbolicity as was shown in section 2.2 . The principal
symbol for the natural configuration reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.225)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This form of the principal symbol strongly suggest to try to prove
regular hyperbolicity w.r.t the pair @xmath . Indeed one finds that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.226)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is negative definite. On the other hand for all @xmath satisfying
@xmath we have that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.227)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is positive definite by virtue of the Legendre-Hadamard condition
implied in the definition of the natural configuration. Finally one
checks the final requirement: @xmath . Thus we have the following
result:

###### Lemma 11.

The system ( 4.224 ) is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. the pair @xmath .

Then the corollary from section 2.2 immediately implies the following
result.

###### Theorem 3.

The Cauchy problem for ( 4.224 ) is well-posed in the following sense:
Given a smooth natural configuration. Then there exists a foliation of
space-time, such that the initial value problem for initial data @xmath
being close to the data induced by the natural configuration @xmath in
@xmath (for @xmath ) give rise to a unique local (both in space and
time) solution, which depends continuously on the initial data.

###### Remark.

The problem with this result is that we only get existence and
uniqueness locally in space. This can be improved if the we add an
additional assumption. If the characteristic speeds of the material are
smaller than the speed of light, one may obtain regular hyperbolicity
w.r.t. @xmath all over the leafs of the foliation and not only in
certain neighborhoods. For the case of an isotopic material this is
explicitly carried out for the material setup in the following section
in lemma 16 , but it would work just the same wy in the given context of
the space-time description.

Note that the connection between the Legendre-Hadamard condition and
regular hyperbolicity is even deeper than we already know. The following
holds

###### Lemma 12.

The system ( 4.224 ) is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. @xmath for a reference
configuration if and only if it is natural. If the material is isotropic
w.r.t. the reference strain, then ( 4.224 ) is regular hyperbolic if and
only if the reference configuration is natural.

The first part of the lemma is easy to prove: One part of the statement
we have already checked. The other part is obvious from the structure of
the principal part: suppose that the system is regular hyperbolic w.r.t
@xmath . Then the Legendre-Hadamard condition for the elasticity
operator follows directly from the definition.

The second part of the lemma is a little bit harder. We will see that
regular hyperbolicity w.r.t. any @xmath implies the Legendre-Hadamard
condition. We have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.228)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath . Since we assume isotropy, we can write this as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.229)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and contractions are taken w.r.t. the strain. We can always
find a @xmath , which gives rise to a non-vanishing @xmath . Then @xmath
includes @xmath , while choosing @xmath orthogonal to @xmath gives rise
to @xmath . But those are just the conditions on the Lamé moduli which
establish the Legendre-Hadamard condition. The statement of the lemma is
proven.

###### Remark.

This lemma does not generalize to non-isotropic materials.

The reason for this lies in the following fact: suppose the system is
regular hyperbolic w.r.t. a pair @xmath where @xmath is not parallel to
the four-velocity. Then the hyperbolicity conditions would imply the
Legendre-Hadamard condition only on the subspace, which is the
intersection between the orthogonal spaces of the four-velocity and the
given @xmath .

To recover the full Legendre-Hadamard condition one would in addition
require @xmath to be true. But in general there is no way to obtain this
inequality. One could of course try to derive a necessary condition on
the elasticity operator which would result in the above inequality and
thus would imply the statement of the lemma for such materials but this
will not be done here.

We make a further comment on possible choices for @xmath for isotropic
materials:

###### Lemma 13.

Let the material be isotropic. Then the system ( 4.224 ) is regular
hyperbolic w.r.t. the pair @xmath if and only if the following
inequalities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.230)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as well as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.231)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hold for @xmath being the maximum of @xmath and @xmath while @xmath is
the minimum. For this lemma we also assume that @xmath , i.e. that those
constants are bounded from above by the speed of light (the physical
meaning is that the sound waves travel with physical velocities). @xmath
is the reference four-velocity.

###### Remark.

This lemma sheds some light on the geometric structure of the problem.
It tells us that @xmath as well as @xmath have to lie inside certain
sound-cones. Recall that we have found in the last section (at least for
the linearized setup) that the elastic perturbations travel along these
cones.

To prove the lemma we first of all have to know the isotropic principal
symbol. In principle (that means beside positive multiples) it is given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.232)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and contractions are taken w.r.t. the reference strain.
Without restriction of generality we assume @xmath .

Recall the definition: a system is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. @xmath if
and only if @xmath is negative definite, while @xmath has to be positive
definite for all @xmath . By continuity small changes in the argument
@xmath do not change the positivity properties of @xmath . A change of
these positivity properties would reflect itselve in the condition
@xmath .

In general this determinant can be computed to be (see f.e. [ 5 ] )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.233)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.234)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(later on we will use @xmath and @xmath with the same meaning) The
determinant vanishes if and only if @xmath or @xmath . Since the @xmath
are non-degenerate these conditions define cones in the co-tangent
space.

The principal part taken w.r.t. @xmath is negative definite. Since

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.235)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the principal part is negative definite w.r.t. all @xmath satisfying the
condition @xmath . Thus all co-vectors lying inside cone @xmath are
sub-characteristic.

The proof for @xmath is slightly more difficult: We need the following
result

###### Proposition 1.

@xmath for all @xmath if and only if @xmath

This proposition however is trivially true since @xmath is a
Lorentz-metric for @xmath .

The proposition gives the second inequality of the lemma. At first
glance it might seem strange that one inequality involves @xmath while
the other one contains @xmath . This comes from the fact, that in one
case we approach the co-sound-cone from above and in the other case from
below.

Note that (strictly speaking) up to now we have only proven the
”if”-part of the lemma. To complete the proof we simply note that
positive (respectively negative) definite operators have positive
(respectively negative) determinant. This observation gives the ”only
if”-part and thus completes the proof of the lemma.

###### Remark.

Note that the inner and outer cone interchange when viewed in tangent
and co-tangent space respectively. Thus @xmath lies in the inner cone,
while @xmath lies in the inner co-cone.

##### Rank two vs rank one positivity

Usually people in the relativity community try to prove well-posedness
by casting the equations of motion into a symmetric hyperbolic first
order system. We will not give a definition (which can e.g. be found in
[ 20 ] ). Just note that there exists a complete local-in space-theory
for such systems. We could of course try to apply this theory for the
given setup as is done f.e. in [ 5 ] . But in general there may be a
prize to pay for the transition to the first order system. In the
following we shall briefly sketch, how this problem looks like and how
it (at least in the special case of an isotropic material) can be
overcome:

If one prefers to cast the original equations into a first order system,
one would need to contract the principal part not only with rank one
objects but with general tensors with two indices to obtain
hyperbolicity and hence well-posedness. Hence the original
Legendre-Hadamard condition may in general fail to be sufficient, since
it only covers rank one positivity.

Note that the principal symbol and even the original second order system
is unchanged if we exchange the elasticity tensor by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.236)
  -- -------- -- ---------

if the additional term has the following symmetries:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.237)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will see (at least in the case of an isotropic material) that a gauge
transformation of the kind introduced in ( 4.236 ) can be used to obtain
hyperbolicity of the first order system by just using the
Legendre-Hadamard condition.

For an isotropic material we have seen that the elasticity operator can
be written as (omitting the upper tilde for the reference strain)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.238)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark.

For convenience we will omit the factor @xmath on the left hand side as
well as the stored energy @xmath from now on for the rest of this
subsection.

Since we do not assume the material to be homogeneous they need not be
constant and may still be functions on the body. @xmath is the inverse
strain at the reference deformation. On flat background we may use
coordinates such that @xmath but we will stick to this more general
notation. We know that the Legendre-Hadamard condition is equivalent to
the following condition on the Lamé moduli (compare section 3.1.3 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.239)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Our goal is to establish a stronger positivity result for the
transformed elasticity tensor @xmath using these conditions on the Lamé
moduli. Namely we will show positivity of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.240)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Splitting into its antisymmetric ( @xmath ) and symmetric but trace-free
( @xmath ) parts we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.241)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the trace of @xmath w.r.t. the reference strain. The
first term in ( 4.240 ) can then be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.242)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The indices were lowered using the reference strain. This is nonnegative
if and only if @xmath and the bulk modulus @xmath .

###### Remark.

We note two things:

-    those conditions are stronger than ( 4.239 )

-    they do not include the antisymmetric part of @xmath

We cannot use this expression to bound the contracted original
elasticity tensor away from zero, since the left hand side vanishes for
antisymmetric @xmath . Thus the gauge term @xmath must give rise to
antisymmetric terms thus breaking the symmetry (isotropy) of the setup.

The easiest and at the same time most natural choice for a gauge term is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.243)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This term obeys the required symmetries as stated in ( 4.237 ). The free
function @xmath will be specified in the following. Computing the second
term in ( 4.240 ) using this gauge term we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.244)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding this to the terms from the original elasticity tensor gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.245)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we would chose @xmath then we could use the Legendre-Hadamard
condition to bound the first and the last term but the second term would
vanish. This however would lead to problems as indicated in the remark
above. We thus need a more refined argument. Assume the
Legendre-Hadamard condition holds. Then by continuity there exists a
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.246)
     @xmath      (4.247)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then we set @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.248)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now all coefficients are positive by virtue of the Legendre-Hadamard
condition and all summands are nonnegative.

We have shown how to construct a gauge term which leaves the second
order system unchanged but allows for the Legendre-Hadamard condition to
be sufficient for positivity and hence for hyperbolicity in the context
of the first order system.

#### 4.4.2 Material description

Now we turn to the material setup. In this section we will show that the
equations of motion derived from the material Lagrangian are regular
hyperbolic close to a natural reference state. This will include
well-posedness for the second order system.

We could also try to cast the system into a symmetric hyperbolic system.
Then in general stronger assumptions on the elasticity operator (and
thus on the material) would be needed. For isotropic materials the last
part of the previous section could be used to overcome this discrepancy.
But (besides this remark) we will not go any deeper into the first order
formulation, since the second order formulation works out well.

As in the space-time setting we will find that there exists a preferred
pair @xmath , with respect to which the systems unfolds its
hyperbolicity properties in the most natural way. Finally the connection
between this very choice and the pair @xmath used in the previous
sections will be discussed.

The equations of motion were derived in the form (see section 4.1.2 for
the derivation)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.249)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is a second order quasi-linear system for the deformation @xmath .
As before @xmath denotes lower order terms.

###### Remark.

Note that Greek indices are not space-time indices but rather denote
points of @xmath .

It turns out to be most convenient not to use the principal part
directly to check the various positivity requirements but rather work
with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.250)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath is an isomorphism, this newly defined @xmath has the very
same positivity properties as the original @xmath had. The advantage is
that the new object can be given in the more convenient form (see again
section 4.1.2 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.251)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is linear homogeneous in the stress. We have seen in
section 4.1.2 how to obtain @xmath and @xmath for Gaussian coordinates
on space-time. It is straightforward to see that for general coordinates
(i.e. for non-vanishing lapse and shift) we obtain very similar
expressions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.252)
     @xmath      (4.253)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the rest of this section we will stick to this more general
formulation. Note that @xmath is thus again given by the more general
expression @xmath

Then for a reference deformation the principal part reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.254)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now try to find a pair @xmath w.r.t. which the system is regular
hyperbolic. Note that the principal part consists of two portions. The
first is non-positive, while the second is non-negative once the
Legendre-Hadamard condition is assumed for the elasticity operator. Thus
a good choice for each element of the pair @xmath will annihilate one
part of the principal symbol. For the reference deformation this is in
general given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.255)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From the form of the principal symbol it is clear that the choice for
@xmath has to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.256)
  -- -------- -- ---------

because then for all @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.257)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is positive by the Legendre-Hadamard condition unless @xmath .
This however can be excluded since

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.258)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is non-zero by the non-degeneracy of the strain.

In order to obtain a negative principal part for @xmath we have to
assure that the part involving the elasticity operator does not enter
the symbol. This is guaranteed only by the following condition:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.259)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We conclude

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.260)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus for fixing @xmath through the (arbitrary) condition @xmath we
obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.261)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Together this gives the following result

###### Lemma 14.

The system ( 4.249 ) is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. the pair

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.262)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in a neighborhood of a natural deformation.

###### Remark.

Needless to say that the system is also regular hyperbolic w.r.t. all
pairs sufficiently close to the one given above. Nevertheless the system
( 4.249 ) satisfies the conditions for regular hyperbolicity in this
optimal way only for the above choice.

We can thus obtain the analogous result as in the previous section
stating that the system ( 4.249 ) is regular hyperbolic near a natural
deformation if and only if it is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. the above
choices for @xmath and @xmath . The form of the corresponding lemmas can
be taken word by word from the last section. Instead of spending too
much time on this, we shall rather clarify the connection between the
above choice for @xmath and the four-velocity.

For this purpose we make use of the transformation introduced in section
4.1.2 , namely the diffeomorphism

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.263)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have seen in the section mentioned above, that the material velocity
maps to @xmath which is a multiple of @xmath . We have also seen that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.264)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this one may guess that @xmath . To see this we use the following
result from section 3.2.3 :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.265)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this it is easy to obtain that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.266)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To complete the argument we have to show that the spatial parts coincide
(The time-part already fits). This can be seen by recalling the formula
for the inverse strain derived in ( 3.101 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.267)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using this calculation on the spatial art of @xmath we immediately find
that @xmath thus proving the claim.

###### Remark.

The above computation shows how the geometric importance of the
four-velocity @xmath carries over to the material description.

From our observations up to now the following lemma connecting the
material and the space-time description is immediate:

###### Lemma 15.

The material system close to a natural deformation is regular hyperbolic
w.r.t. @xmath as defined above if and only if the system in the
space-time picture is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. @xmath where @xmath is
the natural normalized four-velocity. Moreover @xmath and @xmath are
connected via the diffeomorphism introduced in section 3.2.3 as
indicated above.

###### Remark.

To prove this one just has to use that from regular hyperbolicity w.r.t.
one of the above pairs the Legendre-Hadamard condition follows, which
gives the hyperbolicity in the other description.

We carry on with a local existence result. As in the space-time
description we can use the basic theorem given in section 2.2 to obtain
local well-posedness:

###### Theorem 4.

The Cauchy problem for ( 4.249 ) is well-posed in the following sense:
Given a natural deformation. Then there exists a (local) foliation of
@xmath , such that for initial data @xmath close to the ones induced by
the natural deformation on the leafs of the foliation in the @xmath
topology ( @xmath ) there exists a unique regular (i.e. at least @xmath
) local (in space and time) solution which depends continuously on the
initial data.

###### Remark.

The actual function spaces involved can be taken from the original
theorem from section 2.2 .

###### Remark.

The reason why we only get local in space solutions in general lies in
the fact that @xmath (and hence @xmath ) is not closed in general.

There is another natural choice for the pair @xmath , given by the
foliation @xmath . This pair is given by @xmath . In the following lemma
we will see how to deal with this setup (at least for isotropic
materials)

###### Lemma 16.

Let the material be isotropic w.r.t a natural deformation. Then the
system ( 4.249 ) evaluated in a neighborhood of the natural deformation
is regular hyperbolic w.r.t @xmath if and only if the characteristic
speeds @xmath and @xmath are bounded from above in the following way:
@xmath as well as @xmath .

The following corollary follows immediately from the @xmath :

###### Corollary 3.

The isotropic system is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. @xmath close to the
natural deformation if the characteristic speeds @xmath are bounded by
the speed of light, i.e. @xmath .

###### Remark.

It is interesting that due to the lemma one may obtain regular
hyperbolicity w.r.t. @xmath even if @xmath .

###### Remark.

An analogous result can be obtained for the space-time setup for a
suitable foliation.

For the proof of the lemma we note that the Legendre-Hadamard condition
guarantees that the principal symbol is positive definite w.r.t. all
@xmath satisfying @xmath . This has already been mentioned in the proof
of lemma 14 . The new part consists in showing that @xmath is
sub-characteristic. We have to show that the principal symbol (for
convenience we omit the tilde) taken w.r.t. @xmath is negative definite,
i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.268)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the coefficient on the left hand side is positive (recall that
@xmath ) we only have to care about the right hand side. Using the
expression for the isotropic elasticity operator, the question comes
down to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.269)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for non-vanishing @xmath where products were taken w.r.t. the strain
@xmath , while @xmath . The coefficient in front of @xmath lacks a clear
sign (the Legendre-Hadamard condition only leads to the conditions given
in the lemma). We thus first have to rewrite the above expression. This
is done by splitting @xmath into a part parallel to @xmath and an
orthogonal rest:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.270)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.271)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus besides positive multiples the principal symbol twice contracted
with @xmath is given through

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.272)
  -- -------- -- ---------

now the Legendre-Hadamard condition can be used to guarantee positivity
of the coefficients. Since @xmath and @xmath can be chosen
independently, the symbol is negative definite if and only if the
following two inequalities hold:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.273)
     @xmath      (4.274)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Assuming the non-trivial case, those two inequalities are essentially of
the type

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.275)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It remains to compute @xmath and compare the result to @xmath . From the
formula for the inverse strain given by equation ( 3.101 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.276)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus the inequality we need becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.277)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is the claimed inequality.

###### Remark.

Note that we can use the lemma to establish a local existence result on
all of @xmath getting rid of the locality in space. The same argument
works for the space-time description. There we can use it to obtain
valid data on all of @xmath .

### 4.5 Gravito-elastodynamics

Once the initial value problem for the unbounded setup on a fixed
background is shown to be well-posed, there are two natural ways to
proceed. One can consider finite material bodies or one can investigate
unbounded self-gravitating elastic materials. While the former task will
be undertaken in the following section 4.6 we shall concentrate here on
the latter challenge. We will show that the initial value problem for a
self-gravitating unbounded elastic medium is well-posed under certain
(mild) restrictions on the material, already well-known to us from the
previous sections (namely the Legendre-Hadamard condition).

We will first discuss the initial value problem for the Einstein field
equations. Following the exposition of Friedrich and Rendall [ 21 ] we
will use the harmonic gauge to cast them into a quasi-linear wave
equation, which is then shown to be regular hyperbolic. Then we will
discuss issues like gauge propagation and proper initial data.

Then in the second part we will show that the coupled system consisting
of the Einstein(-matter field) equations (in harmonic gauge) and the
elastic equations of motion in space-time description is regular
hyperbolic and discuss how the arguments given for the un-coupled case
carry over.

#### 4.5.1 Einstein field equations

Let space-time be denoted by @xmath . The Einstein field equations
determine the space-time geometry (encoded in the metric @xmath )
through the space-time entities (matter). They are obtained from the
action principle ( @xmath denotes the matter Lagrangian)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.278)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.279)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Einstein tensor formed from the Ricci tensor @xmath
, which depends on the metric and its first and second derivatives while
@xmath is the energy-momentum tensor while the constant @xmath ( @xmath
being the gravitational constant). An equivalent version reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.280)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For vacuum the energy-momentum tensor vanishes and the Einstein field
equations simplify to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.281)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark.

For the moment we do not specify a particular matter model. In this
spirit we do not give an explicit expression for the energy-momentum
tensor. We rather assume it to be a functional of the matter fields to
keep this discussion on a general level. Later on it will of course be
the one derived for elastic matter ( 3.65 ). It is however important to
assume that it does not contribute to the principal part.

When written in terms of the metric equation ( 4.280 ) reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.282)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the contracted Christoffel symbols are defined by @xmath . Since
the Christoffel symbols involve first derivatives of the metric, the
principal part is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.283)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark.

We could exchange the covariant derivative by an ordinary one, because
the difference is of lower order in the metric.

Note that this is a quasi-linear expression, since the inverse metric
depends on the metric itself but not on higher order terms. One can show
(see e.g. [ 21 ] ) that every hyper-surface is characteristic in the
sense that for every choice of @xmath the characteristic polynomial (see
chapter 2.1 for the definitions) vanishes:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.284)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This in particular implies that there exists neither a
sub-characteristic co-vector nor can the equation in the form ( 4.282 )
be hyperbolic in the sense of any of our definitions. This defect can
however be shown to be a result of the diffeomorphism invariance (i.e.
of coordinate freedom) of the field equations.

In order to obtain a reasonable system of differential equations we have
to make a suitable choice of coordinates. The form of the principal part
( 4.283 ) suggest that a good coordinate system would allow us to get
rid of the term @xmath , since we then would be left with a
wave-equation. This is possible, since the Christoffel symbols are no
tensorial objects. We can thus hope to find coordinates for which

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.285)
  -- -------- -- ---------

More precisely we have the following:

###### Lemma 17.

Given a space-like hyper-surface. Let @xmath be coordinates in some open
neighborhood @xmath in this hyper-surface. Then there exists coordinates
@xmath on some neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath with the property @xmath
such that in these new coordinates

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.286)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Definition.

The coordinates introduced in the fore-going lemma are called ”harmonic
coordinates”.

We can prove the lemma by rewriting ( 4.286 ) (we construct harmonic
coordinates):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.287)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the second Christoffel symbol corresponds to the new coordinate
system @xmath . The first equality holds since coordinates are scalars
on space-time. Using proper initial conditions one can obtain the
solution claimed in the lemma (a way of seeing this is by application of
the theorem in section 2.2 ).

In harmonic coordinates (which will from now on be denoted by @xmath )
the principal part ( 4.283 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.288)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At the given stage it is easy to show that the principal part (after
raising the indices @xmath in the above equation using the metric) in
harmonic coordinates is regular hyperbolic:

###### Lemma 18.

The principal part ( 4.288 ) is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. every pair
@xmath where both @xmath and @xmath are time-like and satisfy @xmath .

Given proper initial data we can thus apply the existence theorem from
section 2.2 to obtain local well-posedness for the Einstein equations in
harmonic gauge (assuming proper well-posedness of the matter equations).

###### Remark.

The procedure of reducing the Einstein field equations to a hyperbolic
system by a suitable choice of coordinates is called ”hyperbolic
reduction”.

The story however does not end at this point. Two (three) questions
remain open:

-   What are proper initial data? The related question: Are there any
    constraints or can the data be given freely? If there are
    constraints, do they propagate?

-   Does the gauge condition hold off the initial surface? (Is it
    preserved under the evolution?)

These question will be answered in separate subsections.

##### Initial data and constraints

One may at first guess that the metric and a suitable transversal
derivative given on a suitable initial surface play the role of proper
initial data. This however is not the case. We will see that an initial
data set consist of a three-dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath ,
which in addition is equipped with a symmetric covariant two-tensor
@xmath plus a diffeomorphism identifying @xmath with a space-like
hyper-surface in @xmath . Then @xmath plays the role of first
fundamental form (induced metric) on this initial hyper-surface, while
@xmath is the second fundamental form (external curvature). If matter is
present, the initial data set has to be extended to include the matter
data.

While lapse and shift can be prescribed freely (each choice corresponds
to a certain coordinate choice on @xmath ), @xmath and @xmath are
subjected to certain constraint equations. From these ”constrained”
initial data one can construct initial data for ( 4.282 ).

To actually see this we have to carry out a 3+1 decomposition of the
Einstein field equations ( 4.280 ). Assuming a foliation of space-time
by space-like hyper-surfaces @xmath we write the metric in its ADM
representation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.289)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the projector onto the tangent space of the hyper-surface @xmath is
@xmath where the unit-normal @xmath is given by @xmath .

Then @xmath is the induced metric on @xmath , while the second
fundamental form is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.290)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One finds that certain components of the Einstein equations ( 4.279 )
beside material quantities only depend on the first and second
fundamental form and do not involve higher order transversal derivatives
of the metric. First note the following trivial consequences of ( 4.279
):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.291)
     @xmath      (4.292)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The interesting point about these equations is that they can be written
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.293)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.294)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.295)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath denotes the Ricci scalar corresponding to the induced metric
(one must use the Gauss and the Codazzi equation to arrive at the stated
result. See [ 18 ] for details) while @xmath is the covariant derivative
associated with @xmath .

Note that equations ( 4.293 , 4.294 ) form an under-determined system
for first and second fundamental form, once the material quantities are
known. In this sense ( 4.293 , 4.294 ) constitute necessary restrictions
on possible initial data and are therefore called constraint equations.
If the coupled system is considered, these equations also constrain the
material initial data.

It remains to show how to construct the initial data @xmath and @xmath
for ( 4.282 ) on @xmath once @xmath (or rather the corresponding objects
on the initial hyper-surface) are given.

From the 3+1 decomposition of the Christoffel symbols one can derive the
following equations for lapse and shift (see [ 21 ] for the derivation)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.296)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.297)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath denote the contracted Christoffel symbols corresponding to
the induced metric.

Given lapse and shift and assuming harmonic gauge, the above equations
give the time derivatives of lapse and shift in terms of @xmath . What
we still lack is an equation for @xmath in terms of the data. For this
we use the definition of the second fundamental form ( 4.290 ). We can
rewrite it in the form ( @xmath denotes the Lie-derivative w.r.t. the
vector field @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.298)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This equation gives the sought time-derivative of the induced metric.

We sum up: Given initial data @xmath (we suppress the material data for
the moment) which obey the constraints ( 4.293 , 4.294 ). These data
induce corresponding objects on the initial hyper-surface, which is the
isomorphic embedding of @xmath into space-time. Then for any
sufficiently smooth choice of lapse and shift (this choice is pretty
arbitrary, it just fixes the time flow off the initial surface) we can
construct @xmath on the initial surface. The components of @xmath can be
obtained using equations ( 4.296 , 4.297 , 4.298 ) under the restriction
@xmath (coming from the requirement for harmonic coordinates) as
indicated above.

We have seen that the relevant initial data are given by @xmath together
with an isometric embedding into space-time. It has been shown how these
data can be used to obtain suitable data for the problem as formulated
in ( 4.282 ).

##### Propagation of gauge

Assume we have proper initial data on a hyper-surface, such that the
theorem from section 2.2 provides us with local existence and
uniqueness. (The accurate form of this statement will be presented in
the last section.) Then we still have to show that this solution
(obtained from the reduced system) actually is a solution to the full
Einstein field equation ( 4.280 ). This is done by showing that if the
contracted Christoffel symbols vanish initially, then they also vanish
off the initial surface.

For the solution of the reduced system @xmath we construct the
un-contracted and contracted Christoffel symbols (which for the moment
we do not assume to vanish). For these symbols we derive the Einstein
tensor @xmath . Subtracting the energy-momentum tensor and the reduced
field equations (which hold due to the assumptions) leads to ( @xmath is
assumed to be computed from @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(The second term arises when we express @xmath in terms of covariant
derivatives.) Now we employ the contracted Bianchi identity (see f.e. [
53 ] or [ 47 ] ), which hold for purely geometrical reasons
independently of the field equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.299)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If the energy-momentum tensor @xmath is divergence-free (which is the
case for elastic materials according to lemma 9 ) this leads to a
homogeneous wave equation for the contracted Christoffel symbols:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.300)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we can show that @xmath and @xmath both vanish on the initial
surface, we may employ the basic existence and uniqueness result from
section 2.2 : obviously @xmath is a solution for trivial initial data.
The uniqueness part then assures that this is indeed the only solution.
This means that @xmath found from this harmonic coordinate ansatz is a
solution to the Einstein equations.

To see that the initial data for ( 4.300 ) are indeed trivial, we recall
equations ( 4.296 , 4.297 ). We used the harmonic gauge to obtain @xmath
and @xmath in terms of the given data. Reverting this argument implies
that the initial data have been chosen in a way such that @xmath
vanishes initially.

The argument for @xmath works in a similar way, but is more complicated,
since the expression under consideration is second order in the metric.
By this it is not sufficient anymore to argue in terms of initial data
only. We have to make use of the field equations. These enter in the
form introduced in the beginning of this sub-section. Contracting with
the unit-normal @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.301)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that the left hand side only involves initial data when evaluated
on the initial surface (this was shown in the last sub-section). But the
initial data satisfy the constraint equations, so that we can conclude

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.302)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since we already know that @xmath vanishes on the initial surface this
can be written as (we stress that this equality only holds on the
initial surface as do the following equations. We include no statements
off the initial surface.)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.303)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that we can omit spatial derivatives of the contracted Christoffel
symbols, since the latter vanish identically on all of @xmath . It is
then a simple matter of inserting the definitions of the unit-normal
together with the ADM-representation of the metric to obtain the desired
result. We can conclude that @xmath has to vanish on the initial
surface.

Thus we have found that the data for ( 4.300 ) are trivial so that the
only solution is trivial as well. We conclude that the metric obtained
from the reduced equations is indeed a solution to the Einstein
equations.

###### Remark.

Note that the only restriction on the matter model was the
divergence-less-ness of the energy-momentum tensor. For elastic
materials which satisfy the equations of motion this condition holds.
This is true independently of the equations of motion for the metric.

##### Propagation of constraints

We have seen in the previous section that the constraints ( 4.293 ,
4.294 ) naturally arise in the context of 3+1 decomposition. If we would
have used the Einstein equations in their ADM-version (i.e. as evolution
equation for the induced metric), we would have to assure that the
constraints hold off the initial surface.

In the given context however this requires no further work, since a
solution to the initial value problem connected to the equation ( 4.282
) gives rise to a solution @xmath of the full Einstein equations ( 4.280
). Thus at each instant of time the constraints are trivially satisfied
and require no further argumentation.

This property still holds once matter fields (and the corresponding
equations of motion) are added to the system.

##### Hyperbolicity for the ADM variables in harmonic gauge

Although this is somehow ”off-route” we will show how the harmonic gauge
can be used to obtain a well-posed system for the ADM-variables.
Therefore we first define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.304)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and introduce

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.305)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this notation we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.306)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This gives for the derivatives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.307)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.308)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so the new principal part derived from ( 4.288 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.309)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the mapping @xmath is a diffeomorphism, so that @xmath is a
linear isomorphism.

The symbol corresponding to ( 4.309 ) reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.310)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to apply theorem1 we have to modify this. The most natural way
is by use of @xmath . For this purpose we first raise the free Greek
indices in ( 6.74 ) by a non-degenerated contra-variant two tensor
@xmath , which we will be specify later. It may depend on the ADM
variables and their first but not on their second derivatives. The new
symbol reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.311)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to apply our definition of regular hyperbolicity we have to
modify this. The most natural way is by use of @xmath . For this purpose
we first raise the free Greek indices in ( 6.74 ) by a non-degenerated
contra-variant two tensor @xmath , which we will be specify later. It
may depend on the ADM variables and their first but not on their second
derivatives. The new symbol reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.312)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The proper choice of @xmath is crucial for the whole argument to work. A
natural candidate is the following:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.313)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the unit normal to the @xmath hyper-surface. If we
contract ( 4.312 ) with @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.314)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the terms inside the bracket is positive, the symbol is positive
(negative) definite for space-like (time-like) choice of @xmath .
Therefore the symbol is regular hyperbolic with respect to every pair
@xmath where both @xmath and @xmath are time-like and satisfy @xmath .

#### 4.5.2 Coupled

Here we will collect the partial results from the fore-going sections to
add them up into a local well-posedness result for the equations of
gravito-elasto-dynamics. We know that the Einstein equations in harmonic
coordinates form a regular hyperbolic second order system. We also know
that the solution of this system is indeed a solution to the Einstein
field equations ( 4.280 ) if the energy-momentum tensor is
divergence-free (which in our case is trivial since the latter condition
is equivalent to the matter equations of motion, see lemma 9 ). Finally
we know which restrictions (namely the constraints) have to be imposed
on the initial data and that these constraints propagate in the proper
sense.

We know from section 4.4.1 that equations governing the dynamics of an
elastic material on a fixed background are regular hyperbolic close to a
natural reference state (i.e. a stress-free state, which satisfies the
Legendre-Hadamard condition).

What we lack up to now is knowledge on the coupled system. For this
purpose we take a closer look at the action describing the coupled
scenario. For a self-gravitating elastic materials we rewrite ( 4.278 )
as (one could include a coupling constant in front of one of the two
terms, but we set it equal to one, since we can f.e. absorb it into the
stored energy)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.315)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At this stage we point out the following important detail: the elastic
Lagrangian does not depend on derivatives of the metric while the Ricci
scalar is independent of the configuration at all. Thus the principal
part decouples and in a harmonic coordinate system we find that we can
write the system as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.316)
  -- -- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.317)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the principal part for the material equations as given in ( 4.30 )
(We have divided the material principal part by @xmath ). As already
indicated previous to lemma 18 it is more convenient to raise the
indices in the portion of the principal part involving the second order
derivatives of the metric. (There appear extra terms, but they are
omitted here because they are at most of first order.) The new principal
part reads

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.318)
  -- -- -- ---------

Next we recall the material principal part for a reference configuration
(recall that all quantities corresponding to the reference configuration
@xmath were labeled by an upper tilde; see ( 4.37 ) for the principal
part)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.319)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We know from the section 4.4.1 that this is regular hyperbolic w.r.t the
pair @xmath . Since the four-velocity @xmath is time-like by
construction, we find that the principal part ( 4.318 ) evaluated at a
natural configuration is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. @xmath . This is due
to the diagonal form of the principal part which itself is a result of
the uncoupling of the equations in the highest order. By continuity (the
stored energy is assumed to be sufficiently smooth) the same is then
true for all configurations sufficiently close. We thus have the
following statement:

###### Lemma 19.

The principal part ( 4.318 ) is regular hyperbolic w.r.t. the pair
@xmath for all pairs @xmath where @xmath is close enough to a natural
configuration.

###### Remark.

Note that the definition of natural configuration did involve the
Legendre-Hadamard condition.

We can thus apply the existence theorem (or the corollary, depending on
whether @xmath is closed) from section 2.2 to obtain local
well-posedness.

There remains just one small obstacle regarding proper initial data: we
have to identify the material quantities used in the constraint
equations ( 4.293 , 4.294 ) in terms of the configuration. For this we
have to chose a proper initial surface. Let us for convenience assume
that @xmath is closed.

###### Remark.

Carefully note that this very last assumption implies the existence of a
reference metric @xmath with respect to which the above statement is
true. This particular tilde here does not stand for the reference
configuration but for the reference metric.

Then redefine @xmath . This one-form then by definition constitutes a
foliation of space-time by space-like hyper-surfaces @xmath (which we
assume to be isomorphic to @xmath ). For those hyper-surfaces the
four-velocity @xmath is the unit-normal w.r.t. @xmath . Then the
constraints ( 4.293 , 4.294 ) can be written as (note that in this
particular foliation @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.320)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.321)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now we can state the main result of this section:

###### Theorem 5.

Let the stored energy depend smoothly on its arguments. Given a
reference state @xmath , where @xmath is a natural configuration such
that @xmath is closed. Then this reference state defines a foliation of
space-time by space-like hyper-surfaces @xmath . Given an initial data
set @xmath satisfying the constraints ( 4.320 , 4.321 ) together with a
diffeomorphism mapping @xmath onto the initial hyper-surface @xmath
(defined using the reference state @xmath ). Then the embedded data give
rise to data @xmath for the system ( 4.316 ). If the latter are close to
the data induced by the reference state @xmath in the topology @xmath
for @xmath they generate a unique local solution @xmath to the coupled
system ( 4.280 , 4.224 ) which depends continuously on the initial data.

For the actual function space for the solution we refer to the existence
theorem from section 2.2 .

###### Remark.

Once the theorem is given is becomes clear what we meant by the phrase
”close to”: namely that the corresponding data on a suitable
hyper-surface would be sufficiently close in the topology given in the
theorem. An example would be states which are close to the reference
state in the supremum-norm.

We could have tried to obtain a similar result using the corollary from
section 2.2 : If @xmath is not assumed to be closed, then one obtains
local well-posedness. We shall formulate this the following way:

###### Lemma 20.

Given a reference state @xmath , where @xmath is a natural
configuration. Then there exists a (local in space and time) foliation
of space-time such that all data close to the the ones induces by the
reference state give rise to a unique local (in space and time) solution
for the Cauchy problem.

### 4.6 Bounded domains

In the context of matter models most naturally the question arises
whether the equations of motion admit solutions subjected to certain
boundary conditions. In this context it is again the most natural choice
to consider so called natural boundary condition. This means that the
normal stress is assumed to vanish. An elastic body like a planet
(neglecting the atmosphere) would be described by such a model.
Nevertheless one should stress that a planet like earth is still well
described by the Newtonian version of the equations given here. On the
other hand the next bigger objects, where relativistic corrections come
into play, are stars, which are described well enough by fluid dynamics.

Fluid dynamics can by kinematically treated as a simple subcase of an
elastic material (the stored energy depends only on the particle
density, see e.g. [ 5 ] ). Nevertheless the techniques used in this work
are not suitable to discuss the dynamics of fluids. This leaves us with
the only physical example, which seems to be realized in our universe:
neutron stars. Those extremely dense objects are known to admit solid
crusts ( [ 38 ] or [ 25 ] ) and it may well be the case that the core is
solid as well. This provides a physical motivation for the given
problem. Of course we do not treat the self-gravitating case but the
setup discussed here has to be rather seen as a natural first step
towards this challenge.

There is another reason to talk about finite elastic materials, which is
a rather pragmatic one: there is a small number of physical reasonable
theories where a well-posed initial-boundary-value problem can be
considered without too much trouble. From this point of view one can
argue that it is reasonable to consider the given problem for the sole
reason that we can do so.

But instead of giving further arguments to justify the following
analysis we shall go in medias res. We finally note that the results of
this section can be too found in [ 8 ] .

We will use the equations of motion in the material picture. The reader
will find that in comparison to the foregoing sections we will place
stronger restrictions on the space-time geometry. The reason for this is
technical and will be discussed ”on the way”.

This section is organized as follows: First we recall the basic setup
including the relevant equations of motion. Then we discuss suitable
boundary conditions, which in our case happen to be natural ones. This
discussion is then followed by some remarks concerning the connection
between the Garding inequality and strong point-wise stability as
introduced in section 2.1 . Finally we will show that the corollary to
the basic existence theorem due to Koch [ 36 ] given in section 2.3
applies to the system under consideration, which gives local
well-posedness of the initial-boundary value problem.

#### 4.6.1 Basics and equations of motion

It is convenient for the problem at hand to use the equations of motion
cast in the material description. The reason lies in the boundary
conditions. We will find in the following section that while the
boundary in space-time is free, thus the problem in that setup is that
of solving a free-boundary value problem, it is fixed in the material
picture and given through the boundary of the material manifold.

In the given scenario the basic unknowns are the deformation mappings
@xmath , which are time-dependent mappings from a compact manifold
@xmath with smooth boundary @xmath onto a bounded region @xmath of the
standard leaf of the foliation, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.322)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.323)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As in the unbounded case the body is equipped with a volume-form @xmath
, which is smooth on @xmath .

For this setup we can define the basic kinematic objects just the same
way as for an unbounded medium. We thus use the definitions as given in
section 3.2 .

For technical reasons we restrict ourselves to so called ”ultra-static”
space-times. This means we assume the existence of a
hyper-surface-orthogonal normalized time-like Killing vector field. This
restriction may seem harsh but we stress that the sole existence of a
reference deformation, which admits a Born-rigid normalized
four-velocity, already provides a quite strong restriction on the
space-time geometry. If this reference deformation ought to be a
solution of the field equations, we found in section 4.1.1 that this
necessarily implies the existence of a normalized time-like Killing
vector field.

For technical reasons, which will be explained at a later stage it is
very convenient to assume this Killing field additionally to be
hyper-surface-orthogonal.

Under this assumption a suitable choice of coordinates allows us to
write the metric as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.324)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this form of the metric already leads to a notable
simplification of the formalism: Since both the lapse and the shift take
their most trivial form @xmath , @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.325)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which includes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.326)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as well as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.327)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark.

Remember that @xmath are to be understood as the inverse of @xmath .

We finally recall the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.328)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the stored energy @xmath is a smooth function of @xmath and of the
strain.

Then the field equations are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.329)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus the principal part is determined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.330)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 4.6.2 Boundary conditions

We now turn to boundary conditions. In non-relativistic elasticity
theory there are essentially two kinds of boundary conditions:

-   boundary conditions of place: the boundary of the material in
    space-time (i.e. the set @xmath ) is prescribed.

-   traction boundary conditions: the normal traction, i.e. the normal
    components of the stress are prescribed.

When the normal traction is zero, we speak of ”natural” boundary
conditions. For obvious reasons they are the ones appropriate for
modeling a freely floating finite object like a star or a planet. This
reason together with a second one strongly suggests this choice: all
other boundary conditions but the natural ones become inconsistent once
one couples to the Einstein equations.

For the space-time description these natural boundary conditions are
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.331)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the energy-momentum tensor as given in ( 3.65 ) while
@xmath denotes the co-normal of @xmath . To see this note that the
material velocity is tangential to the inverse images of points of
@xmath under the configuration map. Thus it is annihilated by the
co-normal. Hence the above equation becomes (recall that the
configuration gradient is assumed to be of maximal rank)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.332)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is just the statement that the normal stress vanishes.

There is however a huge disadvantage about these boundary conditions:
the boundary @xmath is free, i.e. it is not determined a priori, but it
is rather a part of the problem to find the actual boundary.

This problem is overcome by switching to the material description. Then
the boundary conditions are evaluated on @xmath , which is fixed. To
actually obtain these new boundary conditions we have to translate (
4.332 ) into the material description. In section 3.2.3 we have
encountered the diffeomorphism @xmath . Applying it to the space-time
co-normal @xmath we find that it is mapped to the one-form @xmath ,
which by definition is connected to @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.333)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recalling now that the four-velocity was mapped to a multiple of @xmath
, we find that the equation @xmath now reads @xmath , which at once
implies the relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.334)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus ( 4.332 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.335)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These are the new boundary conditions. They state that the normal
components of the stress measured along the body have to vanish for all
time.

There is a deep connection between the equations of motion and the
boundary condition. To reveal this connection we note that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.336)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using formula ( 4.47 ) for the variation of the strain this becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.337)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means the following: if we replace ( 4.335 ) by the equivalent
equation (recall that @xmath was an isomorphism)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.338)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we find that we can rewrite the boundary condition in a slightly
different way as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.339)
  -- -------- -- ---------

since @xmath . Due to this correspondence ( 4.338 ) (sometimes the
version ( 4.339 )) will be the version of the boundary condition we are
going to use in the following.

So the problem is to find a solution to the initial-boundary value
problem given by the equations of motion ( 4.329 ) subjected to the
boundary conditions ( 4.339 ).

###### Remark.

Note that the statements of this section are independent of the
restricted space-time geometry, but apply to the general setup.

#### 4.6.3 Reference deformation

It is natural to assume the existence of a ”natural state” of the
material, which may be viewed as a trivial realization of the (abstract)
material manifold in space-time.

In the given context we assume that there exists a static reference
deformation, such that the elasticity operator satisfies the strong
point-wise stability condition ( 2.49 ).

We formulate these requirements first in terms of the space-time
description: There exists a configuration @xmath , such that the
four-velocity coincides with the Killing field:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.340)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This implies that the reference configuration is time-independent:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.341)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From section 3.1.5 we know that the reference configuration by
definition has to be stress-free with the corresponding normalized
four-velocity @xmath being geodesic. But the latter point together with
the property of being a static Killing field implies the Born condition,
which in turn means that the reference strain can be viewed as a metric
field on the body. (A simple way of seeing this is by recognizing that
@xmath is time-independent as well as the reference configuration, which
implies that it becomes a field on @xmath , once translated into the
material description.)

###### Remark.

Note that this nice property of the reference configuration is an
artefact of this special setup. For general space-times as investigated
in the sections dealing with the unbounded setup, there will neither
exist a Born-rigid motion nor will the strain define a tensor field on
the body.

###### Remark.

Note that the requirements on the elasticity operator employed here are
stronger than those needed for the unbounded setup. We will see that it
is a proper way of satisfying the Garding inequality, which is a
necessary component for the Koch theorem.

Once the properties of the reference state are known in the space-time
description it is quite easy to determine the analogous statements for
the material description:

There exists a reference deformation @xmath , which is time-independent.
The reference strain @xmath is a metric field on the body, and satisfies
the following conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.342)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as well as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.343)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally strong point-wise stability for

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.344)
  -- -------- -- ---------

reads (suppressing the @xmath -dependence; also compare ( 2.49 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.345)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath .

###### Remark.

We stress that strong point-wise stability implies the Legendre-Hadamard
condition but not vice versa.

It is worth noting that our definition of the reference deformation did
not imply any statement on the boundary conditions. However one finds
that the following is true:

###### Lemma 21.

The reference deformation also solves the boundary value problem ( 4.329
, 4.338 ). In particular this means that initial data given on the
hyper-surface @xmath of the form @xmath generate the reference
deformation.

The first part of the lemma is a trivial consequence of ( 4.343 ). The
second part however is not that trivial. It is obvious that the
reference deformation is a solution to ( 4.329 , 4.338 ) with the
claimed initial data. But in order to exclude that there are other
solutions with the same initial data, which do not coincide with the
reference deformation we have to use the uniqueness part of the Koch
theorem. We will show in the following that the requirements of this
theorem are met for the reference deformation (and hence by continuity
for deformation which are close enough). This will result in the main
theorem of this section, which implies the uniqueness statement needed
here.

The principal part given in ( 4.97 , 4.98 ) takes a relative simple form
for the reference deformation. (Remember that in these formulas not the
principal part @xmath was given but rather @xmath . Another slight
difference comes from the fact that in the definition given there the
factor @xmath coming from the volume form was eliminated, which is not
convenient anymore in this context due to the presence of the boundary
conditions.)

Using the convention that every object evaluated in the reference
deformation is marked by an upper tilde, f.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.346)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.347)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as well as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.348)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The remaining terms of the principal part vanish when taken for the
reference deformation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.349)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Apart from other reasons the last equations holds as a result of the
special form of the metric. If a lapse would have been present, the
elasticity operator would have entered @xmath and @xmath would not
necessarily have vanished.

This would have resulted in the problems we know from section 4.4.2
concerning a proper coordinate choice. This question of coordinate
choice gains extra-finesse since in these different coordinates the
boundary would most probably loose its convenient coordinate form. All
these problems were bypassed by the restrictions placed on the metric in
this section.

We finally observe that by ( 4.347 ) the coefficient of the
time-derivative @xmath is negative definite for the reference
deformation and thus by continuity for all deformation sufficiently
close.

#### 4.6.4 Coerciveness

A crucial entity for the Koch theorem is the coerciveness of the spatial
principal part. At this stage the equation of state (i.e. the elasticity
operator) comes into play. We will show that in the given context
materials those stored energy satisfies strong point-wise stability (
4.345 ) at the reference state give rise to this coerciveness condition.

More concrete we have to show that the Garding inequality ( 2.28 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.350)
  -- -------- -- ---------

holds for all smooth @xmath where the constants @xmath and @xmath . (
@xmath and @xmath ; see e.g. [ 19 ] )

###### Remark.

Note that the inequality involves no derivatives of the deformation
higher than first order. By this property it becomes a restriction on
possible initial data.

We will first derive the Garding inequality for the reference
deformation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.351)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By continuity ( 4.350 ) is then true for all deformation sufficiently
close (the precise form of this statement will be given later). This
includes that the Garding inequality holds for all initial data
sufficiently close to those generated by the reference deformation.

To prove ( 4.351 ) we have to invoke Korn’s inequality (see f.e. [ 28 ]
) or (to be more accurate) a slight generalization to Riemannian
manifolds due to [ 10 ] : Given a vector field @xmath on the body, which
can be viewed as the Riemannian manifold @xmath . Then define @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.352)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the Korn inequality tells us that there exists a positive constant
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.353)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Going back to @xmath we note that by ( 4.345 ) the integral on the left
hand side is taken over the product of two positive functions (the
scalar @xmath and the rest). Since @xmath is also a continuous function
on a compact set, we can estimate it from below by its minimum, which is
positive. Using ( 4.345 ) again on the remaining integral we still have
to show that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.354)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is bounded from below in a suitable way. For this purpose we assume
without restriction of generality that coordinates on @xmath were chosen
in a way such that @xmath becomes the identity map.

###### Remark.

It is notable that this specialization directly leads to the classical
setup of non-relativistic elasticity theory in its classical
formulation: that the body is identified with a certain part of space.

For this choice of coordinates the deformation gradient coincides with
the Kronecker delta:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.355)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which clearly includes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.356)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying this to the integrand in ( 4.354 ) leads us to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.357)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that we would obtain equality, if the norm @xmath was defined using
the reference strain. If one decides to use a flat metric @xmath to
construct these norms (as is the usual way) equality does not hold
anymore. In any case however the equivalence of finite-dimensional norms
tells us that the above inequality holds for some positive constant
@xmath (which depends on the metric used to construct the norm on the
right hand side). Note that the proper choice of coordinates was crucial
for the argument, since it allowed us to interchange differentiation
with contraction with the inverse deformation gradient.

Now we can apply the Korn inequality ( 4.353 ) to the right hand side of
( 4.357 ). Since @xmath , we find that ( 4.351 ) is true, which in turn
implies validity of ( 4.350 ) for deformations close enough.

#### 4.6.5 Main result

In this section we will show that all the requirements of the Koch
theorem as given in section 2.3 are met in the current setup. This will
ultimately result in a local well-posedness for the relativistic elastic
initial-boundary value problem.

For convenience we recall these requirements (already stated in the
terms used here). First note that the system ( 4.329 , 4.339 ) has
exactly the required connection between boundary conditions and
equations of motion. In addition we have to check

-   the symmetry @xmath

-   hyperbolicity (and coerciveness) of the principal part

The first point is trivially met, since our equations of motion come
from an action principle which reflects itself in ( 4.330 ) from which
the desired symmetry can readily be read off.

The second point consists of two parts: First we have to show that
@xmath is negative definite. For the reference deformation this is
evident from ( 4.347 ). From this we concluded the same property for all
deformations ”sufficiently close”. This statement will be sharpened in
the following:

Assume we are given initial data, i.e. a pair @xmath for @xmath . Then
by Sobolev embedding we find that @xmath (See f.e. [ 19 ] ). But this
means that the deformation gradient is a continuous function on the
initial surface @xmath .

Denoting the data induced by the reference deformation (which itself
clearly is assumed to be sufficiently smooth) by @xmath , we find that
all data close to the reference data in the topology @xmath are close in
@xmath (which is a point-wise statement). We conclude that there exists
a neighborhood of the reference data in @xmath for which @xmath is
negative.

On the other hand we have to show coerciveness for the spatial component
of the principal part. By the very same argument as we used for
time-components, we conclude that coerciveness holds for all data close
to the reference data in @xmath .

We have found that all the requirements of the theorem are met, so that
we obtain the following result:

###### Theorem 6.

Given a space-time and a material manifold as described in section 4.6.1
. Let the stored energy be a smooth function of all its entries. In
addition assume that there exists a smooth static reference solution as
defined in section 4.6.3 , such that the elasticity operator satisfies
the strong-point-wise stability condition ( 4.345 ). Then for all data
close to the data induced by the reference deformation in the topology
@xmath that satisfy the compatibility conditions up to order @xmath
there exists a unique @xmath and a unique solution @xmath to the
initial-boundary value problem ( 4.329 , 4.338 ) which depends
continuously on the initial data.

We end with two remarks concerning the compatibility conditions: First
note that by the lemma 4 from section 2.3 we know that there exists a
great number of possible initial data obeying the compatibility
conditions.

Secondly we stress that in the proof of lemma 4 the compatibility
conditions were solved by prescribing certain normal derivatives of the
initial data along the boundary (we refer to section 2.3 for details).
In this sense the boundary conditions ( 4.338 ) are of Neumann type.

For details concerning the compatibility conditions we refer to section
2.3 .

## Chapter 5 Summary, Conclusions and Outlook

What have we learned in the course of the thesis and in what ways can
the results given here hope to be generalized? This will be answered in
the following.

### 5.1 Summary and conclusions

In this thesis we treated relativistic elasticity as a Lagrangian field
theory. The key objects were configurations (deformations respectively),
which are maps between space-time and an abstract material manifold.
During all of our applications we assumed the existence of a certain
reference state, which played the role of a natural realization of the
material manifold in space(-time). This assumption constitutes the
connection to the classical non-relativistic setup, where the material
in rest is identified with a certain region in space. Note however that
in principle the (kinetic) theory as presented here can be formulated
without the assumption of any reference state.

There remains another grave difference to the classical non-relativistic
setup: There the material manifold is (spoken in our language) viewed as
a Riemannian manifold equipped with a flat metric. The reference state
is defined to be the state where the strain coincides with this given
flat metric.

For the relativistic formulation we only assume the existence of a
volume form on the material manifold. This assumption turns out to be
sufficient to treat kinematics. If the strain is to define a metric on
the material manifold, there arise certain restrictions on the
space-time geometry (there has to exist a Born-rigid vector-field).

As in the non-relativistic theory the elastic properties of the material
are basically encoded in the stored energy function, which is a measure
for the elastic energy in dependence of the strain. The difference
between relativistic and non-relativistic theory lies in the definition
of the strain (which can be viewed as a metric for the deformed state)
itself. While in the non-relativistic theory it is a purely spatial
object (compare @xmath as defined in ( 3.106 )) in the given context it
is constructed out of the full space-time metric (compare ( 3.10 ))
including also time-derivatives of the configuration.

In the second part of this thesis we derived the equations of motion
governing the time-evolution of the elastic material from an action
principle arising from the variation of a Lagrangian which was basically
given by the total energy density. The resulting equations were then
analyzed both on the linearized and non-linear level. For the linearized
equations on Minkowski space-time we could give an explicit formula for
the solution of the initial value problem corresponding to an un-bounded
homogeneous and isotropic material. On the non-linear level we discussed
conserved quantities and the connection between the thus defined energy
and Killing vector fields (generating trivial spatial configurations).

Finally we proved well-posedness results for a variety of scenarios
including both bounded and unbounded elastic materials both on a fixed
gravitational background and self-gravitating.

We found that the initial boundary value problem required stronger
restrictions on the material’s elastic properties than the other setups,
for which a rather mild assumption (real propagation speeds for
linearized elastic wave solutions) turned out to be sufficient.

In this sense we can say that the theory as presented in this thesis is
well-suited for the description of relativistic elastic materials.

### 5.2 Outlook and open problems

Given the results of this thesis what else remains there to do? In
principle there are basically two ways to proceed. One may either choose
to go into detailed analysis for certain kinds of materials (equations
of state) in hope of obtaining some results which could be compared with
observational data (f.e. concerning neutron stars). This can be seen as
a complementary approach to the ”ab initio” attempts of obtaining
suitable equations of state (see [ 25 ] ). It might lead to an
understanding of certain effects like the well-known ”glitches” (see [
38 ] and references therein). This task however would require numerical
effort rather than analytical. But even for the numerical treatment
well-posedness of the equations of motion is a necessary ingredient [ 45
] .

On the other hand one can of course carry on without numerics. Such
analytical work could go in two directions.

First one might try to generalize the result from section 4.6 to include
self-gravitation. This task by far exceeds the one related to the finite
body on fixed background, since one would have to care about the
propagation of the constraints along the boundary. We have learned in
section 4.6 that it is favorable to formulate the boundary value problem
in the material description. Section 4.5 however teaches us that the
self-gravitating problem is conveniently addressed in the space-time
setup. One might even ask how to formulate the self-gravitating problem
in the material description in terms of partial differential equations.
The diffeomorphism between space-time and @xmath material manifold times
time @xmath introduced in section 3.2.3 may be of some help in this
conquest.

Secondly one might try to derive global results. At least for small
initial data (i.e. data close to a natural reference state) it should be
possible to prove global existence on Minkowski space-time. For the
non-relativistic theory such results already exist for a growing number
of scenarios. (See [ 48 ] for an overview.)

There are at least two important ingredients in the proofs of such
result. One has to require a certain ”null-condition”, which prevents
the self-interaction of the eigen-modes of the elastic material (see [
29 ] for the definition for wave equations and [ 49 ] for isotropic
elastic equations). In non-relativistic theory this condition is known
to be necessary for the long-time existence of solutions ( [ 33 ] (it
should be possible to obtain analogous non-existence results for the
present setup).

Under the assumption of this null-condition (a generalization of this
condition also plays an important role in general relativity, see [ 11 ]
, [ 40 ] , [ 39 ] ) one then uses generalized energy estimates (first
introduced by Klainerman in the study of non-linear wave equations [ 35
] ) which are connected to the symmetry group of isomorphisms of
space-time. In the non-relativistic theory this symmetry group is the
Galilei group and hence only 6-dimensional. One has to employ special
projection techniques (see [ 48 ] ) to obtain additional bounds. In the
present relativistic version we have the full 10-dimensional Poincare
group at our disposal. This might lead to a simplification of the task
of obtaining the required estimates. One can thus hope that it will be
rather straightforward to obtain a global existence result for the
relativistic setup by following the non-relativistic proof.

The ultimate challenge would be the derivation of statements on the
asymptotic structure for elastic materials. For unbounded materials one
might expect that the global solution for small initial data approaches
the unstressed reference solution (on any open neighborhood) as time
passes on (perturbation due to non-trivial initial data travel to
infinity). The analogous problem for finite materials implies further
problems. Will the material approach a natural state? What about
translations of the center of mass? How to describe such a phenomenon?
What is to be expected in the self-gravitating setup?

Finally (far beyond the scope of any stern approach): what about global
asymptotic behavior for a self-gravitating finite elastic material? What
is there to be expected?

This is a whole load of interesting and challenging questions, both from
mathematical and physical point of view. In this sense the results
obtained up to now can be seen as a (necessary) first step on the way to
answering the questions of the type stated above.

## Chapter 6 Appendix

This appendix contains some minor results which do not directly fit into
the main body of this work. It contains an example which is incorporated
to become familiar with the objects defined in chapter 3 as well as
remarks on energy conditions, Newtonian limit of the field equation and
finally some formulas arising in the context of the 3+1 decomposition.

### 6.1 An easy example: 1+1 dimensions

This section contains a simple 1+1 dimensional example to get used to
the definitions introduced in chapter 3 . For convenience we will
specialize to static space-times, in particular we concentrate on the
elastic equations on Schwarzschild background. Note however that we do
not employ any ”small-stress” assumptions.

#### 6.1.1 Basics

The unknown is a mapping @xmath from two dimensional space-time @xmath
onto a one dimensional manifold @xmath called body. The body is equipped
with a volume form @xmath , which is a one-form in the given context.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We assume the tangent mapping @xmath to be of maximal rank with
time-like null-space. In the given context this simply means @xmath .
Therefore (as long as @xmath is time-orientable) there exists a unique
future-pointing time-like vector-field @xmath satisfying the two
conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The strain @xmath is determined by the function @xmath which (in
accordance with ( 3.10 )) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the particle density becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We also assume the existence of a reference configuration @xmath . Then
we can choose coordinates on the body in such a way that @xmath . For
convenience we assume that @xmath in these coordinates, such that the
reference strain is a flat metric on the body and @xmath is the
corresponding volume form.

Then a material which is homogeneous and isotropic w.r.t. this reference
configuration is given by a stored energy which depends only on the
invariants of the strain (taken w.r.t. the reference strain, which is a
flat metric). Since in one dimension there is only one independent
invariant we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Remark.

In this sense there is no difference between fluids and other elastic
materials in this low dimension. The stored energy does (in the
isotropic case) only depend on the particle number density.

Consequently we have that the stress is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the energy-momentum tensor this implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this point on we will specialize to static setups. What we exactly
mean by this we explain in the following:

#### 6.1.2 Static setup

We assume the existence of a Killing field @xmath , which in addition is
assumed to be proportional to the four-velocity:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under these assumptions we can easily derive the equations of motion. We
have seen in section 4.1.1 that they are equivalent to
divergence-less-ness of the energy-momentum tensor. Recalling the
continuity equation ( 3.8 ) this condition is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is a Killing field, we have @xmath . As a consequence
@xmath yields @xmath . We also find that @xmath . From this we find that
( 6.11 ) contracted with the four-velocity leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

But since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that @xmath is satisfied identically by virtue of the continuity
equation as was to be expected from section 3.1.4 .

The remaining component is the only non-trivial one. It is obtained by
contraction of ( 6.11 ) with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bracket term includes both first and second variations of the stored
energy. Besides these non-vanishing stress-terms the above equation
looks a lot like the equations of motion as given in section 4.1.1 .
They constitute a second order equation for the configuration @xmath .
In fact it isn’t even a PDE but can rather be cast in the form of an
ODE, since we assumed the material velocity to be proportional to a
Killing field. To see this more clearly we again specialize our example
by fixing a particular background metric, namely the Schwarzschild
metric.

#### 6.1.3 Elasticity on Schwarzschild background

We now use the Schwarzschild metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore we use the following Killing field

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first consequence is that the configuration is time-independent,
i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus ( 6.14 ) becomes a single ordinary differential equation in @xmath
.

We find that the second term in ( 6.14 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Altogether this means that ( 6.14 ) is given by (using the identity
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Multiplying by @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that @xmath , we conclude that ( 6.14 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we can solve by integration. We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant @xmath has to be determined via the boundary
conditions entering the integration. This is an algebraic equation for
@xmath and hence for @xmath . If we can solve algebraically for the
configuration gradient, we can obtain the configuration itself via
integration.

For convenience we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the definition for the stress

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can translate @xmath into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that we used the assumption @xmath . In fact we will also assume
that @xmath is positive:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and monotone

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that the energy density @xmath has to be convex.

We now turn to the analysis of ( 6.24 ) for certain special setups.

First we concentrate on the case of a hanging body (supported at the
upper end).

It is natural to assume @xmath and @xmath to be given. The first is the
suspension point. The second is given through @xmath , since we require
the pressure to vanish at the lower end. Note that we can solve @xmath
for @xmath , since by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

the pressure @xmath is monotone in @xmath . For the described scenario (
6.24 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This equation only gives us information on the endpoints
of the material.

To obtain a formula which gives the particle density for general @xmath
(away from the endpoints), we assume for the moment that @xmath is given
(this assumption has to be removed later on). Then ( 6.24 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assume for a moment that @xmath (i.e. vanishing gravity). Then @xmath
which means that the particle density is constant along the stick and
thus that there is no pressure present when gravity is turned off.

###### Remark.

Recall that @xmath was uniquely determined by the condition @xmath .

Since we are interested in a finite body we assume that its intrinsic
length @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

is finite. This implies (the configuration is viewed as mapping between
body and the space orthogonal to the Killing flow)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can use this equation to get rid of the @xmath entering formula (
6.32 ). We will see that we can solve ( 6.34 ) for @xmath in terms of
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

For this we have to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This condition is necessary and will give rise to a restriction on
@xmath and hence on the stored energy @xmath .

To see this note that the second term is negative while for the first
term ( 6.32 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is positive. By the monotonicity of @xmath (recall @xmath ) this
includes the analogous statement on the variation of @xmath . Thus from
our original (mild) assumptions on @xmath we cannot conclude a sign for
the right hand side of ( 6.35 . We thus assume the validity of ( 6.35 )
in the following. It is reasonable to assume that @xmath to be negative,
since this implies that a longer material is also longer in space. In a
more explicit form this condition reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Without analyzing this condition any further at the moment we shall
assume it as given, since it obviously plays the role of a minimal
requirement for a reasonable model.

To assign a coordinate-independent meaning to a certain length in
space(-time), we define an intrinsic length using the induced volume
element of @xmath surfaces of space-time:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since both @xmath and @xmath can be obtained from the data, we can
assign a spatial length to the material.

One would expect that the elastic material is stretched when gravity
becomes stronger. To actually see this we compute @xmath . For this
computation recall that @xmath depends on @xmath via ( 6.34 ).
Consequently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term is positive, which is in accordance with what one would
expect. In the second term we have to get rid of the @xmath derivative
of @xmath , since we know a priori nothing about its sign. This is done
by differentiating ( 6.34 ) with respect to @xmath and using the
resulting equation to determine the sign of @xmath .

Since @xmath is by construction independent from @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain the desired result, namely that @xmath we have to show that
the integral has is negative.

Since doing these estimates for general @xmath would go beyond the scope
of a simple example we shall be satisfied with a simpler case, namely by
showing the above claims for small @xmath . For this first note that (
6.37 ) is indeed satisfied:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

By continuity the above inequality and the following results also hold
for small @xmath .

But we can do better. In fact we can derive an explicit formula for
@xmath . We can use that the solution for the elastic equation ( 6.32 )
for @xmath implies that the particle density has to be constant to
evaluate ( 6.34 ) at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus in order to obtain an explicit expression for ( 6.39 ) for @xmath ,
we only have to compute @xmath This is done by evaluating ( 6.40 ) at
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus according to ( 6.39 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the integrand is positive we conclude that there an actual growth
in the length of the material in space at least in first order.

Using the above results we can expand the length of the elastic material
into a formal Taylor series in the Schwarzschild mass @xmath . Using
only the given data, which are @xmath as well as @xmath and @xmath we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next example is simpler in nature, since we need not use @xmath .
Assume now to hang the body into the gravitational field. Then place the
same body such that its lower end stands, where the hanging body ended.

We may now compare the two solutions corresponding to the picture
(Compare ( 6.31 )), where @xmath denotes the particle density along the
hanging body (compare ( 6.32 )), while @xmath corresponds to the hanging
body (note that in this setup now @xmath defines the pressure-free
state):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations give @xmath and @xmath as functions of @xmath . To prove
that the standing material does not reach the original suspension point
of the hanging material given by @xmath , we proceed by contradiction.
Since both scenarios @xmath and @xmath correspond to the same material,
they both lead to the same intrinsic length @xmath . Assume now that
@xmath . Since the integrand is positive this includes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that there have to exist at least some points @xmath where
@xmath . By the monotonicity of @xmath this includes @xmath .

Now we make use of the equations ( 6.46 ) and ( 6.47 ). Taken together
they imply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining this with the last observation we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a contradiction to the setup. Thus we have proved the claim
that @xmath and have thus shown that the hanging material is the longer
one.

###### Remark.

Note that one can formulate the above problem in a coordinate invariant
way by comparing the spatial length @xmath . But it is easy to see that
this problem can be reduced to the one handled here.

###### Remark.

Note that in these examples we had no grave restrictions on the equation
of state nor on the state itself. In contrary to the main body of this
work the results derived here hold for materials subjected to high
stress.

### 6.2 A short remark on energy conditions

This section will be concerned with the energy conditions and whether
they hold for elastic materials. This will be a rather short discussion
since the energy-momentum tensor given by (see equation ( 3.65 )):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

includes the stress. Our conditions did only involve the elasticity
operator. But the following is trivially true: for states sufficiently
close to a reference state, the energy-momentum tensor is arbitrarily
close to that of a pressure-free perfect fluid.

In this sense all the energy conditions hold. For a stress-free state we
have

-   the weak energy condition:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.53)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for all time-like @xmath .

-   the dominant energy condition, since in addition to the weak energy
    condition

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.54)
      -- -------- -- --------

    is future-pointing and time-like for time-like @xmath since @xmath .

-   the strong energy condition: for all @xmath with @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Remark.

By the above observations at least some of the states appearing in our
analysis in the last chapter obey the energy conditions.

It may be interesting to see to which degree the states for which local
existence can be obtained satisfy energy conditions (and which of them
in particular). Both statements use smallness assumptions on the stress.
Formulating those in a proper way may (or may not) lead to interesting
agreement.

### 6.3 Non-relativistic limits

Here we show that the non-relativistic limit of the elastic field
equations coincides with the known non-relativistic field equations.
Since the non-relativistic limit for the space-time description can be
found in [ 5 ] , we will concentrate on the material description. The
non-relativistic field equations are given by (see f.e. [ 23 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be obtained from an action principle of the form (see again [
23 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will do the non-relativistic limit only for the Lagrangian, since the
corresponding limit for the equations of motion is then a trivial
consequence if the involved quantities are regular.

The action for the material description according to ( 3.113 ) is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note the modification: we inserted an extra @xmath to keep the limit
regular. Otherwise the total Lagrangian would diverge with order @xmath
.

In a first step we set @xmath . The metric is chosen to be Minkowskian,
i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this choice already implies that the foliation, w.r.t. to
which the material description was introduced (recall that such a
foliation was necessary) is flat.

By the above restrictions @xmath , while the shift vanishes. We find
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus developing into a formal Taylor series in terms of @xmath we find
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

It remains to evaluate the stored energy. For this purpose we have to
say a word on the strain, which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the non-relativistic version of the strain, while @xmath
(the @xmath comes from the fact that we use @xmath now instead of @xmath
as time variable).

Note that by the expression for @xmath the strain is of order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

The stored energy consists of a rest-energy portion and a variable part
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the above observation on the strain, we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the Lagrangian becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are essentially three parts: the first part is constant and thus
does not contribute to the field equations, since it vanishes under
variations. The last term vanishes in the non-relativistic limit @xmath
(which is of course equivalent to @xmath ). Thus the action one obtains
from the non-relativistic limit is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

which obviously coincides with the action given above.

###### Remark.

Comparing this non-relativistic Lagrangian with the relativistic one, we
find the following: if one linearizes the above Lagrangian, the
resulting field equations would exactly coincide with the ones derived
from the linearized material Lagrangian ( 4.146 ). There is thus no way
to distinguish between relativistic and non-relativistic elasticity on
the linearized level.

### 6.4 3+1 decompositions

At some stage of this work (section 3.2.3 ) we needed the form of the
Christoffel symbols in a 3+1 decomposition. For matters of completeness
these shall hence be given at this point.

Let the metric be given in the ADM form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the inverse metric reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then one can compute the Christoffel symbols in terms of lapse, shift
and induced metric. The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.69)
     @xmath      (6.70)
     @xmath      (6.71)
     @xmath      (6.72)
     @xmath      (6.73)
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------