##### Contents

-    1 Introduction and main results
    -    1.1 Bounding and geometric bounding questions
    -    1.2 Classifying cusp cross sections of @xmath –hyperbolic
        orbifolds
    -    1.3 Peripheral subgroup separability
    -    1.4 Density of cusp shapes
    -    1.5 Hilbert modular varieties
-    2 Preliminaries
    -    2.1 Some basic algebra
    -    2.2 Algebraic groups and lattices
        -    2.2.1 Corestriction
        -    2.2.2 Arithmetic lattices
        -    2.2.3 @xmath –forms of a Lie group
    -    2.3 Arithmetic lattices in the classical rank one groups
        -    2.3.1 Involutions and matrices over algebras
        -    2.3.2 Arithmetic lattices in @xmath
        -    2.3.3 The proof of Theorem 2.3.1
    -    2.4 Solvable groups and their geometries
        -    2.4.1 Bieberbach groups
        -    2.4.2 Almost Bieberbach groups
        -    2.4.3 Flat, almost flat, and infrasolv manifolds
        -    2.4.4 @xmath and @xmath geometry
    -    2.5 @xmath –Hyperbolic geometry
        -    2.5.1 The Iwasawa decomposition of @xmath
        -    2.5.2 The upper half plane model
        -    2.5.3 The Kazhdan–Margulis theorem and cusp cross-sections
-    3 Separable subgroups and geometric applications
    -    3.1 Line stabilizers and Chevalley’s theorem
    -    3.2 Corollaries to Theorem 1.3.1
    -    3.3 Applications to @xmath –hyperbolic manifolds
-    4 Cusps of @xmath –hyperbolic manifolds
    -    4.1 Algebraic structure of unitary affine groups
    -    4.2 @xmath –monomorphisms of unitary affine groups into the
        isometry group
    -    4.3 A necessary and sufficient condition for arithmeticity
    -    4.4 The holonomy theorem
    -    4.5 Density of cusp shapes
    -    4.6 Orbifold to manifold promotion
-    5 Hilbert and Hilbert–Blumenthal cusps
    -    5.1 Cusps of Hilbert modular varieties
    -    5.2 Classifying cusp cross-sections
    -    5.3 A question of Hirzebruch
    -    5.4 A simple criterion for arithmeticity
    -    5.5 Hilbert–Blumenthal modular varieties
    -    5.6 An obstruction to geometric bounding
-    6 Examples and low dimensional considerations
    -    6.1 Prime order holonomy
    -    6.2 Central products
    -    6.3 @xmath 3–manifolds and the proof of Theorem 1.2.2
    -    6.4 Infranil 5–manifolds
    -    6.5 @xmath 3–manifolds
    -    6.6 Two @xmath examples
-    7 Presentation of @xmath 3–manifold groups
-    8 Solutions to Equation ( 6.2 )

###### List of Figures

-    1.1 A finite volume hyperbolic surface with four cusp ends.
-    2.1 Some horospheres in the disk model for the hyperbolic plane.

## Chapter 1 Introduction and main results

### 1.1 Bounding and geometric bounding questions

It is a classical problem in topology to decide whether or not a closed
@xmath –manifold @xmath bounds. Hamrick and Royster [ 20 ] resolved this
in the affirmative for flat @xmath –manifolds and Rohlin [ 38 ] for
closed 3–manifolds (see also Rourke [ 39 ] and Milnor [ 29 ] ). However,
beyond these two classes there are few other settings where the story is
nearly this complete.

The introduction of geometry to a topological problem provides
additional structure which can lead to new insight. This philosophy
serves as motivation for the primary concern of this thesis which is a
geometric notion of bounding and its specialization to flat and almost
flat manifolds. To both guide the reader and establish some basic
terminology required for our results, we review the simplest case of
this venture whose concern is with the class of finite volume hyperbolic
@xmath –manifolds and their flat cusp cross-sections.

Every finite volume hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold @xmath has a thick-thin
decomposition comprised of a compact manifold @xmath with boundary
components @xmath and manifolds @xmath of the form @xmath . The
manifolds @xmath are called cusp ends , the manifolds @xmath are called
cusp cross-sections , and the union of @xmath with @xmath recovers
@xmath topologically. The inclusion @xmath induces an injective
homomorphism @xmath whose image is virtually contained in a subgroup
isomorphic to @xmath . Consequently, @xmath is virtually abelian, @xmath
is a flat orbifold of dimension @xmath , and each @xmath is a totally
geodesic boundary submanifold of @xmath .

We say a flat @xmath –manifold @xmath arises as a cusp cross-section if
there exists a hyperbolic @xmath –manifold @xmath and a boundary
component @xmath of @xmath diffeomorphic to @xmath . More generally, we
say @xmath geometrically bounds if there exists a compact Riemannian
@xmath –manifold @xmath with totally geodesic boundary @xmath and a
diffeomorphism between @xmath and @xmath .

Farrell and Zdravkovska [ 16 ] conjectured every flat @xmath –manifold
arises as a cusp cross-section of a 1–cusped hyperbolic @xmath –manifold
and this is easily verified for @xmath . Indeed, the complement of a
knot in @xmath is typically endowed with a finite volume, complete
hyperbolic structure with one cusp (see [ 44 ] ), and thus gives the
realization of the 2–torus @xmath as a cusp cross-section of a 1–cusped
hyperbolic 3–manifold. Likewise, the Klein bottle arises as a cusp
cross-section of the 1–cusped Gieseking manifold (see [ 36 ] ). However,
Long and Reid [ 26 ] constructed counterexamples by showing any flat
3–manifold arising as a cusp cross-section of a 1–cusped hyperbolic
4–manifold must have integral @xmath –invariant.

The failure of the conjecture of Farrell–Zdravkovska is far from total.
Nimershiem [ 33 ] showed every flat 3–manifold arises as a cusp
cross-section of a hyperbolic 4–manifold, and Long and Reid [ 27 ]
proved every flat @xmath –manifold arises as a cusp cross-section of a
hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold.

Our main aim is a complete understanding of the topological and
geometric structure of cusp cross-sections of hyperbolic @xmath
–orbifolds and their complex and quaternionic analogs. The absence of a
general geometric construction for real, complex, and quaternionic
hyperbolic orbifolds forces our restriction to orbifolds produced by
arithmetic means. Given this forced restriction, the picture we provide
here is nearly complete.

### 1.2 Classifying cusp cross sections of @xmath–hyperbolic orbifolds

For @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath , cusp cross-sections of finite volume
@xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds are flat @xmath –manifolds or
almost flat orbifolds modelled on the @xmath –dimensional Heisenberg
group @xmath or the @xmath –dimensional quaternionic Heisenberg group
@xmath . Our first result shows the result of Long–Reid [ 27 ] does not
extend to the complex or quaternionic hyperbolic settings. ¹ ¹ 1 Since
every lattice in the isometry group of quaternionic hyperbolic space is
arithmetic (see [ 12 ] and [ 17 ] ), an arithmeticity assumption in (b)
is superfluous.

###### Theorem 1.2.1.

  (a)  

     For every @xmath , there exist infinite families of closed almost
    flat @xmath –manifolds modelled on @xmath that are not diffeomorphic
    to a cusp cross-section of any arithmetic complex hyperbolic @xmath
    –orbifold.

  (b)  

     For every @xmath , there exist infinite families of closed almost
    flat @xmath –manifolds modelled on @xmath that are not diffeomorphic
    to a cusp cross-section of any finite volume quaternionic hyperbolic
    @xmath –orbifold.

Theorem 1.2.1 is a consequence of the topological classification of cusp
cross-sections of arithmetic @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds (see
Theorem 4.3.2 ). Despite the negative nature of Theorem 1.2.1 , it is
misleading. There are a wide range of manifolds which do arise and the
metrics present vary considerably. One such example is the special case
of complex hyperbolic 2–orbifolds and their @xmath 3–manifold cusp
cross-sections.

###### Theorem 1.2.2.

Every @xmath 3–manifold is diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of an
arithmetic complex hyperbolic 2–orbifold.

### 1.3 Peripheral subgroup separability

In order to give a complete classification of cusp cross-sections of
arithmetic @xmath –hyperbolic orbifolds, we require certain subgroup
separability results. For a group @xmath , a subgroup @xmath of @xmath ,
and @xmath in @xmath , we say @xmath and @xmath are separated if there
exists a subgroup @xmath of finite index in @xmath which contains @xmath
but not @xmath . We say @xmath is separable in @xmath if for every
@xmath in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are separated. We say @xmath is
subgroup separable (or LERF) if every finitely generated subgroup is
separable.

The next theorem and its subsequent corollary provide one of the main
tools in the classification of cusp cross-sections of arithmetic @xmath
–hyperbolic orbifolds.

###### Theorem 1.3.1 (Borel subgroup separability theorem).

Let @xmath be a number field, @xmath a @xmath –algebraic group, and
@xmath a Borel subgroup of @xmath . Then any subgroup of @xmath is
separable in @xmath .

###### Corollary 1.3.2 (Stabilizer subgroup separability theorem).

Let @xmath be @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath an arithmetic
lattice in @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath . Then every subgroup of @xmath
is separable in @xmath .

How these results are brought to bear on the topological problem of
classifying cusp cross-sections of arithmetic @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath
–orbifolds is fairly well known. This is achieved through a relationship
established by Scott [ 41 ] between subgroup separability and the
lifting in a finite cover of a @xmath –injective immersion to a @xmath
–injective embedding. In tandem with Corollary 1.3.2 , we obtain the
following geometrically applicable corollary.

###### Corollary 1.3.3.

Let @xmath be a @xmath –injective immersion of an almost flat manifold
@xmath into an arithmetic @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold. Then
there exists a finite cover @xmath such that @xmath lifts to an
embedding.

### 1.4 Density of cusp shapes

It is well known that most similarity classes of flat structures on a
flat @xmath –manifold cannot arise in the cusp cross-sections of any
hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold. Nevertheless, Nimershiem [ 33 ] showed for
any flat 3–manifold, the similarity classes of flat metrics arising in
the cusp cross-sections of hyperbolic 4–manifolds are dense in the space
of flat similarity classes. She conjectured [ 33 , Conj. 2’] this for
every flat @xmath –manifolds, and our next result verifies this in the
orbifold setting.

###### Theorem 1.4.1.

For a flat @xmath –manifold @xmath , the flat similarity classes that
arise in the cusp cross-sections of arithmetic hyperbolic @xmath
–orbifolds are dense in the space of flat similarity classes.

Using Selberg’s lemma, we verify the full conjecture for the @xmath
–torus.

###### Corollary 1.4.2.

For the @xmath –torus, the flat similarity classes that arise in the
cusp cross-sections of arithmetic hyperbolic @xmath –manifolds are dense
in the space of flat similarity classes.

The similarity structures used in the proof of Theorem 1.4.1 are
precisely those that arise in cusp cross-sections of arithmetic
hyperbolic orbifolds. With an extension of this to infranil manifolds
modelled on @xmath and @xmath , we obtain a geometric classification of
cusp cross-sections of arithmetic @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds.

### 1.5 Hilbert modular varieties

The same methods used for cusp cross-sections of @xmath –hyperbolic
orbifolds can be implemented for cusp cross-sections of Hilbert modular
varieties over a totally real number field @xmath . The corresponding
cusps are virtual @xmath –torus bundles over @xmath –tori where @xmath ,
@xmath , and for brevity we call these virtual @xmath –torus bundles .
We say @xmath in @xmath is totally positive if @xmath for every real
embedding @xmath of @xmath . We denote the set of totally positive
elements and totally positive integers by @xmath and @xmath , and define
the sets @xmath , @xmath . We say a virtual torus bundle @xmath is
@xmath –defined if there exists a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we say @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic if @xmath and @xmath are
commensurable.

###### Theorem 1.5.1.

A virtual @xmath –torus bundle @xmath is diffeomorphic to a cusp
cross-section of a Hilbert modular variety over @xmath if and only if
@xmath is @xmath –arithmetic.

Theorem 1.5.1 answers a question of Hirzebruch [ 22 , page 203] who
asked in our terminology which @xmath –arithmetic torus bundles arise as
cusp cross-sections of Hilbert modular varieties over @xmath . Theorem
1.5.1 also provides an obstruction to the realizability of a torus
bundle as a cusp cross-section of a Hilbert modular variety, yielding
@xmath –torus bundles (with @xmath ) that are not diffeomorphic to a
cusp cross-section of any (generalized) Hilbert modular variety.

Hilbert modular varieties over real quadratic number fields are
traditionally called Hilbert modular surfaces and possess @xmath
3–manifold cusp cross-sections. Here, as with @xmath 3–manifolds, we
achieve the converse.

###### Theorem 1.5.2.

Every @xmath 3–manifold is diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of a
generalized Hilbert modular surface.

Our final result follows from an obstruction to geometric bounding whose
derivation employs the methodology used by Long–Reid [ 26 ] for flat
3–manifolds.

###### Theorem 1.5.3.

There exists a @xmath 3–manifold that cannot be diffeomorphic to a cusp
cross-section of any 1–cusped Hilbert modular surface with torsion free
fundamental group.

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries

### 2.1 Some basic algebra

For a number field @xmath , we denote the ring of @xmath –integers by
@xmath , the set of distinct real embeddings by @xmath , and the set of
distinct complex embeddings by @xmath . We say that @xmath is totally
real if @xmath , totally imaginary if @xmath , and call quadratic
extensions @xmath with @xmath totally imaginary and @xmath totally real,
CM fields .

Associated to each @xmath and cyclic extension @xmath of degree @xmath
with Galois group @xmath , is a central simple @xmath –algebra @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

called a cyclic algebra of degree @xmath over @xmath . In the event
@xmath is quadratic, the resulting algebras are @xmath –quaternion
algebras with Hamilton’s quaternions @xmath being the most well known
example.

By a theorem of Wedderburn, any quaternion algebra over @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath and over @xmath to either @xmath or @xmath . For a
@xmath –quaternion algebra @xmath , each embedding @xmath of @xmath
yields a new quaternion algebra @xmath . If either @xmath is complex or
@xmath , we say @xmath is unramified at @xmath , and otherwise say
@xmath is ramified at @xmath . When @xmath is (un)ramified at each
embedding @xmath of @xmath , we say @xmath is totally (un)ramified .

By an @xmath –order in an @xmath –algebra @xmath , we mean a finitely
generated subring @xmath of @xmath that is finitely generated as an
@xmath –module and @xmath . In the sequel we require an existence
theorem for orders in central, simple @xmath –algebras and refer the
reader to [ 37 ] for a proof.

### 2.2 Algebraic groups and lattices

For an algebraically closed field @xmath of characteristic zero, a
linear algebraic group @xmath is a Zariski closed subgroup of @xmath .
Associated to @xmath is its ideal of vanishing @xmath , and we say
@xmath is @xmath –defined or @xmath –algebraic if @xmath is generated
over a subfield @xmath of @xmath . For any subring @xmath of @xmath
whose field of fractions is @xmath , the subgroup @xmath is well-defined
up to commensurability and called the @xmath –points of @xmath . We say
@xmath is a real algebraic group if @xmath is the @xmath –points of an
algebraic group.

###### Lemma 2.2.1 ([35]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be commensurable and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a @xmath –homomorphism of @xmath –algebraic groups. Then there exists
@xmath commensurable with @xmath such that @xmath is contained in @xmath
.

For a number field @xmath , a linear @xmath –algebraic group @xmath ,
and an ideal @xmath of @xmath , the kernel of the reduction homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a finite index subgroup called a principal congruence subgroup . Any
subgroup of @xmath containing a principal congruence subgroup will be
called a congruence subgroup .

#### 2.2.1 Corestriction

Let @xmath be a number field and @xmath its Galois closure over @xmath .
For a @xmath –algebraic group @xmath and finite @xmath –generating set
@xmath of @xmath , each element @xmath in @xmath yields a new set of
@xmath –polynomials @xmath . The ideal @xmath generated by these
polynomials is the ideal of vanish of a @xmath –algebraic group @xmath ,
and for any two automorphisms @xmath equivalent modulo @xmath , the
groups @xmath are @xmath –isomorphic. We define the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction @xmath is invariant under the action of @xmath , and so
@xmath is @xmath –algebraic and the groups @xmath and @xmath are
commensurable. We call this process restriction of scalars or
corestriction .

#### 2.2.2 Arithmetic lattices

For a @xmath locally compact group with right Haar measure @xmath , a
lattice @xmath of @xmath is a discrete subgroup such that @xmath
descends to a finite measure on @xmath . When @xmath is compact, @xmath
is called cocompact and otherwise noncocompact . It is fundamental
result of Borel and Harish-Chandra [ 4 ] that @xmath is a lattice in
@xmath for any @xmath –algebraic semisimple group @xmath . More
generally, for a real Lie group @xmath , we say @xmath is an arithmetic
lattice if there exists a semisimple @xmath –algebraic group @xmath ,
compact Lie groups @xmath and @xmath , and an exact sequence

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

such that @xmath is commensurable with @xmath .

#### 2.2.3 @xmath–forms of a Lie group

A @xmath –form of a Lie group @xmath is a real @xmath –algebraic group
@xmath and a Lie epimorphism @xmath with compact kernel. Applying
restriction of scalars to @xmath , we obtain a real @xmath –algebraic
group @xmath and the diagram:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

When @xmath is compact and @xmath is semisimple, @xmath is an arithmetic
lattice in @xmath and we call such a @xmath –form of @xmath admissible .

### 2.3 Arithmetic lattices in the classical rank one groups

In our investigation of cusp cross-sections of arithmetic lattices, we
require a classification theorem for noncocompact arithmetic lattices in
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . This is summarized in the following
theorem often attributed to Weil.

###### Theorem 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be a noncocompact arithmetic lattice in @xmath .

  (a)  

     If @xmath , then @xmath is commensurable with @xmath , where @xmath
    is a signature @xmath bilinear form defined over @xmath .

  (b)  

     If @xmath , then @xmath is commensurable with @xmath , where @xmath
    is a hermitian form of signature @xmath defined over an imaginary
    quadratic number field @xmath .

  (c)  

     If @xmath , then @xmath is commensurable with @xmath , where @xmath
    is a hermitian form of signature @xmath defined over a ramified
    quaternion @xmath –algebra @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath –order in
    @xmath .

###### Remark.

The converse to Theorem 2.3.1 holds modulo a few exceptional cases.
Namely, the groups @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are noncompact lattices
except possibly for @xmath and @xmath when some of these lattices are
cocompact.

We prove Theorem 2.3.1 (b) as we could not locate a proof in the
literature. For (a) and (c), the reader is directed to [ 49 ] —for (a),
see also [ 24 ] .

#### 2.3.1 Involutions and matrices over algebras

For a central simple @xmath –algebra @xmath , an involution on @xmath is
an order two map @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Given an
involution @xmath on an algebra @xmath , we obtain an involution @xmath
on @xmath given by @xmath , and call this @xmath –conjugate transpose .
An element @xmath is @xmath –symmetric if @xmath , and associated to
@xmath is the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.3.2 Arithmetic lattices in @xmath

Let @xmath be a CM field, @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath a cyclic
@xmath –division algebra @xmath of degree @xmath that admits an
involution @xmath whose restriction to @xmath is the nontrivial Galois
involution @xmath . For a @xmath –symmetric element @xmath in @xmath
with associated group @xmath and each embedding @xmath of @xmath , we
obtain a new group @xmath . By Weil’s theorem on involutions [ 48 ] ,
the group @xmath , which we denote by @xmath , is isomorphic as a real
algebraic group to @xmath for some @xmath such that @xmath . We say
@xmath is admissible if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any admissible @xmath and @xmath –order @xmath of @xmath , the group
@xmath is a lattice in @xmath via the inclusion provided by any
isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath . These lattices are arithmetic
and according to Tits [ 5 , p. 33–66] , up to wide commensurability,
comprise the full class of arithmetic lattices.

#### 2.3.3 The proof of Theorem 2.3.1

The proof of Theorem 2.3.1 requires the following theorem (see [ 4 ] , [
30 ] ).

###### Theorem 2.3.2 (Godement’s compactness criterion).

  (a)  

     Let @xmath be a semisimple @xmath –algebraic group and @xmath an
    arithmetic lattice in @xmath . Then @xmath is cocompact if and only
    if @xmath contains no non-trivial unipotent elements.

  (b)  

     Let @xmath be a noncompact semisimple Lie group with an admissible
    @xmath –form @xmath . If @xmath is noncocompact, then @xmath .

###### Proof of Theorem 2.3.1.

It suffices to prove this for lattices in @xmath . In addition, since
noncocompactness is an invariant of the wide commensurability class, it
suffices to determine when the groups @xmath are noncocompact. To this
end, let @xmath be admissible for the pair @xmath over the CM field
@xmath such that @xmath is noncocompact, and note our goal is to show
@xmath and @xmath . The latter is achieved by part (b) of Theorem 2.3.2
, and the admissibility assumption in this case is simply that @xmath be
isomorphic to @xmath .

By definition, there exists a cyclic extension @xmath of degree @xmath
such that @xmath . The field @xmath is totally imaginary, @xmath is a CM
field for a unique subfield @xmath of @xmath , and we have the field
diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Up to wide commensurability, we may assume ( [ 49 ] )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . By Theorem 2.3.2 (a), @xmath contains a nontrivial
unipotent element, and so by a change of @xmath –basis, we may further
assume @xmath has the form ( [ 49 ] )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The group @xmath is given by extending the coefficients of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath is
the image of @xmath under the embedding @xmath . The image of @xmath is
given explicitly by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where by this we mean the block diagonal matrix with these blocks.
According to the admissibility assumption, @xmath must have signature
@xmath while the signature of the image of @xmath is @xmath , for some
nonnegative integers @xmath . In particular, this can happen if and only
if @xmath and @xmath , and the resulting groups are precisely those in
the statement of (b). ∎

### 2.4 Solvable groups and their geometries

#### 2.4.1 Bieberbach groups

We denote the affine, Euclidean, and similarity groups of @xmath by
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Given a discrete, torsion free subgroup
@xmath of @xmath , the quotient @xmath is a smooth manifold, and those
@xmath whose quotient manifold is compact will be called Bieberbach
groups . We denote the space of faithful representations of @xmath in
@xmath with Bieberbach images by @xmath (i.e., an @xmath –conjugate of a
Bieberbach group). Finally, @xmath will denote the subspaces of the
@xmath and @xmath –character spaces consisting of the faithful
characters whose image is Bieberbach.

Associated to each maximal compact subgroup @xmath of @xmath is the
orthogonal affine group @xmath . As each @xmath is conjugate in @xmath
to @xmath , @xmath is @xmath for some symmetric, positive definite,
bilinear form @xmath on @xmath . When @xmath is @xmath –defined (i.e.
@xmath –valued on some @xmath –basis), @xmath is @xmath –defined and we
call subgroups commensurable with @xmath @xmath –arithmetic . We say
@xmath in @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic if there exists a @xmath –defined
orthogonal affine group @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic
subgroup of @xmath , and denote the subspace of @xmath of @xmath
–arithmetic representations by @xmath .

#### 2.4.2 Almost Bieberbach groups

Let @xmath be @xmath , or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath the standard inner
product on @xmath , and @xmath . The @xmath –Heisenberg group @xmath is
the extension

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with trivial holonomy and associated 2–cocycle @xmath . When @xmath , we
call this group the @xmath –dimensional Heisenberg group and for @xmath
, we call this group the @xmath –dimensional quaternionic Heisenberg
group .

The automorphism group of the @xmath –Heisenberg group @xmath splits as
@xmath , and the @xmath –nondegenerate vectors in @xmath are in
bijection with the nontrivial inner automorphisms—this is the whole of
@xmath except when @xmath . The outer automorphism group is comprised of
three types of automorphisms. The first type of automorphism is a
symplectic rotation given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . The second type of automorphism is a Heisenberg dilation
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Finally, we have @xmath –scalar conjugation given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . The outer automorphism group is generated by these three
automorphisms, and in total

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The maximal compact subgroups of @xmath are of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a symmetric, positive definite bilinear form, @xmath is
a positive definite hermitian form with @xmath , and @xmath is the unit
sphere in @xmath (equipped possibly with a nonstandard quaternionic
structure). As all maximal compact subgroups are conjugate in @xmath ,
each @xmath is Lie isomorphic to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a given maximal compact subgroup @xmath , we call the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a unitary affine group and denote this group by @xmath . We call the
group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

an @xmath –Heisenberg similarity group and denote this group by @xmath .
Finally, we call the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the @xmath –Heisenberg affine group and denote it by @xmath .

By an almost Bieberbach group (or AB-group for short) modelled on @xmath
, we mean a discrete, torsion free subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that
the quotient @xmath is compact and @xmath is a finite index subgroup of
@xmath . Every AB-group modelled on @xmath is determined by the short
exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . We call @xmath the Fitting subgroup of @xmath
and @xmath the holonomy group of @xmath . The above exact sequence
induces an injective homomorphism @xmath called the holonomy
representation of @xmath . Since @xmath is finite, this is conjugate
into a representation @xmath for any @xmath and yields a faithful
representation @xmath for any @xmath .

#### 2.4.3 Flat, almost flat, and infrasolv manifolds

We say a connected, closed manifold @xmath is flat if @xmath is
diffeomorphic to @xmath for some Bieberbach group. The flat metric
@xmath induced by the standard inner product @xmath on @xmath supplies
@xmath with a flat metric called the associated flat structure , and
@xmath will denote the space of all isometry classes of such metrics. We
say two flat structures @xmath and @xmath are similar if there exists an
isometry @xmath , for some @xmath . We denote the similarity class of a
flat metric @xmath by @xmath and the space of all similarity classes by
@xmath .

###### Theorem 2.4.1 ([45]).

The space of flat isometry classes on @xmath is @xmath . The space of
flat similarity classes on @xmath is @xmath .

Any faithful representation @xmath of @xmath into @xmath whose image is
Bieberbach endows @xmath with a flat metric induced from the form @xmath
.

For a complete Riemannian manifold @xmath , let @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath denote the diameter of @xmath and the lower and upper bounds of
the sectional curvature of @xmath , respectively, and set @xmath to be
the maximum of @xmath and @xmath . We say @xmath is almost flat if there
exists a family of complete Riemannian metrics @xmath on @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Gromov [ 18 ] proved every compact almost flat manifold is of the form
@xmath , where @xmath is a connected, simply connected nilpotent Lie
group and @xmath is an AB-group modelled on @xmath . In the sequel we
refer to compact almost flat manifolds as infranil manifolds modelled on
@xmath , where @xmath is the connected, simply connected nilpotent
cover. In the event the fundamental group is a lattice in @xmath , we
call such manifolds nil manifolds modelled on @xmath .

For a simply connected, connected, solvable, Lie group @xmath , a
discrete torsion free subgroup @xmath of @xmath is an infrasolv group
modelled on @xmath if @xmath is finite index in @xmath and @xmath is a
compact manifold. A smooth manifold diffeomorphic with @xmath for some
infrasolv group will be called an infrasolv manifold modelled on @xmath
, and we require the following rigidity result of Mostow [ 31 ] for
these manifolds.

###### Theorem 2.4.2.

If @xmath , @xmath are infrasolv manifolds with @xmath , then @xmath is
diffeomorphic to @xmath .

#### 2.4.4 @xmath and @xmath geometry

The 3–dimensional geometries @xmath and @xmath play a prominent role in
this thesis, and for completeness, a short introduction is provided
here.

The Heisenberg group @xmath can also be viewed as the subgroup of @xmath
of matrices of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Identifying @xmath with the rotations in the @xmath –plane, an
orientable @xmath 3–manifold is a manifold of the form @xmath , where
@xmath is a discrete subgroup of @xmath which acts freely. As we will
have need for this in the sequel, we must also consider an orientation
reversing involution given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As automorphisms of lattices of @xmath uniquely determine automorphisms
of @xmath by Mal’cev rigidity, this determines a continuous isomorphism
of @xmath . A @xmath 3–manifold is a manifold of the form @xmath , where
@xmath is a discrete subgroup of @xmath which acts freely.

The solvable Lie group @xmath is defined to be topologically @xmath with
group operation defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By a @xmath 3–manifold , we mean a manifold @xmath diffeomorphic with
@xmath , where @xmath is a discrete, torsion free subgroup of @xmath
such that @xmath is compact and @xmath .

### 2.5 @xmath–Hyperbolic geometry

For @xmath , or @xmath , the classical groups @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath produce the symmetric spaces @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , known
collectively as @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –space. For an explicit
description, we equip @xmath with a hermitian form @xmath of signature
@xmath . @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –space is the (left) @xmath
–projectivization of the @xmath –negative vectors endowed with the
Bergman metric associated to @xmath . We denote @xmath –hyperbolic
@xmath –space together with this metric by @xmath and say @xmath is
modelled on @xmath and call @xmath a model form . The boundary of @xmath
in @xmath is the @xmath –projectivization of the @xmath –null vectors.
We denote this set by @xmath , which is topologically just @xmath —see [
8 , p. 265] .

The spaces constructed in this way yield every symmetric space of real
rank–1 except for the exceptional Cayley hyperbolic plane @xmath . We
shall only make use of the fact that @xmath has a faithful linear
representation and refer the reader to [ 1 ] for more on the Cayley
hyperbolic plane.

The isometry group of @xmath is denoted by @xmath , and in each setting
is locally isomorphic to @xmath . More precisely,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an involution induced by an inversion in the real case
and complex conjugation in the complex case.

#### 2.5.1 The Iwasawa decomposition of @xmath

The isometry group of @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –space decomposes as
@xmath via the Iwasawa decomposition (see [ 8 , p. 311–313] ). The
factor @xmath is isomorphic to the @xmath –Heisenberg group @xmath and
all isomorphisms arise in the following fashion. Let @xmath be a model
hermitian form for @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –space and @xmath be the
@xmath –orthogonal complement of a pair of @xmath –linearly independent
@xmath –null vectors @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . For any maximal
compact @xmath of @xmath and associated positive definite hermitian form
@xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be any isometric @xmath –isomorphism. This induces a map @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the hermitian outer pairing of @xmath and @xmath with
respect to the hermitian form @xmath . This extends to all of @xmath as
these elements generate @xmath . In fact, this extends to @xmath , and
produces the equality @xmath .

#### 2.5.2 The upper half plane model

Viewing @xmath as the coset space @xmath , where @xmath is a maximal
compact subgroup, topologically @xmath is @xmath , and we call this the
upper half plane model for @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath has a foliation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whose leaves are called horospheres and are said to be centered at
@xmath when @xmath arises from @xmath .

#### 2.5.3 The Kazhdan–Margulis theorem and cusp cross-sections

For a lattice @xmath in @xmath with associated orbifold @xmath , we say
@xmath (or @xmath ) has a cusp at @xmath if @xmath and @xmath is
centered at @xmath .

For a lattice @xmath in @xmath with cusp at @xmath , we define the
maximal peripheral subgroup of @xmath at @xmath to be the subgroup

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the Kazhdan–Margulis theorem [ 23 ] , @xmath is virtually nilpotent
with the maximal, torsion free, nilpotent subgroup @xmath , and there
exists a horosphere @xmath such that @xmath is embedded in @xmath . We
call @xmath a cusp cross-section of the cusp at @xmath .

More generally, for any @xmath , there are three possibilities for
@xmath :

  (1)  

    @xmath is finite.

  (2)  

    @xmath is virtually cyclic with cyclic subgroup generated by a
    loxodromic isometry.

  (3)  

    @xmath is an AB-group modelled on @xmath .

In the sequel, we refer to this trichotomy as the stabilizer trichotomy
.

## Chapter 3 Separable subgroups and geometric applications

In this chapter, we prove the subgroup separability results from the
introduction. This task begins the following basic lemma—for a general
reference, we refer the reader to [ 25 ] .

###### Lemma 3.0.1.

  (a)  

     Let @xmath and @xmath be separable in @xmath with @xmath . Then
    @xmath is separable in @xmath .

  (b)  

     Let @xmath be separable subgroups of @xmath . Then @xmath is
    separable in @xmath .

  (c)  

     Let @xmath be subgroups of @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath is
    separable in @xmath if and only if @xmath is separable in @xmath .

  (d)  

     Let @xmath and @xmath be separable in @xmath . Then @xmath is
    separable in @xmath .

###### Proof.

For brevity, we only prove (b) and (c), as the proofs of (a) and (d) are
of a similar flavor.

Part (b). Let @xmath and assume @xmath . Since @xmath is separable in
@xmath , there exists a finite index subgroup @xmath of @xmath with
@xmath contained in @xmath and @xmath . Visibly, @xmath separates @xmath
and @xmath . For the alternative @xmath , an identical argument is made
using @xmath .

Part (c). The direct implication is immediate by (b), since @xmath is
separable in the larger group @xmath . For the reverse implication, to
show @xmath is separable in @xmath , by (a) it suffices to show @xmath
is separable in @xmath . For @xmath , there are two cases to consider.
If @xmath , then @xmath separates @xmath and @xmath . Otherwise, if
@xmath , since @xmath is separable in @xmath , there exists a finite
index subgroup @xmath of @xmath separating @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
As @xmath , @xmath is also a finite index subgroup of @xmath and thus
separates @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . ∎

### 3.1 Line stabilizers and Chevalley’s theorem

In this section, we prove the following result which bears Theorem 1.3.1
as a corollary.

###### Theorem 3.1.1 (Closed stabilizer separability).

Let @xmath be a number field, @xmath a linear @xmath –algebraic group,
and @xmath a closed @xmath –algebraic subgroup such that every finite
index subgroup of @xmath is congruence. Then a subgroup of @xmath is
separable in @xmath if and only if it is separable in @xmath .

To prove this we employ the following theorem of Chevalley—see [ 34 ] .

###### Theorem (Chevalley’s theorem).

Let @xmath be a linear @xmath –algebraic group and @xmath a closed
@xmath –algebraic subgroup. Then there exists a faithful @xmath
–homomorphism @xmath and a @xmath –defined line @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath .

###### Proof of Theorem 3.1.1.

Let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath . By Lemma 3.0.1 (d), if @xmath is
separable in @xmath , then @xmath is separable in @xmath . For the
converse, assume @xmath is separable in @xmath . According to
Chevalley’s theorem, there exists a faithful @xmath –homomorphism @xmath
and a @xmath –defined line @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath . We can
select a basis @xmath of @xmath such that both @xmath is spanned by
@xmath and the inner automorphism @xmath of @xmath induced by the change
of basis from the standard basis @xmath to @xmath is @xmath –defined.
Let @xmath denote the @xmath –defined homomorphism of @xmath into @xmath
given by @xmath . By Lemma 2.2.1 , @xmath is a finite index subgroup of
@xmath and we denote this subgroup by @xmath . According to Lemma 3.0.1
(c), it suffices to separate @xmath in @xmath , and this is achieved as
follows. For @xmath , we have two cases to consider. First, if @xmath is
not in @xmath , then @xmath for some @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
@xmath –coefficient of the matrix @xmath . As @xmath is Dedekind, there
are only finitely many prime ideals @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .
In particular, so long as @xmath is an ideal different from @xmath , the
number @xmath is nonzero. In contrast, since @xmath stabilizes the line
@xmath , every element @xmath in @xmath has the property that @xmath .
Therefore, @xmath and thus @xmath is a finite index subgroup of @xmath
separating @xmath and @xmath . This leaves the alternative @xmath and
the remaining task of separating @xmath from @xmath in @xmath . By
assumption @xmath is separable in @xmath , and according to Lemma 3.0.1
(c), @xmath is separable in @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath is separable in
@xmath and hence there must exist a finite index subgroup @xmath of
@xmath separating @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is a finite index
subgroup of @xmath , by Theorem 3.1.2 , there exists an ideal @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath is the modulo @xmath reduction
for @xmath . It is a simple matter to see that @xmath , and hence the
desired finite index subgroup of @xmath separating @xmath and @xmath is
given by @xmath . ∎

We need three results in order to derive Theorem 1.3.1 from Theorem
3.1.1 . The first is a result of Chahal [ 9 ] which establishes the
congruence subgroup property for solvable algebraic groups defined over
number fields.

###### Theorem 3.1.2.

If @xmath be a solvable @xmath –algebraic group, then every finite index
subgroup of @xmath is a congruence subgroup.

The second is due to Borel—see [ 7 ] .

###### Theorem 3.1.3.

If @xmath is a @xmath –linear algebraic group and @xmath is a Borel
subgroup, then @xmath is a @xmath –defined closed subgroup for some
finite extension @xmath .

The final result is due to Mal’cev.

###### Theorem 3.1.4.

If @xmath is a linear, solvable @xmath –algebraic group, then every
subgroup of @xmath is separable in @xmath .

###### Proof of Theorem 1.3.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath –algebraic group with Borel subgroup @xmath . We
are required to separate each subgroup @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . By
Theorem 3.1.3 and Theorem 3.1.2 , @xmath is a closed @xmath –algebraic
subgroup of @xmath for some finite extension @xmath and @xmath has the
congruence subgroup property. Hence, Theorem 3.1.1 is applicable and
@xmath is separable in @xmath if and only if @xmath is separable in
@xmath . By Theorem 3.1.4 , @xmath is separable in @xmath and hence
separable in @xmath . Therefore, by Lemma 3.0.1 (d), @xmath is separable
in @xmath . ∎

### 3.2 Corollaries to Theorem 1.3.1

Our first corollary shows the conclusions of Theorem 1.3.1 hold for any
subgroup of @xmath commensurable with @xmath ; we call such subgroups
@xmath –arithmetic subgroups .

###### Corollary 3.2.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath –algebraic group, @xmath a @xmath –arithmetic
subgroup in @xmath , and @xmath a Borel subgroup of @xmath . Then every
subgroup of @xmath is separable in @xmath .

###### Proof.

For a subgroup @xmath of @xmath , by Lemma 3.0.1 (c), it suffices to
separate @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath , by
Theorem 1.3.1 , @xmath is separable in @xmath . Thus, @xmath is
separable in @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 3.2.2.

Let @xmath be a @xmath –algebraic group and @xmath is a solvable
subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath is separable in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since every solvable subgroup is virtually contained in a Borel subgroup
(see [ 7 , p. 137] ), by Lemma 3.0.1 (c), it suffices to separate @xmath
in @xmath . The latter is done using Theorem 1.3.1 . ∎

The following is a consequence of [ 41 ] .

###### Theorem 3.2.3.

If @xmath is a @xmath –injective immersion of an infrasolv manifold
@xmath into an arithmetic @xmath –orbifold @xmath , then there exists a
finite cover @xmath such that @xmath lifts to an embedding.

### 3.3 Applications to @xmath–hyperbolic manifolds

In this section we prove Corollary 1.3.2 and corollaries specific to
lattices in the isometry group of @xmath –hyperbolic space.

###### Proof of Corollary 1.3.2.

Corollary 1.3.2 requires for each @xmath and arithmetic lattices @xmath
in @xmath , we separate each subgroup of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . For this, we
split our consideration naturally into three cases depending on the
stabilizer trichotomy for the groups @xmath given at the end of previous
chapter. Since @xmath –hyperbolic lattices are residually finite it
follows easily from Lemma 3.0.1 (c) that subgroups in case (1) are
separable. For @xmath or @xmath , case (2) follows exactly the proof in
[ 19 ] on noting @xmath . For @xmath or @xmath , since every lattice in
@xmath and @xmath is arithmetic (see [ 12 ] and [ 17 ] ), we can apply
Corollary 3.2.2 to separate. For (3), as peripheral subgroups are
virtually nilpotent, Corollary 3.2.2 handles this case. To be complete,
we first realize the arithmetic lattice @xmath as a subgroup of @xmath
with a finite index subgroup in @xmath and finish by applying Corollary
3.2.1 with Corollary 3.2.2 . ∎

###### Remark.

[ 19 ] proved that in a cocompact lattice @xmath of @xmath , every
virtually abelian subgroup is separable. As her proof does not require
arithmeticity, our proof of Corollary 1.3.2 uses arithmeticity only in
(3).

We conclude this chapter with a geometric corollary of particular
interest in the topological classification of cusp cross-sections of
arithmetic @xmath –orbifolds.

###### Theorem 3.3.1.

  (a)  

     A flat @xmath –manifold is diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of
    an arithmetic real hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold if and only if @xmath
    injects into an arithmetic real hyperbolic @xmath –lattice.

  (b)  

     An almost flat @xmath –manifold @xmath modelled on @xmath is
    diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of an arithmetic complex
    hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold if and only if @xmath injects into an
    arithmetic complex hyperbolic @xmath –lattice.

  (c)  

     An almost flat @xmath –manifold @xmath modelled on @xmath is
    diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of a quaternionic hyperbolic
    @xmath –orbifold if and only if @xmath injects into a quaternionic
    hyperbolic @xmath –lattice.

  (d)  

     An almost flat @xmath –manifold @xmath modelled on @xmath is
    diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of an octonionic hyperbolic
    @xmath –orbifold if and only if @xmath injects into an octonionic
    hyperbolic @xmath –lattice.

## Chapter 4 Cusps of @xmath–hyperbolic manifolds

One goal of this chapter is to give a classification of cusp
cross-sections of arithmetic @xmath –hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds. By
Theorem 3.3.1 , we are reduced to classifying AB-groups admitting
injections into arithmetic @xmath –hyperbolic lattices. The main point
is to prove this is equivalent admitting injections into arithmetically
defined subgroups of unitary affine groups. The latter groups are easier
to work with in regard to this problem, as the generalized Bieberbach
theorems ensure the existence of injections. The proof of this reduction
relies on being able to realize unitary affine groups as real algebraic
subgroups of the isometry group of @xmath –hyperbolic space. In total,
this is straightforward with the bulk of the material consisting of
terminology, notation, and formal manipulation. We hope the main point
is not lost in this.

### 4.1 Algebraic structure of unitary affine groups

Recall for each maximal compact subgroup @xmath of @xmath , we defined
the unitary affine group @xmath to be @xmath . The algebraic structure
of these groups is completely determined by the algebraic structure of
the maximal compact subgroup. Specifically, @xmath is @xmath –algebraic
if and only if @xmath is @xmath –algebraic. In turn, the algebraic
structure of @xmath is controlled by the finite index subgroup @xmath .
For these groups, @xmath is @xmath –algebraic if and only if @xmath is
defined over @xmath .

In the real setting, these groups are of the form @xmath , where @xmath
is a symmetric, positive definite bilinear form and the form @xmath will
be defined over a subfield @xmath of @xmath . In the complex setting,
these groups are of the form @xmath , where @xmath is a hermitian form
of signature @xmath and @xmath will be defined over a subfield @xmath of
@xmath . In the quaternionic setting, these groups are of the form
@xmath , where @xmath is a positive definite hermitian form and @xmath
will be defined over a subalgebra @xmath of @xmath . Our only interest
is when @xmath is a number field in the first two settings or @xmath is
a quaternion algebra defined over a number field in the last setting.

For an AB-group @xmath modelled on @xmath , @xmath is conjugated into a
subgroup of a unitary affine group @xmath for any @xmath . If this
unitary affine group is @xmath –algebraic and @xmath is contained in the
@xmath –points, we say @xmath is @xmath –defined . When @xmath is
commensurable with the @xmath –points ( @xmath is either the ring of
integers of @xmath or a @xmath –order in the quaternion algebra), we say
@xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup . Note if @xmath is @xmath
–defined, then by conjugating by a Heisenberg dilation, we can arrange
for @xmath to be commensurable with a subgroup of the @xmath –points of
the unitary affine group.

In the quaternionic setting, we can realize @xmath as @xmath –algebraic
subgroup of @xmath , where @xmath is the field for which the quaternion
algebra @xmath is defined. For a @xmath –order @xmath in @xmath , if
@xmath has a finite index subgroup in the @xmath –points of some unitary
affine group @xmath , when we realize @xmath as a @xmath –algebraic
group, @xmath will have a finite index subgroup in the @xmath –points of
this group.

In our notation, we will refer to @xmath as being @xmath –defined,
subgroups @xmath which are commensurable with @xmath for some @xmath
–order @xmath as being @xmath –arithmetic, and homomorphisms as being
@xmath –defined. Since when we realize @xmath as a @xmath –algebraic
group, these definitions correspond to the standard algebraic
definitions (over the field @xmath ), this is only a slight abuse of
notation.

### 4.2 @xmath–monomorphisms of unitary affine groups into the isometry
group

We start by characterizing when a unitary affine group admits a @xmath
–algebraic structure via embeddings into the isometry group of @xmath
–hyperbolic space.

If @xmath is a @xmath –algebraic unitary affine group, then @xmath , the
associated hermitian form for @xmath , is defined over @xmath . Set
@xmath , with @xmath defined on @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath –defined
@xmath –hyperbolic plane. Finally, let @xmath denote the @xmath
–orthogonal complement in @xmath of a pair of @xmath –linearly
independent, @xmath –defined, @xmath –null vectors @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath .

Any isometric @xmath –isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induces a @xmath –isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are factors in the Iwasawa decomposition induced
on @xmath with respect to the above pair of @xmath –null vectors. Since
both vectors are @xmath –defined, it follows that @xmath is @xmath
–algebraic. Consequently, we have the following proposition.

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

@xmath is a @xmath –algebraic group if and only if there exists a
hermitian form @xmath of signature @xmath defined over @xmath and a
@xmath –isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is modelled on @xmath .

### 4.3 A necessary and sufficient condition for arithmeticity

We are ready to classify cusp cross-sections of arithmetic hyperbolic
lattices. Above, we related the algebraic structure of abstractly
defined unitary affine groups via embeddings into the isometry group of
@xmath –hyperbolic space. We now do the same for AB-groups which is
achieved with the following proposition.

###### Proposition 4.3.1.

@xmath is a @xmath –defined AB-group modelled on @xmath if and only if
there exists a @xmath –defined hermitian form @xmath modelling @xmath
–hyperbolic @xmath –space, a subgroup @xmath of @xmath commensurable
with @xmath , and an injection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath –defined @xmath –null vector @xmath .

###### Proof.

For the direct implication, assume @xmath is contained in a @xmath
–defined unitary affine group @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be @xmath –isomorphism given by Proposition 4.2.1 . This provides us
with a @xmath –monomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath –algebraic groups. Hence, by Lemma 2.2.1 , there exists @xmath
in @xmath , commensurable with @xmath such that @xmath is contained in
@xmath , as asserted.

For the reverse implication, we assume the existence of @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath . Note for the Fitting subgroup @xmath of @xmath ,
@xmath is contained in some nilpotent factor @xmath of an Iwasawa
decomposition. The nilpotent group @xmath is @xmath –algebraic, since
@xmath is Zariski dense and consists of @xmath –points. Since @xmath is
virtually contained in @xmath , @xmath is contained in @xmath for the
compact factor @xmath of an Iwasawa decomposition @xmath of @xmath .
Since the group @xmath can be selected to be @xmath –algebraic, we have
@xmath is contained in @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath –algebraic
unitary affine group, as desired. ∎

For an AB-group @xmath modelled on @xmath , we say @xmath is
arithmetically admissible if there exists an arithmetic @xmath
–hyperbolic @xmath –lattice @xmath such that @xmath is isomorphic to
@xmath . Altogether we have the following theorem which classifies the
arithmetically admissible AB-groups (part (a) is proved in [ 27 ] ).

###### Theorem 4.3.2 (Cusp classification theorem).

Let @xmath be an AB-group modelled on @xmath .

  (a)  

     For @xmath , @xmath is arithmetically admissible if and only if
    @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup in @xmath , where @xmath is
    a @xmath –defined, positive definite, symmetric bilinear form on
    @xmath .

  (b)  

     For @xmath , @xmath is arithmetically admissible if and only if
    @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup in a unitary affine group
    for some imaginary quadratic number field @xmath .

  (c)  

     For @xmath , @xmath is arithmetically admissible if and only if
    @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup in a unitary affine group,
    for some ramified quaternion @xmath –algebra @xmath .

###### Proof.

The direct implication is immediate in all three case. For the converse,
assume @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup in a unitary affine
group, where @xmath is as above. By Proposition 4.3.1 , there exists a
@xmath –defined hermitian form @xmath modelling @xmath –hyperbolic
@xmath –space, a subgroup @xmath of @xmath commensurable with @xmath ,
and an injection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath –defined light-like vector @xmath . @xmath must be a
finite index subgroup of @xmath and by Theorem 2.3.1 , @xmath is an
arithmetic subgroup. In this injection we cannot ensure that @xmath . As
@xmath is an arithmetic subgroup in the @xmath –algebraic group @xmath ,
by Corollary 1.3.2 , we can find a finite index subgroup @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath . Specifically, select a complete set of coset
representatives for @xmath , say @xmath . By Corollary 1.3.2 , there
exists a finite index subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is
contained in @xmath and for each @xmath , @xmath . Therefore @xmath ,
since @xmath . ∎

### 4.4 The holonomy theorem

For an AB-group @xmath modelled on @xmath , we say the holonomy group
@xmath of @xmath is complex if @xmath is contained in @xmath for the
holonomy representation, and otherwise say @xmath is anticomplex . We
have the following alternative characterization based on the structure
of the holonomy representation.

###### Corollary 4.4.1 (Holonomy theorem).

If @xmath is an AB-group modelled on @xmath with complex holonomy, then
@xmath is arithmetically admissible if and only if the holonomy
representation @xmath is conjugate to a representation into @xmath for
some imaginary quadratic number field.

###### Proof.

If @xmath is arithmetically admissible, then from Theorem 4.3.2 , there
exists a @xmath –defined unitary affine group @xmath such that @xmath is
conjugate into @xmath and commensurable with @xmath , for some imaginary
quadratic number field @xmath . This yields an injective homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath complex, @xmath is contained in @xmath , which is a
subgroup of @xmath , as desired.

For the converse, assume the holonomy representation of @xmath maps into
@xmath , for some imaginary quadratic number field @xmath . By taking
the @xmath –average of any @xmath –defined hermitian form, we see this
representation is contained in a @xmath –defined unitary group @xmath .
Specifically, for any @xmath –defined hermitian form @xmath , define the
@xmath –average of @xmath to be the @xmath –defined hermitian form given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this representation and a presentation for @xmath , we get a
system of linear homogenous equations with coefficients in @xmath .
Since @xmath is conjugate to the holonomy representation, by the
generalized Bieberbach theorems, this system has a solution which yields
a faithful representation into @xmath . Conjugating by a Heisenberg
dilation to ensure the Fitting subgroup consists of @xmath –integral
entries, we see @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic. Therefore, by Theorem
4.3.2 , @xmath is arithmetically admissible. ∎

### 4.5 Density of cusp shapes

The proof of Theorem 1.4.1 is established in three steps. We first show
each representation @xmath in @xmath produces a similarity class that
arises in an arithmetic real hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold. Next, we
demonstrate the density of @xmath in @xmath . Finally, we produce a
continuous surjective map from @xmath to both @xmath .

Our first proposition follows from Theorem 4.3.2 and provides the first
step in the quest for density.

###### Proposition 4.5.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be any @xmath –defined orthogonal affine group
where @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup of @xmath . Then there
exists an arithmetic hyperbolic @xmath –lattice @xmath in @xmath and an
injection @xmath such that @xmath is a maximal peripheral subgroup of
@xmath .

###### Proposition 4.5.2.

For every Bieberbach group @xmath , @xmath is dense in @xmath .

To prove Proposition 4.5.2 , we need a pair of auxiliary lemmas.

###### Lemma 4.5.3.

If @xmath is a topological group with dense subgroup @xmath and @xmath
is a topological space with a continuous transitive @xmath –action, then
the @xmath –orbit of any @xmath in @xmath is dense in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Given a dense subgroup @xmath of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , it
suffices to show for each @xmath in @xmath , there exists a net @xmath
in @xmath such that @xmath converges to @xmath . By assumption @xmath
acts transitively on @xmath and so there exists @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath . Since @xmath is dense, there exists a net @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath . Finally, since the action map @xmath is continuous,
it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Lemma 4.5.4.

For every crystallographic group @xmath , @xmath is nonempty.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the maximal translational subgroup and @xmath the
holonomy. We can view @xmath and thus the holonomy representation
becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After conjugating by a dilation if necessary this yields a faithful
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To obtain a @xmath –defined @xmath –invariant, positive definite
bilinear form @xmath , we simply take the @xmath –average of any @xmath
–defined positive definite bilinear form @xmath . Specifically, define
the @xmath –average of @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is a simple matter that @xmath is @xmath –defined, positive definite,
and @xmath –invariant and @xmath is a finite index subgroup of @xmath .
∎

###### Proof of Proposition 4.5.2.

As expected, we seek to apply Lemma 4.5.3 , and must ensure the
conditions are satisfied by @xmath and @xmath . To begin, the topology
on @xmath is the subspace topology induced by viewing @xmath as a
subspace of the @xmath –representation space. Visibly, the @xmath
–action on the representation space is continuous, and so by restriction
the action of @xmath on @xmath is continuous. Less obvious is the
transitivity of the @xmath –action on @xmath . However, this is
precisely the statement of one part of the Bieberbach theorems. Thus, by
Lemma 4.5.3 , for @xmath and any @xmath in @xmath , the @xmath –orbit of
@xmath is dense in @xmath . We assert for each @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath , the conjugate representation @xmath is in @xmath , where @xmath
. To see this, let @xmath be a @xmath –defined orthogonal affine group
for which @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup of @xmath .
Conjugation by @xmath yields an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath in @xmath is the linear factor (or second coordinate) for
@xmath . Since @xmath resides in @xmath , the symmetric, positive
definite form associated to @xmath is @xmath –defined, being @xmath
–equivalent to the @xmath –defined form @xmath . Moreover, this
isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath is @xmath –defined. Therefore, by
Lemma 2.2.1 , any @xmath –arithmetic subgroup of @xmath is mapped to a
@xmath –arithmetic subgroup of @xmath , and thus @xmath is a @xmath
–arithmetic subgroup of a @xmath –defined orthogonal affine group as
asserted. Of course, this is only useful if @xmath is nonempty, and by
Lemma 4.5.4 it is. Consequently, there exists a dense @xmath –orbit of
representations which, by the argument above, resides in @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 1.4.1.

The reduction of @xmath by the @xmath –conjugate action yields a space
containing @xmath , and there exists a continuous surjective map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given as follows. For @xmath in @xmath , as @xmath is an @xmath
–conjugate of a Bieberbach group, by the Bieberbach theorems @xmath
projects to a finite group @xmath in @xmath . Taking the @xmath –average

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the standard inner product @xmath on @xmath produces a maximal
compact subgroup @xmath such that @xmath is contained in the orthogonal
affine group @xmath . Up post-composition with an inner automorphism of
@xmath , there exists a unique @xmath in @xmath conjugating @xmath to
@xmath . From this, we define @xmath .

If @xmath is a sequence of representations in @xmath converging to
@xmath in @xmath , the sequence @xmath converges to @xmath in @xmath .
For a free abelian group this is immediate since @xmath is trivial. For
nontrivial @xmath , this follows from the convergence of the maximal
compact subgroups @xmath arising from the @xmath –average—a small change
in the image of @xmath results in a small change in the @xmath –average.
We briefly explain this. To begin, the maximal compact subgroup @xmath
depends only on @xmath . For a sequence of representations @xmath
converging to @xmath , let @xmath be the image of @xmath under
projection onto @xmath . It follows the groups @xmath converge to @xmath
and thus @xmath converges to @xmath in the space of positive definite,
symmetric matrices—we use the standard basis to associate these matrices
to the @xmath –average forms. From this we see the maximal compact
subgroups @xmath converge to @xmath . The conjugating matrices @xmath
need not converge to the conjugating matrix @xmath for @xmath . However,
up to left multiplication in @xmath , the sequence does converge and so
the sequence of @xmath converges to @xmath in @xmath . As this is the
sequence @xmath , we see @xmath converges to @xmath in @xmath .

The desired set of flat similarity classes is the image of @xmath under
the projection map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That this subset is dense is a consequence of the continuity and
surjectivity of @xmath in combination with Proposition 4.5.2 . For the
former, if @xmath resides in @xmath , the @xmath –average of the
standard form is the standard form and thus produces @xmath . In
particular, we can take @xmath and thus @xmath restricted to @xmath is
the identity. It remains to show each similarity class @xmath does arise
in a cusp cross-section of an arithmetic hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold. By
Proposition 4.5.1 , for each @xmath with associated @xmath –defined
orthogonal affine group @xmath , there exists a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and an arithmetic lattice @xmath such that @xmath is a maximal
peripheral subgroup of @xmath . For the flat structure on @xmath coming
from @xmath and the flat structure on the cusp cross-section associated
to @xmath , this produces a similarity of this pair of flat manifolds.
To obtain this for the associated class in @xmath , we argue as follows.
It could be that the @xmath –form @xmath for @xmath is not the @xmath
–average of @xmath . If this is the case, simply replace @xmath by
@xmath , and notice this too is a @xmath –defined orthogonal affine
group for which @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic subgroup. Let @xmath be
the associated flat manifold with this similarity class associated to
@xmath viewed as a representation into @xmath . Making the same argument
as before, we see @xmath occurs as a cusp cross-section of an arithmetic
hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold. By construction, the flat manifold @xmath
with similarity class @xmath is similar to @xmath . Hence, every class
in the dense subset @xmath arises in a cusp cross-section of an
arithmetic real hyperbolic @xmath –orbifold. ∎

For almost flat manifolds modelled on the @xmath or @xmath an identical
argument can be made. However, the associated set @xmath need not be
nonempty, and consequently there is a dichotomy.

###### Theorem 4.5.5.

  (a)  

     For an almost flat @xmath –manifold @xmath modelled on @xmath , the
    realizable almost flat similarity classes in the cusp cross-sections
    of arithmetic complex hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds is either empty
    or dense in the space of almost flat similarity classes.

  (b)  

     For an almost flat @xmath –manifold @xmath modelled on @xmath , the
    realizable almost flat similarity classes in the cusp cross-sections
    of quaternionic hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds is either empty or
    dense in the space of almost flat similarity classes.

Together with Theorem 1.2.2 , we obtain:

###### Corollary 4.5.6.

For a @xmath 3–manifold @xmath , the @xmath similarity classes that
arise in the cusp cross-sections of arithmetic complex hyperbolic @xmath
–orbifolds are dense in the space of @xmath similarity classes.

This also holds for @xmath 3–manifolds—see the next chapter for more on
this.

###### Corollary 4.5.7.

For a @xmath 3–manifold @xmath , the @xmath similarity classes that
arise in the cusp cross-sections of generalized Hilbert modular surfaces
are dense in the space of @xmath similarity classes.

Finally, with the easily established converse of Proposition 4.5.1 , we
obtain the following geometric classification theorem for cusp
cross-sections of arithmetic hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds.

###### Theorem 4.5.8.

For a flat @xmath –manifolds, @xmath is precisely the set of flat
similarity classes on @xmath that arise in cusp cross-sections of
arithmetic hyperbolic @xmath –orbifolds.

This persists in the complex and quaternionic hyperbolic settings.

### 4.6 Orbifold to manifold promotion

In this short section we prove the following result.

###### Theorem 4.6.1.

For the @xmath –torus, the realizable flat similarity classes in the
cusp cross-sections of arithmetic real hyperbolic @xmath –manifolds are
dense in the space of flat similarity classes.

Theorem 4.6.1 is a consequence of the following proposition whose proof
is essentially a reproduction of Borel’s proof of Selberg’s lemma [ 6 ]
.

###### Proposition 4.6.2.

If @xmath is a finite extension and @xmath a finitely generated subgroup
of @xmath with unipotent subgroup @xmath , then there exists a torsion
free, finite index subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is
contained in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a finite generating set for @xmath , @xmath be the @xmath
–coefficient of @xmath , and @xmath be the subring of @xmath generated
by @xmath . By assumption, @xmath is conjugate in @xmath into the group
of upper triangular matrices with ones along the diagonal. In
particular, the characteristic polynomial @xmath for each @xmath in
@xmath is @xmath . For any torsion element @xmath in @xmath , the
characteristic polynomial @xmath of @xmath has only roots of unity for
its zeroes. Since @xmath is a finite extension and @xmath is fixed,
there are only finitely many degree @xmath monic polynomials in @xmath
having only roots of unity for their roots. Let @xmath denote those
monic polynomials with coefficients in @xmath with this property. As our
concern is solely with nontrivial torsion elements, we further insist
each of the polynomials has a root distinct from @xmath . For each such
polynomial @xmath , there are finitely many prime ideals @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath modulo @xmath . To see this, we first exclude
all prime ideals @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath . Since for each
prime @xmath of @xmath there are finitely many prime ideals @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath , this is a finite set. Next, as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is nonzero, there exists @xmath such that @xmath is nonzero. There are
only finitely many prime ideals @xmath such that @xmath , and so for any
other prime ideal @xmath , it follows @xmath modulo @xmath . Excluding
this finite collection @xmath of prime ideals of @xmath , for any
selection @xmath , we have @xmath not equal to @xmath modulo @xmath .
Repeating this argument for each @xmath , we obtain the desired ideal
set @xmath . For @xmath , no torsion element @xmath cannot reside in
@xmath as every element of @xmath has characteristic polynomial @xmath
and @xmath does not share this trait. Therefore, @xmath is a torsion
free finite index subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath , as sought. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 4.6.1.

It suffices to show for each @xmath in @xmath the induced representation
given by Proposition 4.5.1 is such that @xmath is contained in a torsion
free finite index subgroup of the target lattice @xmath . By
construction, the representation @xmath maps @xmath into a unipotent
subgroup of @xmath since the groups @xmath in the Iwasawa decomposition
are unipotent. As the target lattice @xmath is arithmetic, @xmath is
finitely presentable ( [ 35 , Cor. 13.25] ) and conjugate into the
@xmath –points of @xmath for some number field @xmath . Thus Proposition
4.6.2 is applicable and yields a torsion free finite index subgroup
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is contained in @xmath . Note if
@xmath is a maximal peripheral subgroup of @xmath , @xmath is a maximal
peripheral subgroup of @xmath . In particular, we can realize the
associated flat similarity class @xmath for @xmath in a cusp
cross-section of the associated arithmetic manifold for @xmath . ∎

For those infranil manifold groups realizable as lattices in their
associated nilpotent Lie group, we say the associated infranil manifold
is a niltorus . For niltori modelled on either @xmath or @xmath ,
orbifold density is promoted to manifold density with an identical
argument using Proposition 4.6.2 .

## Chapter 5 Hilbert and Hilbert–Blumenthal cusps

Let @xmath be a totally real number field with @xmath , @xmath the ring
of integers of @xmath , and @xmath the @xmath real embeddings of @xmath
. The group @xmath is an arithmetic subgroup of the @xmath –fold product
@xmath via the embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . The group @xmath is called the Hilbert modular group , and
through this embedding, @xmath acts with finite volume on the @xmath
–fold product of real hyperbolic planes @xmath . More generally, we call
any subgroup @xmath of @xmath commensurable with @xmath a Hilbert
modular group and the quotients @xmath , Hilbert modular varieties .
When @xmath is a real quadratic number field, these quotients are called
Hilbert modular surfaces —for more on Hilbert modular surfaces, see [ 22
] or [ 46 ] .

### 5.1 Cusps of Hilbert modular varieties

For the product geometry @xmath , the Iwasawa decomposition of @xmath is
given by taking @xmath independent Iwasawa decompositions in each @xmath
. The standard decomposition in @xmath is given with

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The standard Borel subgroup @xmath of @xmath is @xmath , and a Borel
subgroup of @xmath is the @xmath –fold product of Borel subgroups @xmath
of @xmath .

Cusps, horospheres, and cusp cross-sections are defined as in the @xmath
–hyperbolic setting via Iwasawa decompositions of @xmath . For the
Hilbert modular group @xmath over a totally real number field @xmath ,
the stabilizer of the boundary point corresponding to the Iwasawa
decomposition given by the @xmath –fold product of the groups @xmath is
the peripheral subgroup

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every peripheral subgroup of @xmath is conjugate in @xmath to a group
commensurable with @xmath . For higher real rank geometries one
typically has metric pinching in finite volume, noncompact quotients
arising from other proper parabolic subgroups. When these parabolic
groups are not Borel subgroups, the associated peripheral subgroups are
not stabilizers of points on the boundary but instead higher dimensional
simplicial complexes. The metric pinching in Hilbert modular varieties
arises only from Borel subgroups, a consequence of the fact our geometry
has @xmath –rank one. For completeness, we establish this claim.

###### Lemma 5.1.1.

If @xmath is @xmath –defined proper parabolic subgroup of @xmath which
intersects @xmath nontrivially, then @xmath is contained in a @xmath
–defined Borel subgroup.

###### Proof.

After applying an element of the symmetric group @xmath , we can assume
the @xmath –defined parabolic @xmath of @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conjugating in @xmath , we can further assume each @xmath is a standard
Borel subgroup @xmath of @xmath . If @xmath , as @xmath is proper, then
under some embedding @xmath of @xmath , @xmath . In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any other embedding @xmath of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for some @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath and so for every embedding @xmath as asserted. ∎

### 5.2 Classifying cusp cross-sections

We now turn our eyes to Hilbert modular varieties and the classification
of their cusp cross-sections. This is achieved with our next theorem
analogous to Theorem 4.3.2 .

###### Theorem 5.2.1 (Correspondence theorem).

If @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic torus bundle, then there exists a
faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is a finite index subgroup of @xmath . Moreover, there
exists a finite index subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .

We defer the proof of Theorem 5.2.1 for the moment in order to prove
Theorem 1.5.1 .

###### Proof of Theorem 1.5.1.

Our task is to verify an @xmath –torus bundle @xmath is diffeomorphic to
a cusp cross-section of a Hilbert modular variety over @xmath if and
only if @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic. For the direct implication, since
@xmath is diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of a Hilbert modular
variety, there exists a Hilbert modular group @xmath and an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To obtain an injective homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is commensurable with @xmath , we argue as follows. By
conjugating by an element @xmath of @xmath , we can assume that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

As @xmath is in @xmath , @xmath remains a Hilbert modular group, and
moreover, @xmath is commensurable with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To obtain the faithful representation @xmath , we simply compose @xmath
with the isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the reverse implication, we apply Theorem 5.2.1 and Theorem 2.4.2 .
Specifically, let @xmath be the Hilbert modular group guaranteed by
Theorem 5.2.1 and let @xmath denote an embedded cusp cross-section
associated with @xmath . As a smooth manifold, @xmath is of the form
@xmath and by Theorem 5.2.1 , we have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying Mostow’s solvable rigidity Theorem 2.4.2 , we obtain the
desired diffeomorphism between @xmath and @xmath . ∎

In the proof of Theorem 5.2.1 , the following lemma is required.

###### Lemma 5.2.2.

If @xmath is a @xmath –arithmetic torus bundle, then there exists an
injective homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath is a finite index subgroups of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic, we have a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is commensurable with @xmath . Hence, given @xmath in
@xmath , we have for some @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, @xmath is in @xmath and thus @xmath is in @xmath . Even
so, it may be the case that @xmath is not contained in @xmath . This is
rectified as follows. Select a generating set for @xmath , say @xmath .
For each generator, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is the field of fractions of
@xmath , we can select @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so the second coordinate @xmath is unchanged. Finally, for @xmath ,
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the inner automorphism determined by @xmath . By
construction, @xmath is a faithful representation of @xmath onto a
finite index subgroup of @xmath . ∎

With Lemma 5.2.2 in hand, we prove Theorem 5.2.1 .

###### Proof of Theorem 5.2.1.

By Lemma 5.2.2 , we have an injective homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is a finite index subgroup. To obtain the injective
homomorphism @xmath , we compose @xmath with the isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That @xmath is faithful and @xmath is a finite index subgroup of @xmath
follow immediately from the properties of @xmath and @xmath . To find
the desired subgroup @xmath , we apply the Borel subgroup separability
Theorem 1.3.1 . ∎

### 5.3 A question of Hirzebruch

Let @xmath be a totally real number field, @xmath an additive group of
rank @xmath (the degree of @xmath over @xmath ), and @xmath a finite
index subgroup such that for all @xmath , @xmath . For each pair @xmath
, we define the peripheral group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any Hilbert modular variety @xmath , the peripheral groups @xmath of
@xmath are conjugate (in @xmath ) to groups of the form @xmath . In [ 22
, p. 203] , Hirzebruch mentions that it is apparently unknown whether or
not every @xmath can occur as a maximal peripheral subgroup of a Hilbert
modular group. The following corollary gives an affirmative answer.

###### Corollary 5.3.1.

For every pair @xmath , there exists a Hilbert modular group @xmath such
that @xmath .

###### Proof.

As in the proof of Lemma 5.2.2 , we can conjugate @xmath by an element
of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath in @xmath , such that @xmath is contained in @xmath . Since
@xmath and @xmath are finite index subgroups of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, @xmath is a finite index subgroup of @xmath . Thus there
exists a finite index subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, for @xmath , we have @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath is a Hilbert
modular group, as required. ∎

### 5.4 A simple criterion for arithmeticity

In this section, we give a simple criterion for the arithmeticity of
@xmath –torus bundles, and so produce the analog of the holonomy
Corollary 4.4.1 . The need for such a result is practical, as it allows
one to establish the arithmeticity of a torus bundle computationally.

For an (orientable) @xmath –torus bundle @xmath , since both the base
and fiber are aspherical, we have the short exact sequence induced by
the long exact sequence of the fiber bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The action of @xmath on @xmath induces a homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

called the holonomy representation . Since peripheral subgroups in
Hilbert modular groups have faithful holonomy representation, we assume
throughout that @xmath is faithful. In particular, we obtain a faithful
representation of @xmath into @xmath .

Of primary importance for us here is the holonomy representation
together with any finite presentation yields a homogenous linear system
of equations with coefficients in @xmath . This system arises as
follows. For ease, select a presentation of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath generate @xmath , @xmath are lifts of a generating set
@xmath for @xmath , and @xmath is a finite set of relations of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the holonomy representation, we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each relation in the presentation yields a linear homogenous equation in
the vector variables @xmath and @xmath (see below for an explicit
example of how these equations arise). Namely, we insert the above forms
for @xmath and @xmath into the relation and consider only the first
coordinate. The equations we obtain are of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . That this system has integral solutions which yield
faithful representations follows from the fact that @xmath is faithful
and induces a faithful representation of @xmath into @xmath .

The main result of this section is a simple criterion for arithmeticity
based on the structure of the holonomy representation. In the statement
of the proof, @xmath and @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.4.1.

If @xmath is an orientable @xmath –torus bundle, then @xmath is
diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of a Hilbert modular variety
defined over @xmath if and only if @xmath , for some faithful character
@xmath , where @xmath is some holonomy representation.

###### Proof.

For the direct implication, since @xmath is diffeomorphic to a cusp
cross-section of a Hilbert modular variety, by Theorem 1.5.1 , we have a
faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By restricting scalars from @xmath to @xmath , we obtain a faithful
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof is completed by noting the holonomy map induced by this
representation is simply @xmath , where @xmath is the holonomy
representation induced by the representation @xmath .

For the converse, we seek a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , the image of @xmath is necessarily a finite
index subgroup. By assumption, we have a faithful character @xmath . We
extend this to a faithful representation of @xmath into @xmath as
follows. Select a presentation as above for @xmath with generators
@xmath and @xmath . Write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are to be determined. Using our presentation for
@xmath , we obtain a system of linear homogenous equations @xmath with
coefficients in @xmath . As above, solutions to @xmath yield
representations of @xmath into @xmath . We assert there is a solution
which yields a faithful representation. To see this, by restricting
scalars from @xmath to @xmath , we obtain a linear system @xmath with
coefficients in @xmath . Solutions to the system @xmath yield
representations of @xmath into @xmath . Moreover, a solution to @xmath
which yields a faithful representation is equivalent to a solution of
@xmath which yields a faithful representation into @xmath . That such a
solution exists with integral coefficients for @xmath follows from the
faithfulness of @xmath and our discussion in the previous subsection.
This yields a solution for @xmath with coefficients in @xmath which
yields a faithful representation. Therefore, @xmath is @xmath
–arithmetic, since there exists a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is a finite index subgroup of @xmath . ∎

If the character @xmath only maps into @xmath , the above proof yields a
faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 5.5 Hilbert–Blumenthal modular varieties

As it requires no more work, we mention the case when @xmath is any
algebraic number field. Our interest is in those subgroups of @xmath
commensurable with @xmath . As in the case when @xmath is totally real,
these groups are arithmetic lattices in @xmath , where @xmath is the
number of distinct real embeddings of @xmath and @xmath is the number of
distinct complex embeddings of @xmath . These groups are called
Hilbert–Blumenthal modular groups and the finite volume quotient
manifolds of these groups acting on @xmath are called Hilbert–Blumenthal
modular varieties .

The cusps of these quotients are @xmath –torus bundles, where @xmath and
@xmath . For @xmath and @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The product of these maps yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say @xmath is positive if @xmath is an injective homomorphism. Note
when @xmath is totally real such a @xmath consists of totally positive
numbers. We say an @xmath –torus bundle is @xmath –defined if there
exists a positive subgroup @xmath in @xmath and a faithful
representation of @xmath into @xmath . If in addition, @xmath is
commensurable with @xmath under this representation, we say @xmath is
@xmath –arithmetic .

###### Theorem 5.5.1.

A virtual @xmath –torus bundle @xmath is diffeomorphic to a cusp
cross-section of a Hilbert-Blumenthal modular variety defined over
@xmath if and only if @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic.

The proof of Theorem 5.5.1 is identical to Theorem 1.5.1 —as is Theorem
5.4.1 in this more general setting. As before, for any pair @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath , there exist @xmath –torus bundles which are not
diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of any Hilbert-Blumenthal modular
variety.

We can classify cusp cross-sections of irreducible orbifolds modelled on
the @xmath –fold product ( @xmath ) @xmath whose associated isometry
group is, up to finite index,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . Irreducible lattices in @xmath exist
if and only if each @xmath or @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath for all
@xmath and @xmath , and by Margulis’ arithmeticity theorem [ 28 ] ,
these lattices are always arithmetic.

### 5.6 An obstruction to geometric bounding

Let @xmath be a 1–cusped Hilbert modular surface @xmath with torsion
free fundamental group—we call @xmath a Hilbert modular manifold in this
case. Similar to the thick-thin decomposition of a real hyperbolic
@xmath –manifold, @xmath has a decomposition comprised of a compact
manifold @xmath with boundary @xmath and cusp end @xmath . Following
Schwartz [ 40 ] (see also [ 15 ] ), we call the manifold @xmath the
associated neutered manifold , and note @xmath is a compact 4–manifold
with @xmath 3–manifold boundary. The goal of this section is the
establishment of a nontrivial obstruction for this geometric situation.
The obstruction is obtained by mimicking the argument of Long–Reid [ 26
] for flat 3–manifolds. This in combination with a calculation of
Hirzebruch bears Theorem 1.5.3 from the introduction.

In [ 22 ] , Hirzebruch extended his signature formula to Hilbert modular
surfaces. The formula relates the signature of the neutered manifold
@xmath to a Hirzebruch @xmath –polynomial evaluated on the Pontrjagin
classes of @xmath but with a correction term associated to @xmath . When
@xmath contains torsion, the elliptic singularities also contribute
nontrivially to this correction term, and so for simplicity, we assume
throughout that @xmath is torsion free. In this case, Hirzebruch’s
formula becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a complete set of cusp ends of @xmath given from the
thick-thin decomposition and @xmath denotes the signature of @xmath .
The definition of the terms @xmath are given as follows. Associated to
each cusp end is the @xmath –conjugacy class of a maximal peripheral
subgroup @xmath . The group @xmath is conjugate in @xmath to a subgroup
of the familiar form @xmath . In turn, for the pair @xmath , we have an
associated Shimuzu @xmath –function @xmath —see [ 43 ] —defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the norm map. With this, the invariant @xmath is defined
to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the volume of @xmath with respect to the pairing @xmath
. Equivalently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath –module basis for @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
denote the image of @xmath under the two real embeddings of @xmath into
@xmath .

###### Theorem 5.6.1 (Hirzebruch;[22]).

If @xmath is a Hilbert modular manifold with exactly one cusp, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the unique @xmath –conjugacy class @xmath .

As we seek an integrality condition, it is convenient to change the pair
@xmath . Associated to the @xmath –module @xmath is the dual lattice
@xmath defined to be the image of @xmath under the duality pairing
provided by @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.6.2.

For a horosphere @xmath stabilized by @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are diffeomorphic @xmath 3–manifolds.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the holonomy representations for @xmath and @xmath . The
pairing @xmath can be viewed as an element of @xmath such that @xmath .
By construction @xmath , and so we have an isomorphism @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof is completed by appealing to the smooth rigidity theorem of
Mostow Theorem 2.4.2 . ∎

Hecke [ 21 ] related the @xmath –functions @xmath and @xmath by the
functional equation @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The specialization of this functional equation at @xmath produces

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and thus from this and Theorem 5.6.1 , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is at this point that we take stock in what has been done. For a
1–cusped Hilbert modular manifold @xmath with cusp cross-section @xmath
, we have associated to @xmath the invariant @xmath . As both @xmath and
@xmath depend on the associated @xmath metric on @xmath afforded by its
embedding as a cusp cross-section, the invariant @xmath depends on the
associated @xmath metric on @xmath . Our goal is to use the integrality
of @xmath and ( 5.2 ) to produce an obstruction for @xmath to
topologically occur in this geometric setting. For this, it remains to
show the invariant @xmath is independent of the @xmath structure on
@xmath .

Given a peripheral group @xmath and stabilized horosphere @xmath , the
metric on @xmath endows @xmath with a @xmath –invariant metric @xmath .
Consequently the metric @xmath descends to quotient @xmath and endows
@xmath with a complete @xmath structure that depends on the horosphere
@xmath only up to similarity.

The formula ( 5.2 ) was also established in [ 3 ] (see also [ 32 ] )
where @xmath was reinterpreted as the @xmath –invariant of an adiabatic
limit.

###### Theorem 5.6.3 (Atiyah–Donnely–Singer;[3]).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

More generally, given any @xmath structure @xmath on @xmath , we can
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last ingredient for proof of Theorem 1.5.3 is the independence of
@xmath from @xmath , a result established by Cheeger and Gromov [ 10 ]
(see [ 11 ] for a treatment specific to @xmath ).

###### Theorem 5.6.4 (Cheeger–Gromov;[10]).

@xmath is a topological invariant of the @xmath 3–manifold @xmath .

We are now in position to state and prove the principal observation
needed in the proof of Theorem 1.5.3 (compare with [ 26 ] ).

###### Theorem 5.6.5.

If @xmath is diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of a 1–cusped Hilbert
modular manifold, then @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath arises as a cusp cross-section of a 1–cusped Hilbert modular
manifold @xmath , then there is an isometric embedding @xmath onto a
cusp cross-section of @xmath . Let @xmath with associated horosphere
@xmath selected such that @xmath is embedded in @xmath . By Proposition
5.6.2 , @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath , though equipped with the
metric @xmath . From the computation above in combination with Theorem
5.6.3 , @xmath and by Theorem 5.6.4 , the right hand side depends only
on the topological type of @xmath . Since @xmath is in @xmath , @xmath
is in @xmath as asserted. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 1.5.3.

To prove Theorem 1.5.3 , by Theorem 5.6.5 , it suffices to find a @xmath
3–manifold @xmath for which @xmath . For @xmath , the standard Hilbert
modular surface @xmath over @xmath has precisely one cusp, since the
number of cusps of a standard Hilbert modular surface over @xmath is the
ideal class number of @xmath . Setting @xmath to be an embedding cusp
cross-section of @xmath , the proof is completed by appealing to [ 22 ]
. Specifically, Hirzebruch showed @xmath . ∎

###### Remark.

It is unknown to the author whether or not there exist 1–cusped Hilbert
modular manifolds. In addition, the number fields @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath also have standard Hilbert modular surfaces with precisely one
cusp for which the associated invariant @xmath . In each of these cases,
@xmath (see [ 22 , p. 236] ).

## Chapter 6 Examples and low dimensional considerations

### 6.1 Prime order holonomy

For an AB-group @xmath modelled on @xmath with cyclic order @xmath
holonomy, @xmath , where @xmath is an odd prime, the holonomy is
necessarily complex and acts trivially on the center of the Fitting
subgroup. Taking the quotient of @xmath by its center gives birth to a
@xmath –dimensional Bieberbach group with @xmath –holonomy. Hence, there
exists a faithful representation of @xmath into @xmath afforded to us by
the Bieberbach theorems. This can occur only when @xmath , and that such
AB-groups exist in dimension @xmath can be shown by explicit
construction. The following proposition shows the existence of
infinitely many AB-groups modelled on @xmath (for infinitely many @xmath
) which are not arithmetically admissible.

###### Proposition 6.1.1.

If @xmath is an AB-groups modelled on @xmath with holonomy @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath is arithmetically admissible, then @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath is arithmetically admissible, by Corollary 4.4.1 , there
exists a faithful representation ( @xmath is an imaginary quadratic
number field)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the field generated by the traces of @xmath for a
generator @xmath of @xmath and note @xmath is contained in @xmath . The
representation @xmath is conjugate to one which decomposes into a direct
sum of characters @xmath . Each of these characters @xmath is of the
form @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is faithful, for some @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By considering the cyclotomic polynomial @xmath , we deduce @xmath is
not in @xmath and so @xmath is a nontrivial extension of @xmath . On the
other hand, from the decomposition above, @xmath is contained in @xmath
. As @xmath , it must be that @xmath . Hence @xmath contains an
imaginary quadratic extension of @xmath . By quadratic reciprocity, this
can happen if and only if @xmath . ∎

It is worth noting for @xmath , Corollary 4.4.1 can be used to show such
AB-groups are arithmetically admissible and the field @xmath is the
unique imaginary quadratic number field in @xmath . Moreover, the
holonomy generator acts by the matrix @xmath .

###### Remark.

When @xmath , we get an obstruction without appealing to Theorem 4.3.2 .
In this case, we have an injection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So long as @xmath , this implies @xmath .

In the quaternionic setting, take @xmath modelled on @xmath with @xmath
–holonomy where the action of @xmath on the center of @xmath is trivial.
If @xmath is arithmetically admissible, we obtain an injection of @xmath
into @xmath , a ramified quaternion algebra over @xmath . However, this
is impossible since such @xmath do not contain elements of order five
(see [ 2 ] or [ 47 ] ). Thus @xmath cannot be arithmetically admissible.

###### Proposition 6.1.2.

There exists infinitely many nonarithmetically admissible AB-groups
modelled on @xmath .

### 6.2 Central products

In the complex setting, we get arithmetically inadmissible examples in
every dimension by a gluing constructing we call the central product .
The details are as follows. For a pair of AB-groups @xmath modelled on
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the generator of the center of the Fitting subgroup
@xmath of @xmath and @xmath denotes the normal closure of @xmath in
@xmath . We call this the central product of @xmath and @xmath . The
following lemma shows under some mild assumptions, the central product
is also an AB-group modelled on @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.1.

If the holonomy groups @xmath are either both complex or both
anticomplex, then @xmath is an AB-group modelled on @xmath .

###### Proof.

As we only wield this when the holonomy groups are complex, the
anticomplex case is left for the reader. To begin, we have natural
inclusions of @xmath and @xmath into @xmath induced by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In fact, this yields inclusions of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a result, we have an injective homomorphism of @xmath onto an
AB-group in @xmath . By selecting the maps @xmath , we can ensure the
induced maps agree on the center of the Fitting subgroups of @xmath and
@xmath . With this selection, the induced map becomes an isomorphism of
@xmath with an AB-group in @xmath , as desired. ∎

Using central products we can construct many arithmetically inadmissible
AB-groups. We summarize this in the following theorem which proves
Theorem 1.2.1 (a).

###### Theorem 6.2.2 (Central product theorem).

If @xmath and @xmath be AB-groups modelled on @xmath and @xmath ,
defined over @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and @xmath and @xmath are
both complex or anticomplex, then

-   @xmath is @xmath –defined,

-   @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic if and only if both @xmath and @xmath
    are @xmath –arithmetic, and

-    there exist arithmetically inadmissible AB-groups modelled on
    @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

For (a), let @xmath and @xmath denote the maximal compact groups defined
over @xmath and @xmath for which @xmath injects into the @xmath –points
of @xmath . Associated to each of these maximal compact groups is a
@xmath –defined hermitian form @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
associated maximal compact subgroup. @xmath is @xmath –define and we
have an injection (into the @xmath –points)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is @xmath –defined.

For (b), if @xmath is @xmath –arithmetic, then @xmath is isomorphic to a
maximal peripheral subgroup of an arithmetic lattice @xmath in @xmath ,
where @xmath is a signature @xmath hermitian form defined over an
imaginary quadratic number field @xmath . It must be that @xmath injects
into a subgroup @xmath of @xmath which is maximal with respect to
stabilizing a @xmath –defined complex subspace @xmath . As @xmath is an
arithmetic lattice in a smaller isometry group (whose model form is the
restriction of @xmath to the complex subspace @xmath ), this implies
@xmath is @xmath –arithmetic for @xmath . The reverse implication
follows immediately from (a).

For (c), by Proposition 6.1.1 , there exists an arithmetically
inadmissible AB-group modelled on @xmath . To obtain examples in higher
dimensions, we take central products of this example with other
AB-groups and apply (b). ∎

The quaternionic setting can be handled similarly. We construct examples
in every dimension by taking central products with the inadmissible
example @xmath in @xmath given above.

###### Corollary 6.2.3.

There exist arithmetically inadmissible AB-groups modelled on @xmath for
all @xmath .

### 6.3 @xmath 3–manifolds and the proof of Theorem 1.2.2

Fix a closed @xmath 3–manifold @xmath with @xmath . By the generalized
Bieberbach theorems (see [ 14 ] ), to prove Theorem 1.2.2 , it suffices
to show @xmath , where @xmath is an arithmetic lattice in @xmath . In
fact, by Theorem 3.3.1 it suffices to construct an injective
homomorphism @xmath . To this end, let @xmath and @xmath be the isometry
of @xmath induced by conjugation. For a subring @xmath , we define
@xmath with the induced group operation and set @xmath . For the
statement of our next result, let @xmath be a primitive third root of
unity, say @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.3.1.

If @xmath is a closed @xmath 3–manifold @xmath and @xmath , then there
exists a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

We begin by summarizing the strategy of the proof, which depends heavily
on the list of presentations for the fundamental group of a closed
@xmath 3–manifold found in the appendix. The idea is to show an
injective homomorphism on the Fitting subgroup @xmath can be promoted to
the full 3–manifold group (see [ 14 , Thm 3.1.3] ). To get a
representation with the coefficients in @xmath or @xmath , we are
reduced to solving some simple equations. The details are as follows.

In the lemma below, let @xmath be projection onto the first factor.

###### Lemma 6.3.2.

-    If @xmath and @xmath are as above,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is a homomorphism, @xmath and @xmath are @xmath –linearly
    independent, and @xmath , then @xmath is injective.

-    In addition, if

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and @xmath is an injective homomorphism, then @xmath is an injective
    homomorphism.

###### Proof.

For (a), let @xmath be in @xmath , write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it must be that @xmath as @xmath . With this we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is in @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath –linear independence of @xmath and @xmath implies @xmath .
Therefore @xmath , and so @xmath , as @xmath .

For (b), let @xmath be in @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this form of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By assumption

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is contained in @xmath . This in tandem with ( 6.1 )
implies @xmath is in @xmath . However @xmath is one-to-one, and so
@xmath . ∎

For (b), we only require that if @xmath then @xmath . Indeed, we need
only check for @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is the first integer such
that @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

Let @xmath and define two homomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This determines @xmath , since some power of @xmath is a commutator of
@xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 6.3.2 (a), both maps are injective
homomorphisms.

We extend this to @xmath by declaring

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

To solve Equation ( 6.2 ), we simply use the presentations in the
appendix to ensure this yields a homomorphism. By applying Lemma 6.3.2
(b), one can see these solutions yield injective homomorphisms. For
clarity, we solve the equations for the second family (2) and give a
list of the equations and solutions for the seventh family (7).

The second family has presentation

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with @xmath . For this family we take the map @xmath . First, consider
the relation @xmath . Under @xmath , the left hand side becomes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath .

Next, consider the relation @xmath . Under @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In particular, @xmath . If @xmath , the above injection would yield an
isomorphism between a group in the first family with a group in the
second family. This is impossible, therefore @xmath . By considering the
first coordinate equation with @xmath , we get no information. The
second coordinate equation is @xmath , therefore @xmath . One can now
check that @xmath , regardless of @xmath .

Now, we take the relation @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

On the other hand,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The first and last coordinate equations yield no information, while the
second coordinate equation yields @xmath . Hence @xmath .

Lastly, we have the relation @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

On the other hand,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As above, the first and second coordinates yields no information, while
the second coordinate implies @xmath .

Hence, we deduce from the above computations, the desired homomorphism
@xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Visibly, these solutions are in @xmath and not @xmath . This is
rectified by conjugating the above representation by a dilation of
@xmath . This dilation is linear on the first factor, quadratic on the
second factor, and trivial on the third factor. The resulting faithful
representation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The faithfulness of @xmath follows from Lemma 6.3.2 (b) upon verifying
the conditions of this lemma are met. The injectivity of @xmath follows
from Lemma 6.3.2 (a). To check

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by the remark proceeding the proof of Lemma 6.3.2 , it suffices to show
@xmath is not in @xmath , the validity of which obvious.

For the seventh family (7), we have the presentation

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We take @xmath in this case. By considering all the relations, we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We omit the last relation @xmath as it is quite long. Note the
commutator relations (aside from @xmath ) are all trivially satisfied.
Solving these equations and conjugating by a dilation of @xmath to get
the coefficients in @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

That this is faithful again follows from Lemma 6.3.2 and the remark
following its proof.

The other remaining families are handled similarly and in the appendix,
we provide a list of the matrices obtained from this venture and the
post-composition of the resulting representation with @xmath (see
below). ∎

The proof of Theorem 1.2.2 is completed by following the injection
@xmath from Theorem 6.3.1 with the injection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.4 Infranil 5–manifolds

Using the list of isomorphism types of holonomy groups for infranil
5–manifolds given in [ 13 ] , we can carry out the same analysis.

###### Proposition 6.4.1.

The only complex holonomy groups which yield arithmetically inadmissible
groups are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

To see this, by Corollary 4.4.1 , it suffices to check the field of
definition for all the distinct representations of the holonomy group in
@xmath . For most of the groups, every representation will be conjugate
to one defined over an imaginary quadratic number field. Both @xmath and
@xmath can arise via central products of @xmath 3–manifold groups for
which Theorem 6.2.2 can be applied to show the resulting AB-groups are
arithmetically inadmissible. For @xmath –holonomy, we can apply
Proposition 6.1.1 , which in turn yields the result for @xmath
–holonomy, since any arithmetic representation for an AB-group with
@xmath –holonomy would yield one for an AB-group with @xmath –holonomy.

### 6.5 @xmath 3–manifolds

In [ 42 ] , Scott proved every @xmath –torus bundles admits either a
Euclidean, @xmath , or @xmath structure. The following essentially
establishes Theorem 1.5.2 .

###### Proposition 6.5.1.

If @xmath is an orientable @xmath –torus bundle which admits a @xmath
structure, then there exists a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some real quadratic number field @xmath .

###### Proof.

For any @xmath –torus bundle @xmath , let the @xmath –action be given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the order of @xmath is finite, then @xmath is a Bieberbach group and
@xmath admits a Euclidean structure. Therefore we assume the @xmath is
not a torsion element. If @xmath is not diagonalizable, then some power
of @xmath is conjugate to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . In this case, @xmath admits a @xmath structure. Thus, we
assume @xmath is diagonalizable, and in this case we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a conjugate of @xmath . It follows, since @xmath , that @xmath and
@xmath are algebraic integers in the real quadratic field @xmath . Thus
the representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is conjugate to @xmath , where @xmath is given by @xmath . Therefore by
the remark following Theorem 5.4.1 , we have a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as asserted. ∎

Via Proposition 6.5.1 , every @xmath 3–manifold group does faithfully
represent into @xmath . Those arising as cusp cross-sections of Hilbert
modular surfaces are precisely the ones whose fundamental group
faithfully represents into the identity component of @xmath . However,
the quotients of those groups which fail to map into the identity
component do produce finite volume quotients which possess 2–fold covers
that are Hilbert modular surfaces. For this reason, we call such
quotients generalized Hilbert modular varieties . Given this, Theorem
1.5.2 follows from this discussion in combination with Theorem 1.5.1 .

### 6.6 Two @xmath examples

The following example illustrates the ideas in the proofs of Theorem
5.4.1 and Theorem 1.5.2 .

###### Example 6.6.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath –torus bundle with @xmath –action given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this action, @xmath has a presentation of the form (we are assuming
@xmath is a split extension which is always the case; see [ 42 ] )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To obtain a faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some quadratic number field @xmath , we first compute the
eigenvalues of @xmath . The characteristic polynomial for @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has roots @xmath . Let @xmath and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are to be determined. Using the presentation
above, we are now reduced to solving a system of equations in @xmath ,
and @xmath to ensure @xmath is an injective homomorphism. By
construction @xmath . The other two relations yield the equations

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Solving, we get the faithful representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a totally real, cubic Galois extension of @xmath and
@xmath be of infinite order. By restricting scalars, we can view @xmath
as an element of @xmath . Let @xmath be a @xmath –torus bundle with
@xmath –action given by @xmath . Following the proof of Theorem 5.4.1 ,
we can construct a faithful representation of @xmath into @xmath . On
the other hand, any Hilbert modular group defined over @xmath cannot
contain @xmath as a finite index subgroup, since @xmath .

The following example is a specific case of the above.

###### Example 6.6.2.

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be the @xmath –torus bundle with @xmath –action given by
@xmath . The characteristic polynomial for @xmath is @xmath . This
polynomial is irreducible over @xmath and has totally real cubic
splitting field. Thus, @xmath is a @xmath –torus bundle which is not
diffeomorphic to a cusp cross-section of any generalized Hilbert modular
variety. However, for the splitting field @xmath of @xmath , we do have
an injection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 7 Presentation of @xmath 3–manifold groups

The following is a complete list of closed @xmath 3–manifold groups (see
[ 14 , p. 159–166] ).

-   -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    @xmath and @xmath or @xmath and @xmath .

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    with @xmath and

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    with @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    or

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

## Chapter 8 Solutions to Equation (6.2)

Below are the resulting matrices obtained by solving Equation ( 6.2 )
and post-composing with the representation @xmath .

(1)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(2)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(3)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(4)

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(5)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(6)

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and @xmath .

(7)

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath .