The dominant theme of this thesis is that random matrix valued analytic
functions , generalizing both random matrices and random analytic
functions, for many purposes can (and perhaps should) be effectively
studied in that level of generality.

We study zeros of random analytic functions in one complex variable. It
is known that there is a one parameter family of Gaussian analytic
functions with zero sets that are stationary in each of the three
symmetric spaces, namely the plane, the sphere and the unit disk, under
the corresponding group of isometries.

We show a way to generate non Gaussian random analytic functions whose
zero sets are also stationary in the same domains. There are particular
cases where the exact distribution of the zero set turns out to belong
to an important class of point processes known as determinantal point
processes.

Apart from questions regarding the exact distribution of zero sets, we
also study certain asymptotic properties. We show asymptotic normality
for smooth statistics applied to zeros of these random analytic
functions. Lastly, we present some results on certain large deviation
problems for the zeros of the planar and hyperbolic Gaussian analytic
functions.

\abstractsignature

\degreeyear

2006 \degreesemester Spring \degree Doctor of Philosophy \chair
Professor Yuval Peres \othermembers Professor Michael Christ
Professor Steven N. Evans
Professor Jim Pitman

\numberofmembers

4 \prevdegrees M. Stat. (Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta, India)
2001 \field Statistics \campus Berkeley

\approvalpage \copyrightpage {dedication}

To all my teachers.
