#

Das ewig Unbegreifliche an der Welt ist ihre Begreiflichkeit.

Werner Karl Heisenberg

0] Contents Contents]0

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Classical Analysis
    -    2.1 Dilaton Gravity in Two Dimensions with Fermions
        -    2.1.1 Equivalence between First and Second Order
            Formulation
        -    2.1.2 Classical Solutions
        -    2.1.3 Conformally Related Theories
        -    2.1.4 Fermions
    -    2.2 Hamiltonian Analysis
        -    2.2.1 Primary and Secondary Constraints
        -    2.2.2 Algebra of Secondary Constraints
        -    2.2.3 Relation to the Conformal Algebra
    -    2.3 BRST Gauge Fixing
-    3 Nonperturbative Quantization of Geometry
    -    3.1 Ghosts and Second Class Constraints
    -    3.2 On the Path Integral Measure
    -    3.3 The Remaining Gauge Fields
    -    3.4 Ambiguous Terms
    -    3.5 Conformal Properties of the Effective Action
-    4 Perturbative Treatment of the Matter Fields
    -    4.1 One-Loop Effects and Bosonization
        -    4.1.1 Zeta Function Regularization and the Heat Kernel
        -    4.1.2 Conformal Anomaly
        -    4.1.3 Chiral Anomaly
    -    4.2 Lowest Order Vertices
        -    4.2.1 Effective Geometry and the Virtual Black Hole
        -    4.2.2 Four-Point Vertices
    -    4.3 Asymptotic Matter States
-    5 Conclusions and Possible Further Developments
    -    5.1 Summary and Conclusions
        -    5.1.1 Classical Analysis
        -    5.1.2 Nonperturbative Quantization of Geometry
        -    5.1.3 Matter Perturbation Theory and Bosonization
    -    5.2 Possible Extensions
-    A Notational Conventions
-    B Details from Ch. 2
    -    B.1 Poisson Brackets of the Secondary with the Second Class
        Constraints
    -    B.2 Dirac Brackets used in Sec. 2.2.3
    -    B.3 Calculations from Sec. 2.3

0] ]0

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Gleichwohl müßten die Atome zufolge der inneratomischen
Elektronenbewegung nicht nur elektromagnetische, sondern auch
Gravitationsenergie ausstrahlen, wenn auch in winzigem Betrage. Da dies
in Wahrheit in der Natur nicht zutreffen dürfte, so scheint es, daß die
Quantentheorie nicht nur die Maxwellsche Elektrodynamik, sondern auch
die neue Gravitationstheorie wird modifizieren müssen.

Albert Einstein [ 1 ]

Today, ninety years after Albert Einstein’s discovery of General
Relativity [ 2 , 3 ] and eighty years after the advent of quantum
mechanics with the seminal papers by Heisenberg and Schrödinger [ 4 , 5
] , an end of the search for a consistent and unique quantum theory of
gravity is still not in sight. Many different approaches (cf. e.g. the
recent progress report [ 6 ] ) are available, amongst which the most
prominent ones are loop quantum gravity and string theory , all
stressing different aspects and succeeding in solving different problems
while at the same time suffering from different drawbacks. The failure
of our efforts in quantizing gravity until now can be traced back to
conceptual and partly to technical issues. Concerning the conceptual
problems, the foundations of general relativity, namely a dynamical
space-time with no preferred reference frame, seem to be incompatible
with the needs of quantum theory, which in its Hamiltonian formulation
requires a choice of a preferred time direction and thus violates
general covariance. Also the notion of causality in quantum field theory
becomes meaningless if the metric of the underlying space-time is
subject to quantum fluctuations which so to speak “smear out” the causal
structure. On a deeper level, quantum gravity requires the quantization
of space-time itself, a notion which first has to be given proper
meaning by stating which the valid observables are for such a quantum
space-time. Technical difficulties arise mostly from the already
complicated and highly nonlinear structure of general relativity. But if
the classical dynamics of gravity already is this complicated, one can
not expect quantization to be a much easier task.

One way to a better understanding of the conceptual issues behind
quantum gravity is to consider gravitation in lower dimensions to
simplify the dynamics of the theory. Experience with quantum field
theory on Minkowski space shows that models in two dimensions often
exhibit integrable or even topological structures, which makes them
particularly interesting to study. Unfortunately, Einstein-Hilbert
gravity in two dimensions is too simple - the action functional is just
the Gauss-Bonnet term yielding the Euler number of the space-time
manifold. The simplest way to generalize the Hilbert action by
introducing an additional scalar field – the dilaton – leads to
Generalized Dilaton Theories described by the action ( 2.1 ), which was
first introduced in full generality in [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] . ¹ ¹ 1 For a
concise history of the topic cf. e.g. the review [ 10 ] . In their first
order formulation described by the action ( 2.3 ), which was first given
in this general form in [ 11 , 12 ] , the dynamics of this class of
theories indeed simplifies such that all classical solutions can be
obtained explicitly [ 13 ] and a global classification of all
generalized dilaton theories can be given [ 14 ] . In this context a
background independent [ 15 ] and nonperturbative path integral
quantization of first order gravity without matter [ 16 ] , coupled to
real scalar fields [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] , of dilaton supergravity in two
dimensions [ 20 , 21 ] and of dilaton gravity in Euclidean space-time [
22 ] is possible. Also the role of time was discussed [ 23 ] in the
context of Dirac quantization of dilaton gravity [ 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ] ²
² 2 These are only the most influential papers on that topic. A complete
list of references can be found in chapter 9 of [ 10 ] . .

In this thesis I consider the exact path integral quantization of first
order gravity in two dimensions coupled to Dirac fermions. ³ ³ 3 Such
models were first considered on the level of classical solutions [ 28 ,
29 , 30 ] and used later on in studies of the evaporation of charged
CGHS [ 31 ] black holes [ 32 , 33 ] . Interesting by itself because it
has been a blind spot in the literature on quantum dilaton gravity until
now, the main motivation of this analysis is the comparison to the
scalar case [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] . The quantum equivalence between the
massive Thirring model and the Sine-Gordon model in flat Minkowski space
[ 34 , 35 ] has recently been applied [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] to semi-classical
studies of two-dimensional dilaton gravity electrodynamics, with the
matter model treated as a quantized theory on a classical background
described by the dilaton gravity theory. As it is already known how to
nonperturbatively quantize dilaton gravity coupled to scalar fields in
the path integral formalism, the study of the corresponding fermionic
systems is a prerequisite for investigating whether and how bosonization
could carry over to the quantum (dilaton) gravity regime.

The structure of this thesis is as follows:

-    Chapter 2 presents the constraint analysis of two-dimensional
    dilaton gravity in its first order formulation coupled to Dirac
    fermions. After calculating the algebra of first class constraints
    the BRST charge is constructed, the phase space is enlarged by a
    ghost sector and Eddington-Finkelstein gauge is fixed by
    constructing a BRST invariant Hamiltonian.

-    In chapter 3 the first order gravity sector of the theory is
    quantized nonperturbatively using the Feynman path integral
    approach, resulting in an effective action which still depends on
    the Dirac fermions.

-    The remaining path integral quantization of the Dirac fermions is
    carried out by means of perturbation theory in chapter 4 . For
    massless and minimally coupled fermions chiral and conformal
    anomalies are used to calculate the one-loop approximation of the
    total effective action of the system. The gravitationally induced
    four-fermi scattering vertices are derived.

-    Chapter 5 contains a summary of the results, conclusions and an
    outlook to possible further developments.

## Chapter 2 Classical Analysis

### 2.1 Dilaton Gravity in Two Dimensions with Fermions

The field theoretic system considered in this thesis consists of two
sectors, a geometric one and a matter sector. The geometric sector
consists of a scalar field @xmath called the dilaton field and the
metric @xmath on a (1+1) dimensional space-time manifold with signature
@xmath and is described by the Generalized Dilaton Gravity action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being the Ricci scalar associated with the metric @xmath and
@xmath the Levi-Civita connection. The functions @xmath and @xmath are
specifying the model under consideration. Table 2.1 gives a list of
models fitting into this action.

Introducing a Zweibein @xmath and a dual dyad 1-form @xmath which are
related to each other and to the metric by ¹ ¹ 1 For conventions used
throughout this thesis, see App. A .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

the first order gravity action

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

is equivalent to ( 2.1 ) for potentials [ 10 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantity @xmath denotes the volume form on the manifold. The fields
@xmath are Lagrange multipliers for the torsion 2-form, which in turn is
defined by Cartan’s first structure equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being the local Lorentz covariant derivative written as a
1-form. The spin connection is required to be metric compatible and thus
antisymmetric [ 61 ] , @xmath , but first order gravity allows for
torsion if @xmath . Because the Lorentz group in two dimensions, @xmath
, has only one generator, @xmath , the spin connection can then be
expressed as @xmath . The quantity @xmath in ( 2.3 ) is the curvature
2-form related to the spin connection by Cartan’s second structure
equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It is related to the Ricci scalar by @xmath . Using ( A.4 ) and ( A.5 )
this relation is inverted, yielding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This Ricci scalar however differs from the one in eq. ( 2.1 ) by the
torsion part of the spin connection. Only for theories with vanishing
torsion @xmath both definitions coincide (also cf. the remarks in sec.
4.2.1 on eqs. ( 4.88 ) and ( 4.93 )).

#### 2.1.1 Equivalence between First and Second Order Formulation

The equivalence between first order gravity ( 2.3 ) and generalized
dilaton theories ( 2.1 ) is established in two steps [ 10 ] . First one
decomposes the spin connection into a Levi-Civita part @xmath and a
torsion part @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Levi-Civita spin connection explicitly reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

has vanishing torsion @xmath and will be considered fixed from now on.
The second step is to use the equations of motion following from varying
eq. ( 2.3 ) with respect to @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

to eliminate both the Lagrange multipliers @xmath and the torsion part
@xmath of the spin connection. Wedge multiplying eq. ( 2.12 ) with
@xmath from the right, using eq. ( A.9 ) and taking the Hodge dual
yields the solution for the Lagrange multipliers

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Decomposing @xmath , a similar calculation for the class of potentials (
2.4 ) yields from eq. ( 2.11 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The torsion part of the spin connection thus vanishes if and only if
@xmath . Inserting eq. ( 2.9 ) into ( 2.3 ) gives after using the
torsionlessness of the Levi-Civita connection, eq. ( 2.8 ) and a partial
integration

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

After inserting eq. ( 2.14 ) into eq. ( 2.15 ) and using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the third and fourth term in ( 2.15 ) cancel and the last one yields the
kinetic term for the dilaton in ( 2.1 ). This proves the equivalence of
the first order gravity action eq. ( 2.3 ) and the dilaton gravity
action eq. ( 2.1 ) for potentials of the form eq. ( 2.4 ). The above
calculation also holds for first order gravity coupled to matter fields
which do neither couple to the Lagrange multipliers @xmath nor to the
spin connection @xmath , so that the equations of motion ( 2.11 ) and (
2.12 ) do not receive additional matter contributions. It holds in
particular for fermions which in general do couple to the spin
connection through their kinetic term, but not in dimension two (cf.
sec. 2.1.4 ). Under the same restrictions the equivalence proof given in
[ 16 ] for the corresponding quantum theories without matter also
applies to the case with matter.

#### 2.1.2 Classical Solutions

First order gravity ( 2.3 ) is an integrable system [ 10 ] , i.e. all
classical solutions can be obtained in a closed form. Although
integrability is lost in general if matter is added, only one
integration cannot be carried out explicitly. First denote the
variations of the matter Lagrangian by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices @xmath denote light cone coordinates ( A.1 ) in
tangent and cotangent space. A coupling of matter to the spin connection
is not considered, because neither fermions in two dimensions nor
scalars do couple in such a way. The equations of motion corresponding
to variations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In a patch with @xmath a new one-form @xmath can be introduced and eq. (
2.18 ) with the upper sign gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

while eq. ( 2.17 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these two solutions plus eq. ( 2.20 ) with the upper sign (and
@xmath ) one derives the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , which corresponds to (anti)chiral fermions (cf. eq. ( 2.50
)) and (anti)self-dual scalars ² ² 2 The (anti)self-dual components of a
real scalar field @xmath are defined by @xmath . In these terms the
action for a non-minimally coupled free scalar reads @xmath . , the
Ansatz @xmath (with @xmath defined in ( 2.35 ) below) leads to @xmath ,
which can be integrated by use of the Poincaré Lemma to @xmath . This
exact integration is not possible for general matter contributions. The
classical solutions obtained in this way are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The theory exhibits an absolute, i.e. in space and time, conserved
quantity [ 62 , 63 , 13 ] (with @xmath defined in ( 2.34 ) below)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The line element for the solutions reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity @xmath encodes information about the horizons of the
solutions, which lie at @xmath . In the absence of matter @xmath it can
with the help of the conserved quantity be rewritten as @xmath , which
immediately shows the existence of a Killing vector @xmath for all
dilaton gravity models. The corresponding Killing norm reads @xmath .

For the sake of completeness it should be mentioned that in addition to
the vacuum solutions obtained above which are labeled by the conserved
quantity @xmath , isolated solutions (cf. e.g. [ 55 ] ) with constant
dilaton @xmath , so-called constant dilaton vacua (CDV), exist if @xmath
both vanish in some open region. Eq. ( 2.18 ) restricts the value of the
dilaton to be one of the zeroes of the potential @xmath , @xmath . The
curvature for these solutions is constant (cf. eq. ( 2.19 )),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The geometry of the constant dilaton vacua is thus Anti-de Sitter space
( @xmath ), de Sitter space ( @xmath ) and Minkowski or Rindler space (
@xmath ). ³ ³ 3 In the conventions of [ 10 ] , which are adopted in this
thesis, the sphere has negative curvature.

#### 2.1.3 Conformally Related Theories

Although first order gravity ( 2.3 ) is not conformally invariant,
dilaton dependent conformal transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with a conformal factor @xmath map a model with potentials @xmath to one
with ⁴ ⁴ 4 The action picks up a boundary term @xmath . @xmath . Thus
one can always transform to a conformal frame with @xmath , which
simplifies the equations of motion considerably, do calculations there
and afterwards transform back to the original conformal frame. The
expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invariant under conformal transformations, whereas

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

captures the information about the conformal frame.

#### 2.1.4 Fermions

The action for a Dirac fermion in two dimensions (see App. A for
conventions) consists of a kinetic term ⁵ ⁵ 5 The derivative acting on
both sides is defined as @xmath . The sign difference between [ 64 ] and
this thesis for @xmath stems from the differing sign of @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a general self-interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath and @xmath are the dilaton coupling functions. If
they are constant one speaks of minimally coupled matter, and of
non-minimally coupled matter otherwise. Because of the Grassmann
property of the spinor field the self-interaction can in two dimensions
at most include a mass term and a Thirring term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant contribution in this Taylor expansion of @xmath has been
set to zero because it would only shift the dilaton potential @xmath .

In two dimensions the kinetic term is independent of the spin
connection. In arbitrary dimension, the kinetic term for fermions on a
curved background reads ⁶ ⁶ 6 The abbreviation “h.c.” means hermitian
conjugate. [ 65 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath there is only one independent generator of Lorentz
transformations @xmath , and with @xmath the terms in ( 2.36 )
containing the spin connection vanish,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

This simplifies the constraint algebra and is one of the reasons why the
path integral over the geometric sector can be carried out explicitly.
In higher dimensions there would be a multiplicative coupling between
the Vielbeine and the spin connection. Only in two dimensions the whole
Lagrangian turns out to be at most linear in the geometric fields @xmath
and @xmath .

### 2.2 Hamiltonian Analysis

Henceforth we denote the canonical coordinates and momenta by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The canonical structure on the phase space is given by graded equal-time
Poisson brackets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are canonical momenta for the spinors defined by @xmath
( @xmath is the usual left derivative on Grassmann numbers). The graded
Poisson bracket is defined as [ 66 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.44)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath and @xmath being bosonic ( @xmath ) and fermionic ( @xmath )
canonical pairs, respectively. @xmath and @xmath are functions on the
phase space with definite Grassmann parities @xmath , @xmath . In this
chapter three main properties of this bracket will be frequently used,
namely the symmetry property, the Leibniz rule and the graded Jacobi
identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.47)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Henceforth the graded Poisson bracket will just be referred to as
“Poisson bracket” except for where the distinction is crucial.

#### 2.2.1 Primary and Secondary Constraints

The system under consideration admits both primary first and second
class constraints. A look at the component form of the Lagrangian,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.49)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.50)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , shows that there do not occur any time (i.e. @xmath )
derivatives of the @xmath and thus the corresponding canonical momenta
@xmath are constrained to zero,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The symbol @xmath denotes weak equality, i.e. equality on the constraint
surface.

Because the kinetic term for the fermions is of first order in time
derivatives, the fermion momenta @xmath are related to the spinor
components by another set of primary constraints,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which have nonvanishing Poisson brackets with each other,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and thus are of second class according to Dirac’s classification of
constraints [ 67 ] if the matrix ( 2.57 ) has maximal rank. In
Eddington-Finkelstein gauge @xmath , which will become very important
later on, the condition for a horizon is @xmath . The Dirac matrix (
2.57 ) thus has maximal rank away from horizons and the four constraints
( 2.53 )-( 2.56 ) are all of second class. On horizons it has rank two,
but the rank never vanishes for a nondegenerate metric. Thus on a
horizon second class constraints are converted into first class ones,
i.e. on the horizon more gauge symmetries are present than away from it.
This phenomenom was first mentioned by t’Hooft [ 68 ] and appears in
several settings, see [ 69 ] and references therein. As mentioned in
sec. 5.2 , it also seems to be connected to the problem of black hole
universality.

The @xmath are independent of the @xmath and thus commute even in the
strong sense with the other three primary constraints @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having computed all the momenta, one obtains the Hamiltonian density
from the Lagrangian ( 2.48 ) by means of ordinary Legendre
transformation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.59)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.60)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To deal with the second class constraints one introduces the Dirac
bracket [ 67 , 66 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the subscripts @xmath , @xmath denoting functions evaluated at the
corresponding points in space. It inherits the properties ( 2.45 ), (
2.46 ) and ( 2.47 ) from the graded Poisson bracket. @xmath is the
inverse of the matrix-valued distribution ( 2.57 ) defined such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all test functions @xmath . It reads explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Demanding the primary first class constraints @xmath not to change
during time evolution, i.e. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Henceforth, a prime in a Dirac or
Poisson bracket means evaluation of the function at a point @xmath ,
whereas a prime on a function not being an argument of some bracket
denotes differentiation with respect to the argument of the function.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields secondary constraints

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.65)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the first order gravity constraints [ 16 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian density turns out to be constrained to zero, as expected
for a generally covariant system [ 66 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where a boundary term @xmath on the right hand side has been dropped.
Working with smeared constraints ( @xmath is some test function)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

and with the Hamiltonian rather than the Hamiltonian density one finds
that the secondary constraints ( 2.65 )-( 2.67 ) aquire boundary terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the boundaries of the @xmath -direction of
space-time. The Hamiltonian with the @xmath playing the role of smearing
functions turns out to be a sum over constraints even in the presence of
boundaries,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is true for first order gravity supplemented by a Gibbons-Hawking
boundary term, as shown in [ 69 ] , as well as without any additional
boundary terms in the action.

The secondary constraints have vanishing Dirac bracket with the @xmath
because both the @xmath and @xmath are independent of the @xmath . They
also trivially commute with the primary second class constraints, @xmath
, because of the definition of the Dirac bracket. For the same reason
the @xmath do not give rise to new secondary constraints.

#### 2.2.2 Algebra of Secondary Constraints

Dirac conjectured [ 67 ] that every first class constraint generates a
gauge symmetry. The proof of this conjecture is possible in a very
general setting [ 70 ] , but making some additional assumptions (see
paragraph 3.3.2 of [ 66 ] ) to rule out “pathological” examples
simplifies it. These assumptions are fulfilled in our case, because 1.
every constraint belongs to a well defined generation; 2. the Dirac
bracket ensures that the primary second class constraints do not
generate new ones and, as will be seen below, the secondary constraints
are of first class and thus there are no further constraints generated
by them; and 3. every primary first class constraint @xmath generates
exactly one @xmath .

To show that the system does not admit any ternary constraints it is
sufficient to show that the algebra of secondary constraints closes
weakly, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus the secondary constraints are preserved under the time
evolution generated through the Dirac bracket,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To calculate all the Dirac brackets, one first needs the Poisson
brackets @xmath . They are rather lengthy and thus listed in Appendix
B.1 , together with some remarks on the actual calculation. The
resulting algebra of secondary constraints reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.76)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It should be noted that the algebra for minimally coupled fermions with
zero mass and without self-interaction was already computed in [ 71 ] .
The right hand sides vanish weakly, and thus the secondary constraints
do not generate new constraints and the Dirac procedure stops at this
level. The algebra still closes like in the case of a compact Lie
groups, @xmath , but rather with structure functions than with
constants. The second term in ( 2.79 ) deserves some remarks. Without
it, the algebra would be just the one obtained for first order gravity
without matter [ 16 ] . It vanishes for minimal coupling, i.e. for
@xmath For @xmath and @xmath it becomes proportional to @xmath , thus a
mass term does not change the constraint algebra at all. Furthermore, it
does not contain derivatives of the matter field as opposed to the case
of scalar matter (see eq. E.31 in [ 19 ] ), where the additional
contribution to @xmath is proportional to @xmath .

It is noteworthy that if the @xmath -direction has a boundary, in the
matterless theory only the bracket between the diffeomorphism
constraints eq. ( 2.79 ) is modified [ 60 ] , aquiring a boundary term
of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes only for @xmath and @xmath , i.e. for models with an
@xmath ground state (cf. the second, third and sixth entry in table 2.1
).

In contrast to the matterless theory [ 72 ] the algebra generated by the
@xmath and @xmath is no classical finite W-algebra ⁸ ⁸ 8 A classical
finite W-algebra is, according to [ 73 ] , an algebra with generators
@xmath and Poisson brackets @xmath , where @xmath are certain
polynomials in the generators. In the case considered here the Dirac
bracket replaces the Poisson bracket. anymore,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.82)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.84)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The constraints @xmath and @xmath on-shell generate local Lorentz
transformations and diffeomorphisms, respectively. The right bracket in
eq. ( 2.82 ) shows that the @xmath transform as local Lorentz vectors
under the action of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 2.77 ) and ( 2.78 ) show that @xmath and @xmath also form a local
Lorentz vector with components @xmath , @xmath . The action of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the dilaton is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.88)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the last step the equation of motion ( 2.17 ) has been used. This
shows that @xmath on-shell is the generator of diffeomorphisms.

#### 2.2.3 Relation to the Conformal Algebra

As first noted in [ 74 ] , certain linear combinations of the @xmath
fulfil the classical Virasoro algebra. In that work first order gravity
coupled to scalar matter was considered, but the same result holds for
the case with fermionic matter. New generators

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

fulfil an algebra (with @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraints @xmath form the well-known conformal algebra. The total
algebra is the semidirect product of the conformal algebra and an
invariant abelian subalgebra generated by the local Lorentz generator
@xmath [ 75 ] . The diffeomorphism part of @xmath is just @xmath from
eq. ( 2.87 ) above. The Dirac brackets needed for calculating this
algebra are listed in App. B.2 . Defining light cone combinations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

the conformal part of the algebra ( 2.90 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The Fourier modes @xmath , @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

then obey an algebra

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which after redefinition @xmath becomes the classical Virasoro algebra.
Canonical quantization, i.e. representing the Virasoro generators as
operators and replacing the Dirac bracket by @xmath leads to the
well-known Virasoro algebra with zero central charge [ 76 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.3 BRST Gauge Fixing

The path integral for a system with gauge symmetries is in general
ill-defined. In order to obtain a well-defined path integral one has to
explicitly break gauge invariance by means of constructing an
appropriate gauge fixed action and afterwards restore gauge independence
of the correlation functions of physical fields by enlarging the phase
space with unphysical ghost and antighost fields.

In order to obtain a gauge fixed action, we use the general method of
Batalin, Vilkovisky and Fradkin [ 77 , 78 , 79 ] based on the BRST
symmetry [ 66 , 80 ] . We first construct the BRST charge @xmath . The
system has three gauge symmetries generated by the @xmath , so the phase
space has to be enlarged by three pairs of ghosts and antighosts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

and equipped with a graded Poisson bracket obeying the (anti)commutation
relations ( 2.43 ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the (anti)ghosts. The Dirac bracket is still defined as in ( 2.63 ),
but now with the Poisson bracket of the extended phase space. One
important point is that the ghosts themselfes do not give rise to new
second class constraints, thus the matrices ( 2.57 ), ( 2.64 ) are the
same as for the gauge invariant system. The BRST charge acts on
functions on the enlarged phase space through the Dirac bracket,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

and has to be nilpotent,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

By virtue of the graded Jacobi identity ( 2.47 ) this is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore @xmath is required to act on functions depending only on the
original phase space variables @xmath like the original gauge
transformations, i.e. through the generators @xmath , and to have ghost
number one. This means that one assigns @xmath and @xmath for ghosts and
antighosts, respectively, and zero to all other phase space variables.
The ghost number is additive for products of field monomials, @xmath .
This leads to the Ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first term in the above Ansatz gives (cf. ( 2.75 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The next higher term with total ghost number one is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which cancels the contribution from the zeroth order,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Detailed calculations can be found in App. B.3 . The homological
perturbation series terminates at Yang-Mills level ⁹ ⁹ 9 In Yang-Mills
theory the structure functions @xmath are just constants and thus the
construction must necessarily terminate at this order, because @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

not because the structure functions commute with themselfes but rather
because the term containing the bracket of @xmath with itself is quartic
in the ghosts @xmath , while the system contains only three
anticommuting ghosts ( 2.96 ). The full BRST charge thus reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Constructed in this way it is unique up to canonical transformations of
the extended phase space [ 66 ] .

One now uses the theorem that BRST invariant functionals with total
ghost number zero are sums of a BRST closed and a BRST exact part [ 80 ]
. The gauge fixed Hamiltonian density should thus be of form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Choosing the gauge fixing fermion [ 19 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath leads to Eddington-Finkelstein gauge

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and to a gauge fixed Hamiltonian density (compare with ( 2.71 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The gauge fixed Lagrangian is obtained through Legendre transform in the
extended phase space,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and contains the Faddeev-Popov operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The gauge choice eq. ( 2.107 ) still admits for some residual local
Lorentz transformations and diffeomorphisms with parameters of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as can be seen from the infinitesimal transformations of the gauged
fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.112)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.113)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Non-infinitesimally these transformations are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

## Chapter 3 Nonperturbative Quantization of Geometry

In this chapter the path integral over the ghost sector @xmath and the
geometric variables @xmath is evaluated nonperturbatively. The result is
an effective action still depending on the fermions, which are quantized
with perturbative methods in the next chapter.

### 3.1 Ghosts and Second Class Constraints

First, for later evaluation of correlation functions containing the
geometric variables @xmath , one couples them and the fermion field to
external sources

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The generating functional for correlation functions is formally given by
the path integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the actions ( 2.109 ) and ( 3.1 ), and the measure

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is a normalization factor. The delta functional in the measure [
66 ] restricts the integration to the surface defined by the second
class constraints eqs. ( 2.53 )-( 2.56 ), and the fermion measure @xmath
will be specified later.

The ghost integration can be carried out immediately, yielding the
functional determinant of the Faddeev-Popov operator ( 2.110 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integration of the fermion momenta @xmath is trivial because of the
delta functionals in ( 3.3 ) and the @xmath -linearity of the second
class constraints ( 2.53 )-( 2.56 ), yielding an effective Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 3.2 On the Path Integral Measure

Before integrating over @xmath , one has to specify the integration
measure for the matter fields. The reason is that for retaining general
covariance of the measure [ 81 , 82 , 83 ] and thus preventing the
diffeomorphism invariance of the classical field theory from acquiring
an anomaly in the quantum theory, the matter fields in the integration
measure have to be multiplied with appropriate powers of @xmath , which
in Eddington-Finkelstein gauge ( 2.107 ) is just @xmath . For the
gauge-fixed path integral this means that the measure has to be
invariant under those BRST transformations that generate general
coordinate transformations [ 81 ] . As was proposed in [ 17 ] , we use
this choice of the measure because preserving general covariance also in
the quantum theory is preferable from the physical point of view and
also for subsequent application of known results, e.g. the derivation of
one-loop effects in Ch. 4 . The measure can be formally derived by
analogy from the case of a finite dimensional vector space over complex
Grassmann numbers [ 82 , 83 ] . For Dirac fermions in two dimensions it
reads (cf. eq. (7.14) in [ 83 ] with diffeomorphism weight @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This procedure of changing the measure by hand to fit ( 3.6 ) can be
implemented already at the level of the phase space path integral ( 3.2
) where, knowing that the measure will be fixed by hand anyway,
clandestinely a factor @xmath has been dropped. ¹ ¹ 1 Strictly speaking
this should be a functional superdeterminant, but the functional part
@xmath has already been separated. This factor arises (see §16.1.1 of [
66 ] , [ 84 ] ) from rewriting the path integral over the surface of
second class constraints as a path integral over the whole phase space,
with the aforementioned delta functionals (cf. eq. ( 3.3 )) again
restricting the allowed paths to lie in the surface defined by second
class constraints. The superdeterminant of a supermatrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. a matrix with even entries in the Bose-Bose part A and Fermi-Fermi
part D and odd ones in the Bose-Fermi (Fermi-Bose) parts B (D), is
defined via its supertrace [ 66 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Keeping in mind that @xmath is a pure Fermi-Fermi matrix and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the measure factor becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For minimal coupling @xmath and with the gauge choice ( 2.107 ) one
arrives at the measure ( 3.6 ) in configuration space by starting with a
phase space measure

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

instead of the one used in eq. ( 3.3 ). This is also what one would
naively expect by analogy from the case of a real boson field [ 82 ] on
a curved background, where a phase space measure @xmath leads to the
correct configuration space measure @xmath after integration over the
canonical momenta. The measure factor for fermions in the Lagrangian
path integral can be expected to be the inverse of the factors in the
bosonic case, i.e. @xmath for each real degree of freedom, because the
volume element for Grassmann variables transforms inversely to that one
for normal variables under changes of the basis. Indeed, the Dirac
spinor has two complex and thus four real degrees of freedom, giving
just the right factor ( 3.6 ). But the kinetic term for fermions ( 2.36
) is already of first order in the time derivatives and thus fermions
and their conjugate momenta are not independent in the Hamiltonian
formalism. If one treats them as independent variables they only count
as one-half degree of freedom each, yielding the right factor in ( 3.9
).

For non-minimal coupling the question of which measure is the “right”
covariant one is subtle and still not completely settled (for a review
cf. e.g. [ 85 ] ).

The additional measure factor ( 3.6 ) introduces a nonlinearity that
prevents the immediate @xmath -integration, but it can, following [ 18 ]
, formally be replaced by integration over an auxiliary field @xmath and
functional differentiating with respect to the current generating the
field factor,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

### 3.3 The Remaining Gauge Fields

After eliminating the nonlinearity in the path integral measure, the
@xmath -linearity of ( 3.5 ) (cf. ( 2.66 ) and ( 2.69 )) allows
functional integration ² ² 2 A partial integration in the contact term
in ( 3.5 ) produces a boundary contribution @xmath , stemming from the
unusual order of integration @xmath . Another one comes from ( 2.69 ),
@xmath , and is cancelled by the boundary term in eq. ( 2.73 ). over the
@xmath , yielding three delta functionals containing partial
differential equations for the @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations are the equations of motion for the @xmath that result
from the gauge fixed Lagrangian ( 2.109 ) after supplementing it by
sources ( 3.1 ) and using the explicit expressions for the fermion
momenta @xmath which follow from the second class constraints ( 2.53 )-(
2.56 ).

Performing the @xmath -integration is now equivalent to solving these
equations for given currents @xmath and matter fields, and substituting
the solutions @xmath back into the effective action obtained after the
last step,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

During this integration, the Faddeev-Popov determinant ( 3.4 ) also
formally cancels, because the differential operators on the left hand
side of eqs. ( 3.12 ) - ( 3.14 ) produce a factor @xmath .

Eqs. ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.13 ) decouple for minimal coupling @xmath such
that the solutions are formally

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the regularized analogue of ( 2.35 ). For vanishing source @xmath it
can be expressed (using ( 3.12 )) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the unspecified lower integration limit means that ( 3.19 ) and (
3.20 ) can differ by a homogeneous solution of the regularized time
derivative @xmath . The quantities @xmath are also homogeneous solutions
of @xmath . Here the prescription of App. B of [ 18 ] is used, which
provides an infrared regularization and proper asymptotic behaviour of
the Green functions @xmath . The details of the regularization are,
however, not important for what follows. In most calculations which
explicitly use the regularized time derivative like e.g. [ 86 ] the
important requirement is that @xmath should yield @xmath after undoing
the regularization, i.e. the integral operator @xmath should act as an
anti-derivate.

For general non-minimal coupling @xmath eqs. ( 3.16 ) & ( 3.17 ) do not
decouple, but still can be solved order by order with the Ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

assuming the matter contributions in eq. ( 3.13 ) to be small, i.e.
@xmath being of order @xmath in fermion bilinears. Because the coupling
functions @xmath are of order of magnitude of the gravitational constant
this approximation is valid for systems with total energies several
orders of magnitude smaller than the Planck scale. Quantum gravity
effects in few-particle scattering at energies accessible in present day
particle accelerators are thus safely described in this approach, but
the approximation breaks down either for scattering at the Planck scale
or for macroscopic matter accumulations like macroscopic black holes. In
these cases a nonperturbative solution of eqs. ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.13 )
will be needed, which is only available for minimal coupling (eqs. (
3.16 ) and ( 3.17 )).

The lowest order contributions @xmath are then given by eqs. ( 3.16
) & ( 3.17 ) with @xmath . For linear dilaton coupling @xmath , the
higher order terms are obtained through the recursion relations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For general non-minimal couplings one needs to know the functional form
of @xmath to use this approach. A Taylor expansion around the zeroth
term of eq. ( 3.21 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

One now has to truncate the expansion eq. ( 3.21 ) at some order @xmath
to be able to apply the binomial theorem. The zeroth order contributions
are as above and the first order is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Higher orders can be read off order by order from the equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For a given order @xmath this yields restrictions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be used to pick the terms of order @xmath on the right hand
side of eq. ( 3.27 ). For a given @xmath the highest order in @xmath
that can contribute to the equation determining @xmath is contained in
the term proportional to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

corresponding to @xmath . Thus the @xmath th order @xmath only depend on
the previous orders, and this expansion allows to solve eqs. ( 3.12
) and ( 3.13 ) order by order in the fermion bilinears. The @xmath th
order can also be calculated from eqs. ( 3.26 ) and ( 3.27 ), and at the
end the truncation of eq. ( 3.21 ) turns out to be a technical
assumption needed for applicability of the binomial theorem and, of
course, for avoiding convergence issues of this expansion. Nonetheless
the right hand side of eq. ( 3.27 ) contains all the terms necessary to
calculate @xmath to arbitrary high orders.

Eq. ( 3.14 ) can always be solved, yielding (for @xmath and with eq. (
3.20 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the treatment of general dilaton couplings is possible, the
physically most interesting cases of Einstein-Hilbert gravity with in
four dimensions minimally coupled scalars, fermions and Yang-Mills
fields yield upon spherical reduction kinetic terms with minimal or
linear dilaton coupling [ 87 ] , so that these two cases seem to be the
most important ones. This is easily understood: Because the spherical
symmetric Ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

reduces the four-dimensional volume element @xmath upon integration over
the angular part to @xmath , spherical reduction of in four dimensions
minimally coupled matter will in general lead to a linear dilaton
coupling in two dimensions. One important exception could be 2D Type
0A/0B string theory (cf. the penultimate model in table 2.1 ), if it
could be generalized to include the same nonperturbative corrections
that are already included in the exact string black hole (ESBH) [ 59 ,
60 ] . For the ESBH the first order gravity dilaton field @xmath and the
string dilaton @xmath , with @xmath being an auxiliary field, are
related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The question now stands whether the string tachyon nonperturbatively
couples to the first order gravity dilaton @xmath , as it does in the
perturbative limit (cf. §3.1 of [ 60 ] ), or to the string dilaton
@xmath . In the first case the coupling is linear, but in the second
case it gets nonlinear corrections. Also some ”two dilaton theories” [
88 ] show nonlinear coupling to matter fields.

### 3.4 Ambiguous Terms

Eq. ( 3.15 ) as it stands is not the whole effective action, but
contains an ambiguity [ 18 , 89 ] arising from the source terms @xmath .
In expressions like @xmath the regularized inverse derivative, which
stands for an integral operator, acts after a partial integration and
changing the order of integration on the source @xmath and in this way
giving rise to another homogeneous contribution @xmath , whereas the
homogeneous functions in @xmath have already been made explicit in the
solutions @xmath . The action thus has to be supplemented by three terms

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The quantities @xmath can be read off from the solutions @xmath up to
the desired order in matter contributions. The first two terms in
general do not generate any new couplings of the matter fields besides
the ones generated by the @xmath and thus can be omitted unless @xmath
In that case they become important and, for example, yield corrections
to the specific heat of the CGHS black hole (cf. the third model in
table 2.1 ) when coupled to a scalar field [ 86 ] , changing it from a
meaningless infinity to a positive finite value.

That these ambiguous terms are necessary and cannot be omitted is also
obvious from ( 3.15 ). We know that classically the fermions couple to
the metric determinant @xmath and this should still be the case after
integration of the geometric degrees of freedom, where the coupling is
to an effective background defined by the @xmath and the matter fields.
After setting @xmath the action ( 3.15 ) is independent of @xmath and
thus because of ( 3.10 ) containing a factor @xmath and the delta
functional therein setting @xmath the whole partition function would be
ill-defined without the ambiguous terms.

Furthermore, first order gravity in two dimensions without matter is
locally quantum trivial [ 16 ] , i.e. the effective action expressed in
terms of the mean fields @xmath and @xmath is, up to a boundary term,
the classical action ( 2.3 ) in Eddington-Finkelstein gauge. Thus no
local quantum corrections appear in first order gravity and all eventual
quantum effects are encoded in the boundary part and are of global
nature. The mean fields then fulfill the classical equations of motion.
In the matterless case, i.e. dropping the @xmath -integration and the
covariant measure factor and setting @xmath , the correlator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

is indeed just the classical solution for @xmath , cf. eq. ( 2.24 ), in
the gauge ( 2.107 ) (with @xmath and @xmath ). Thus for obtaining the
right classical solutions in the theory without matter the third term in
( 3.32 ) is indispensable. This example also shows that the homogeneous
functions @xmath are fixed by imposing asymptotic conditions on the
expectation values of the geometric fields @xmath .

The occurrence of the ambiguity is also connected to the unusual order
of integrating first over the canonical coordinates @xmath and then over
the momenta @xmath . As shown in [ 90 ] , for the special case of the
Katanaev-Volovich model (the fourteenth entry in table 2.1 ) without
matter the path integration can be carried out in ”normal” order, i.e.
first over @xmath and then over @xmath , without introducing sources
@xmath , yielding an effective action exactly of the type of the last
term of eq. ( 3.32 ).

After quantizing the whole ghost and geometry sector, the generating
functional reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath from ( 3.15 ) and @xmath from ( 3.32 ). It should be
emphasised that @xmath includes all gravitational backreactions, because
the auxiliary field @xmath upon integration is equivalent to the quantum
version of @xmath .

### 3.5 Conformal Properties of the Effective Action

The action of conformal transformation @xmath (or equivalently @xmath )
after fixing the gauge and specifying asymptotic values of the @xmath is
slightly non-trivial and requires some discussion. This is a necessary
pre-requisite to understand the conformal properties of the vertices and
the scattering matrix. By assumption it will be required that the
asymptotic values @xmath and the gauge fixing conditions ( 2.107 ) are
invariant. This implies in particular that neither @xmath nor @xmath
transform and that @xmath has the same conformal weight as the metric.
Furthermore, the geometric part of the conserved quantity eq. ( 2.28 )
is required to be conformally invariant. This leads to different
conformal weights (listed in table 3.1 ) as compared to the situation
before gauge fixing, eq. ( 2.33 ). The conformal weight @xmath of a
field monomial @xmath is defined (if it transforms homogeneously) by
@xmath . Conformal weights thus add for products of field monomials,
@xmath .

The gauge fixed spin-connection transforms inhomogeneously,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the dilaton potentials transform as in the gauge invariant theory,
cf. sec. 2.1.3 . With this choice the effective action ( 3.15 ) and (
3.32 ) is conformally invariant at tree-level in the matter fields, i.e.
before perturbatively performing the path integration over @xmath and
thus taking into account quantum corrections from the fermions.

## Chapter 4 Perturbative Treatment of the Matter Fields

After having obtained the effective action ( 3.15 ) and ( 3.32 ) the
remaining matter integration in ( 3.35 ) is carried out perturbatively
in this chapter, following the treatment of the scalar case [ 18 ] . One
first splits the effective action ( 3.15 ) and ( 3.32 ) into terms
independent of the fermions, in those quadratic in the spinor components
and in higher order terms summarized in an interaction Lagrangian @xmath
. The solutions of eqs. ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.13 ) up to quadratic fermion
terms are given by the zeroth order solutions @xmath (eqs. ( 3.16 ) and
( 3.17 ) with @xmath ) plus the first order contribution eqs. ( 3.25 ).
The expansion ( 3.21 ) then reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Expanding ¹ ¹ 1 The space-time points where the functions are evaluated
at are denoted in subscript. Double subscripts like @xmath mean @xmath ,
and @xmath . eq. ( 3.19 )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath (eq. ( 3.29 )) up to quadratic terms in the fermions yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

A similar expansion of the ambiguous terms eq. ( 3.32 ) with @xmath
yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One recognizes the kinetic term ( 2.50 ) of fermions on a curved
background in Eddington-Finkelstein gauge ( 2.107 ) with a background
metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This background is still the classical one, solely depending on sources
for the geometric variables @xmath and the zeroth order solutions @xmath
. If taking into account the first two ambiguous terms in ( 3.32 ),
@xmath and @xmath acquire additional contributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

After redefining the interaction part of the Lagrangian density such
that the background ( 4.12 ) depends on the full @xmath instead of its
matter-independent part @xmath , i.e. taking into account backreactions
onto the metric determinant to all orders in the fermion fields, the
generating functional ( 3.35 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is one problem to address in connection with this interpretation
of fermions on an effective background: The metric becomes complex if
one chooses the regularisation of the inverse derivatives as in [ 18 ] .
To retain reality of the effective metric one could define it to be the
solution of the equations of motion of ( 3.5 ), i.e. eqs. ( 3.12 ) - (
3.14 ), the equations for @xmath and the constraints @xmath , together
with appropriate boundary conditions and for given external sources. In
what follows the effective background is assumed to be real. When
calculating vertices in sec. 4.2 below, instead of expanding the
effective action a method (first introduced in [ 18 ] ) that uses
exactly this idea is applied. Another solution would be to find a
regularisation which gives a real integral kernel @xmath .

### 4.1 One-Loop Effects and Bosonization

In this section the fermions are assumed to be massless and minimally
coupled. A self interaction term @xmath can be rewritten by introducing
an auxiliary vector potential,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is integrated over in the path integral. The last term will be
absorbed into the Dirac operator, resembling minimal coupling of
fermions to the vector potential. After replacing @xmath in ( 4.15 )
with the covariant derivative @xmath containing the metric compatible
and torsion-free spin connection (which drops out in two dimensions
anyway), partially integrating the kinetic term in ( 4.15 ) ² ² 2 Or in
other words using the fact that the Dirac operator @xmath in Minkowski
space is self-adjoint with respect to the Dirac inner product with
@xmath . , completing the square and evaluating the Gaussian integral
over @xmath and @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the Dirac operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Conformal transformations are homogeneous transformations of the metric
@xmath . The Dirac operator without vector potential transforms
homogeneously with weight @xmath when acting on a spinor which itself
has weight @xmath , i.e. @xmath , and the kinetic term

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is conformally invariant. To retain this property in the case of
non-vanishing vector potential, @xmath needs to have conformal weight
@xmath (coming from @xmath ), while @xmath has weight 0. With
Eddington-Finkelstein gauge ( 2.107 ) fixed the appropriate weights are
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

The determinant of the Dirac operator is most easily calculated using
heat kernel methods [ 91 ] in Euclidean space. There @xmath is
essentially self-adjoint [ 92 ] with respect to the ordinary inner
product on spinor space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The square of the Dirac operator is then of Laplace type (cf.
eqs. (3.27) in [ 91 ] with @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath denotes the electromagnetic field strength. Conventions
applied for Euclidean space can be found in App. A .

#### 4.1.1 Zeta Function Regularization and the Heat Kernel

For deriving one-loop results for classically conformal and chiral
invariant field theories the application of heat kernel methods and zeta
function regularization [ 91 ] is most convenient. The goal of this
subsection is to calculate the one-loop effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

For positive eigenvalues @xmath of @xmath the formal identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be used to express the effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of the heat kernel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.22 ) is only true up to an infinite contribution that does not
depend on @xmath , as can be seen from the Laplace transform (using
eq. ( 4.32 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Extending ( 4.22 ) to zero
or negative eigenvalues is only formally possible, because the integral
does not converge at the upper limit. These eigenvalues correspond to
infrared divergences that can be regularized by e.g. adding a mass to
the Laplace type operator, @xmath . The divergence at the lower limit
corresponds to the ultraviolet range and has to be properly regularized
by e.g. zeta function regularization, i.e. by using the Laplace
transformed effective action ( 4.23 ) before taking the limit @xmath as
the regularized effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity @xmath is a constant with the dimension of a mass
introduced to keep the dimension of the effective action unchanged. The
regularization is removed in the limit @xmath . The key result used
below is that on manifolds of dimension @xmath without boundaries (or on
manifolds with boundaries and local Neumann, Dirichlet or mixed boundary
conditions) the heat kernel ( 4.24 ) admits an asymptotic expansion for
small @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the heat kernel coefficients @xmath are locally computable from
invariants of the manifold, of the bundle part @xmath of the operator (
4.19 ) and possibly more invariants if the smearing function @xmath
itself takes values in some internal gauge group. They are tabulated in
e.g. [ 91 ] . The zeta function for a positive operator @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is related to the heat kernel ( 4.24 ) by the Mellin transform

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the integration contour in the second equation encircles all poles
of the integrand. For operators with negative and zero modes one should
replace @xmath in ( 4.28 ) with the absolute value @xmath and restrict
the sum in the trace to non-zero eigenvalues. The zeta function is
regular at @xmath . Comparing ( 4.27 ) with ( 4.30 ) relates the heat
kernel coefficients to poles of the zeta function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which becomes clear after recalling that the gamma function has a simple
pole at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

will be used in the following. The regularized action ( 4.26 ) can now
be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and expanded around @xmath with the use of ( 4.32 ) ( @xmath ),
revealing a pole at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

that has to be removed by renormalization such that the limit @xmath can
be safely taken. The remaining part is the renormalized effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variation of the zeta function can be rigorously derived [ 91 ] by
use of the Mellin transform eqs. ( 4.29 ), ( 4.30 ) and coincides with
the naive variation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.1.2 Conformal Anomaly

The energy-momentum tensor in classical field theory with action @xmath
on a curved Euclidean background is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the theory is conformally invariant, the variation of the action has
to vanish under arbitrary (infinitesimal) conformal transformations of
the metric @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus the energy-momentum tensor of a classically conformally
invariant field theory is necessarily traceless,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the quantum theory this no longer needs to be the case. Defining the
Euclidean quantum effective action as @xmath and the expectation value
of the energy-momentum tensor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

the variation of the effective action is related to the trace of the
quantum energy momentum tensor @xmath like in ( 4.39 ) with @xmath
replaced by @xmath . For the classical action to be conformally
invariant, the square of the Dirac operator has to transform conformally
covariant, @xmath . The infinitesimal variation is @xmath , and varying
the renormalized effective action ( 4.36 ) yields (cf. ( 4.37 ))

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Comparing with eq. ( 4.39 ) for the quantum effective action shows that
the trace of the quantum energy-momentum tensor eq. ( 4.41 ) is
proportional to the second local heat kernel coefficient whose structure
[ 91 ] is especially simple, yielding with eq. ( 4.20 ) and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field strength term in @xmath does not contribute because of the
spinor trace @xmath . Notably, the conformal anomaly for a Dirac fermion
in two dimensions has the same value as for one real boson [ 91 ] , and
can immediately be used to integrate (with initial condition @xmath )
the variation of the 1-loop effective action (now in Minkowski space) to
the nonlocal Polyakov action [ 93 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the Laplacian on functions ( @xmath , cf. ( A.8 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Green’s function defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.1.3 Chiral Anomaly

Although the whole action in eq. ( 4.17 ) is not U(1) gauge invariant
because of the coupling-dependent mass term in ( 4.17 ), the action in
the path integral which yields the determinant of the Dirac operator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invariant under @xmath gauge transformations (both in Minkowski and
Euclidean space)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the vector potential @xmath is treated as a background field, and
@xmath is a real gauge potential. It is also invariant under global
chiral transformations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Euclidean space this transformation rule still applies, but with the
conventions chosen in App. A @xmath becomes anti-hermitian, in contrast
to the Minkowski case where it is hermitian. Thus in the Euclidean case
a hermitian representation of the chiral symmetry group @xmath rather
than a unitary one is used. To gauge this chiral symmetry fermions have
to be coupled to an axial vector @xmath (the gauge potential for the
chiral symmetry) transforming as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

for Minkowski (M) and Euclidean (E) space, respectively. The vector
potential @xmath is invariant under chiral transformations, as is the
axial vector under gauge transformations. The locally chiral and gauge
invariant action then reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.51)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath for Minkowski space and @xmath for Euclidean space. The
Euclidean Dirac operator and its square transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Because of the vanishing variation eq. ( 4.37 ) of the zeta function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

U(1) gauge invariance is retained on quantum level. The zeta function is
not invariant under chiral transformations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

but yields a non-vanishing chiral anomaly (for @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Decomposing the one-form @xmath uniquely into a gauge and an axial part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

the field strength only depends on the axial part (with eqs. ( A.4 ), (
A.8 )),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

With eq. ( 4.45 ) the chiral anomaly becomes (now in Minkowski space)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath being the Wess-Zumino action [ 94 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The full one-loop effective action thus comprises the Polyakov part
eq. ( 4.44 ) and the Wess-Zumino part eq. ( 4.61 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

What remains to be evaluated is the path integral over the vector
potential in eq. ( 4.17 ), now with the highly non-local integrand eq. (
4.61 ). The nature of the application should thus decide whether it is
favorable to use this form, or to treat the Thirring term directly as an
interaction vertex. On the other hand it may well be that the
Wess-Zumino action becomes local in some gauges, as happens for the
Polyakov action in conformal gauge. Otherwise auxiliary scalar fields
can be introduced to bring the Polyakov and Wess-Zumino action to local
form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These expressions coincide with the ones in [ 32 , 33 ] .

Rewriting the Thirring term as in ( 4.16 ) is actually the application
of the bosonization prescription found by Coleman, Jackiw and Susskind [
34 , 35 ] for the Schwinger model in flat Minkowski space. Transforming
to a gauge with @xmath in eq. ( 4.58 ) leads to the identification
@xmath . The treatment in this section thus shows that bosonization is
also applicable within the framework of quantized dilaton gravity in two
dimensions even after the geometric sector is quantized
nonperturbatively.

### 4.2 Lowest Order Vertices

Because the fermions appear as bilinears in the effective action eqs. (
3.15 ) and ( 3.32 ), the lowest order interaction vertices are non-local
four-point vertices, and all vertices have an even number of outer legs.
In the following only massless fermions without self interactions (
@xmath ) are considered, thus the vertices are solely generated by
gravitational interaction.

#### 4.2.1 Effective Geometry and the Virtual Black Hole

The standard way for extracting the form of interaction vertices would
be to expand the effective action eqs. ( 3.15 ) and ( 3.32 ) up to
fourth order in the matter fields and read off the vertex as the
corresponding coefficient. This is very cumbersome because of nested
integrals coming from the inverse derivatives, whose ranges of
integration have to be treated properly. We therefore adopt a strategy
introduced in [ 18 ] and directly solve the equations of motion for the
canonical pair @xmath following from the action eq. ( 3.5 ) (together
with the first order gravity constraints eqs. ( 2.68 )-( 2.70 ) and for
vanishing sources @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.65)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with matter contributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

localized at a point @xmath in space-time, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a matter configuration is clearly off-shell, i.e. it does not
fulfill the Dirac equation ( 4.102 )-( 4.103 ). Because of the structure
of the interaction terms in the effective action eqs. ( 3.15 ) and (
3.32 ), one can expect to find three four-point vertices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After substituting the solutions of eqs. ( 4.65 )-( 4.70 ) back into the
interaction terms of eq. ( 3.5 ) and expanding up to second order in the
@xmath the explicit form of the vertices is found. In order to be able
to substitute the coefficients @xmath by the corresponding bilinears (
4.71 ) at the end, one should carefully keep track of the (because of
non-locality of the interaction) different space-time points where the
external legs are situated at.

The solutions of eq. ( 4.65 )-( 4.70 ) will have a delta peak in @xmath
direction and the following continuity properties: @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath will jump at @xmath because of the delta distributions on the
right hand side, while the other variables will be continuous. To solve
these equations unambiguously, a prescription for the behaviour of the
vacuum solutions far away from the localization point is needed. To fix
the six integration constants one requires [ 48 ] in the asymptotic
region @xmath

-   @xmath and @xmath , i.e. identification the dilaton with the @xmath
    -coordinate. This corresponds to the fundamental patch used in sec.
    2.1.2 , and can always be reached from the general solutions, eq. (
    4.73 ) and ( 4.74 ) below, by a residual gauge transformation eq. (
    2.115 ) with @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

-   @xmath fixes the integration constant in @xmath (see below).

-   @xmath then solves eq. ( 4.70 ) and defines the asymptotic unit of
    length.

-    The remaining two integration constants enter @xmath , which is the
    solution of a second order partial differential equation derived
    below, are called @xmath and @xmath because for spherical reduced
    gravity they correspond to the Schwarzschild mass and the Rindler
    acceleration of the asymptotic background.

The general solutions for eqs. ( 4.65 )-( 4.67 ) and eq. ( 4.70 ) in the
vacuum regions @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.75)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For finding the vertices the solution for @xmath will not be necessary
and, as only the exterior derivative of the spin connection enters the
Ricci scalar

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

the scalar curvature can be read off directly from the right hand side
of eq. ( 4.68 ). Another differentiation of eq. ( 4.69 ) with respect to
@xmath and use of the other equations of motion yields a second order
differential equation for @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.78)
  -- -- -- --------

which is solved in the vacuum regions by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Adjusting the integration constants in the region @xmath as listed above
and patching the solutions at @xmath according to their continuity
properties ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath jumping, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
continuous) then fixes the integration constants in the region @xmath ,
yielding up to linear order in the @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.82)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.83)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath . The three constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are not
independent from each other because the solutions in the asymptotic
region @xmath have to fulfill the geometric secondary constraints eq. (
2.68 )-( 2.70 ) to describe a consistent background. The Lorentz
constraint eq. ( 2.68 ) then requires

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 2.69 ) even yields a vacuum solution for the spin connection,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

and eq. ( 2.70 ) is identically fulfilled. With these solutions the
geometric part of the conserved quantity eq. ( 2.28 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the scalar curvature eq. ( 4.77 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

both jump at @xmath . For non-minimal coupling the Ricci scalar even has
a delta-like singularity at the point @xmath , whereas for minimal
coupling and @xmath it becomes continuous. The effective line element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes Eddington-Finkelstein form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

by introducing new coordinates @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath is a real scale
factor). The quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the analogue of the Killing norm of the vacuum solutions, @xmath . It
is continuous at @xmath , as is the whole line element. The Ricci scalar
( 4.88 ) following from the Hodge dual of the spin connection is however
not the same as the Ricci scalar computed from the line element ( 4.90
)-( 4.92 ), because it depends on the (for @xmath ) non-vanishing
torsion part of the spin connection (cf. eq. ( 2.14 )). The “torsion
free” Ricci scalar in the asymptotic region @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

and coincides in the absence of torsion ( @xmath ) with ( 4.88 ).

For minimally coupled spherical reduced gravity (cf. the first model in
table 2.1 ; @xmath ) with @xmath and @xmath eq. ( 4.91 ) contains a
Rindler term ( @xmath ) and a Schwarzschild term ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.95)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The dilaton coupling function @xmath enters ( 4.91 ) only evaluated at
the localization point @xmath and thus the structure of the effective
line element ( 4.90 ) does not change, showing that the virtual black
hole is a generic feature for both minimal and non-minimal coupling.

As the asymptotic region @xmath in this example is Minkowski space (
@xmath , @xmath ), the occurrence of such an effective geometry is due
to the scattering process, and in particular the occurrence of the
Schwarzschild term is interpreted as the formation of a virtual black
hole as an intermediary scattering state [ 89 ] .

Fig. 4.1 shows the Carter-Penrose diagram for the resulting space-time.
The non-trivial geometry is located on a light-like cut @xmath extending
from @xmath up to a maximal radius @xmath . The geometry is non-local in
the sense that it depends on two space-time coordinates @xmath and
@xmath . The rest of space-time is flat Minkowski space or, in the
general case, the background given by the line element eq. ( 4.90 ) with
the asymptotic Killing norm eq. ( 4.92 ). As a word of warning this
intermediary geometry should not be over-interpreted. It is off-shell,
as the localized matter contributions are, and it is as much virtual as
virtual particles in ordinary perturbative quantum field theory are.

#### 4.2.2 Four-Point Vertices

Inserting the solutions eqs. ( 4.80 )-( 4.84 ) and ( 4.85 ) into the
interaction terms of eq. ( 3.5 ) (cf. also ( 4.71 ) and ( 4.72 )),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

expanding up to first order in the @xmath , replacing these coefficients
with @xmath and integrating over @xmath yields three four-point
vertices, namely the symmetric one

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.98)
  -- -- -- --------

and two non-symmetric ones

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.99)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Interestingly, the vertices @xmath and @xmath are the same as for a real
scalar field [ 48 ] , and only @xmath is new. They share some properties
with the scalar case, namely:

1.   They are local in the coordinate @xmath , and non-local in @xmath .

2.   They vanish in the local limit ( @xmath ) and @xmath vanishes for
    minimal coupling.

3.   They respect a @xmath symmetry @xmath .

4.   The symmetric vertex depends only on the conformally invariant
    combination @xmath and the asymptotic value @xmath of the geometric
    part of the conserved quantity ( 2.28 ). @xmath is independent of
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus if @xmath is fixed in all
    conformal frames, which is ensured by the conformal transformation
    properties listed in sec. 3.5 , both vertices are conformally
    invariant.

The new vertex @xmath is not conformally invariant because it contains
@xmath , which is mapped to @xmath under a change of the conformal
frame. Still, conformal invariance of the four-fermi scattering matrix
elements is retained at tree-level, because for on-shell matter
configurations (cf. eqs. ( 4.111 )-( 4.113 ) below) the fermion bilinear
@xmath and thus the vertex @xmath vanishes. As all vertices containing
@xmath are generated by the last term in eq. ( 3.32 ) it can be
concluded that all tree-level Feynman diagrams containing pairs of outer
@xmath -legs attached to the same vertex must vanish, and all
non-vanishing Feynman diagrams containing outer @xmath -legs also have
to contain internal @xmath -propagators. Whether these diagrams also
vanish or whether they yield conformally invariant S-matrix elements is
not guaranteed a priori , but tree-level conformal invariance of the
S-matrix is expected to hold because of the nonperturbative result
obtained in sec. 3.5 . At one-loop level, however, conformal invariance
is broken by the conformal anomaly, cf. sec. 4.1.2 .

Thus as in the scalar case, where for minimal coupling the four-particle
scattering amplitude for spherical reduced gravity (cf. the first model
in table 2.1 ) turned out to be either zero or infinity [ 89 ] depending
on which boundary conditions at the origin where chosen for the
asymptotic states, only the symmetric vertex @xmath will contribute at
tree-level.

### 4.3 Asymptotic Matter States

The metric obtained from eq. ( 4.89 ) (and eqs. ( 4.83 ) and ( 4.84 )
with @xmath ) in the region @xmath determines the asymptotic states for
calculation of the scattering matrix. If they form a complete and (in an
appropriate sense) normalizable set, an asymptotic Fock space can be
constructed. In the Dirac equation obtained from eq. ( 2.50 ) with the
Zweibein in Eddington-Finkelstein gauge ( 2.107 ) and with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the spinor components decouple for massless fermions,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.102)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

These equations are just the Dirac equation @xmath (cf. eq. ( 4.18 )) in
components, with a spin connection

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.104)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The equation for @xmath is conformally invariant (with conformal weights
as in table 3.1 ), but the one for @xmath contains @xmath and thus
transforms while changing between conformal frames. To solve the second
equation one introduces new coordinates ( @xmath , @xmath are constants)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.106)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

in patches where the integrals are defined. In this way both coordinates
are locally orthogonal to each other, @xmath . With the Ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

one finds that @xmath has to fulfill eq. ( 4.102 ), @xmath has to obey

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the phases @xmath obey

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Most notably, solutions can be obtained explicitly even for general
non-minimal coupling,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.111)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.112)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath being arbitrary but real functions. The conformal
transformation properties of these solutions are as expected in sec. 3.5
. @xmath includes a factor @xmath and thus transforms with weight @xmath
, while @xmath only depends on the conformally invariant combination
@xmath and the mass @xmath of the asymptotic space-time. Thus if @xmath
is fixed for all conformal frames, the solution for @xmath is
conformally invariant. The fermion bilinears ( 4.71 ) which enter the
tree-level scattering vertices (e.g. the four-fermi vertices ( 4.98 )-(
4.99 )) read on-shell

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As noted at the end of the last section, the vanishing of @xmath implies
conformal invariance of the tree-level scattering matrix elements for
four-fermion scattering as well as vanishing of a certain class of
tree-level Feynman diagrams.

## Chapter 5 Conclusions and Possible Further Developments

### 5.1 Summary and Conclusions

The goal of this thesis was to analyze the classical structure and to
quantize two-dimensional dilaton gravity models in the first order
formulation coupled to Dirac fermions using the Feynman path integral
approach. Chapter 1 contained a short motivation for considering gravity
in two dimensions in general and first order gravity with fermions in
particular, together with some historical remarks.

#### 5.1.1 Classical Analysis

In chapter 2 , after introducing the action describing the system under
consideration, the equivalence between the first order formulation and
the second order dilaton gravity action on the classical and quantum
level was demonstrated, for which it was crucial that fermions in two
dimensions do not directly couple to the spin connection and the
Lagrange multipliers for torsion. After recalling how to obtain all
classical solutions for the matterless theory or even for special matter
configurations, namely (anti)chiral fermions and (anti)self-dual
spinors, the constraints of the system were analyzed. Three primary
first class constraints and four well-known primary second class
constraints relating the spinor to its canonical momentum, as well as
three secondary first class constraints generating local Lorentz
transformations and infinitesimal diffeomorphisms were found. The
Hamiltonian turned out to be fully constrained, as expected for a
generally covariant theory.

The algebra of the secondary first class constraints, eqs. ( 2.76 )-(
2.79 ), is the main result of this analysis and should be compared to
the known cases of first order gravity without matter [ 16 ] and with a
real scalar field [ 18 , 19 ] . As for scalar matter, only the bracket
between the two diffeomorphism generators ( 2.79 ) is changed in
comparison to the matterless theory, but in the very specific way that
the matter contribution is proportional to the local Lorentz generator.
A new feature is that not only for minimal coupling but also for certain
non-minimal couplings ( @xmath ) the constraint algebra is the same as
in the matterless case, namely if the fermions have non-vanishing mass
but otherwise do not self-interact ( @xmath ). Also the kinetic term of
the fermions does not contribute at all, whereas in the scalar case [ 19
] the additional structure function was just the kinetic term for the
real boson. Furthermore, the algebra loses its property to be a finite
W-algebra.

It is remarkable that the constraint algebra ( 2.76 )-( 2.79 ) closes
without any spatial derivatives of delta functions and in this sense
resembles rather an ordinary gauge theory or Ashtekar’s approach to
gravity [ 95 , 96 ] , while the linear combinations ( 2.89 ) correspond
to the Hamiltonian ( @xmath ) and diffeomorphism constraint ( @xmath )
of the ADM approach [ 97 ] and fulfill the Virasoro algebra which closes
with derivatives of delta functionals.

The treatment of boundaries for the matterless theory was also briefly
discussed. It turns out that without any additional boundary terms in
the first order gravity action ( 2.3 ) most of the constraint algebra is
unchanged, but eq. ( 2.79 ) receives a boundary contribution ( 2.80 )
which vanishes for @xmath ground state models. ¹ ¹ 1 Maybe one should
further investigate whether there are any connections of this point to
the topic of @xmath / @xmath correspondence.

At the end of chapter 2 the BRST charge was constructed and
Eddington-Finkelstein gauge ( 2.107 ) on the manifold and light cone
gauge in tangent space was fixed. The homological perturbation theory
terminates at Yang-Mills level, which can be inferred from the Poisson-
@xmath model structure [ 11 ] of the matterless theory but is a
non-trivial fact in the presence of matter when the theory does not
admit a Poisson- @xmath model formulation. In general one would expect
the presence of higher order ghost terms. The choice ( 2.107 ) does not
fix the gauge completely but allows for residual gauge transformations (
2.115 ), namely combined Lorentz transformations and diffeomorphisms.

#### 5.1.2 Nonperturbative Quantization of Geometry

In chapter 3 , the main part of this thesis, the path integral over the
ghost sector and the geometric fields which were not fixed by the gauge
choice ( 2.107 ) was performed nonperturbatively. I want to emphasize
that this is only possible for two reasons. First, the constraints (
2.65 )-( 2.67 ) which appear in the Hamiltonian density are linear in
the fields @xmath , and second, the gauge choice ( 2.107 ) not only
further simplifies the structure of the Hamiltonian but also generates a
Faddeev-Popov determinant ( 3.4 ) which solely depends on the canonical
momenta @xmath . The integration over @xmath can then be carried out
first, leading to the rather simple set of equations ( 3.12 )-( 3.14 ),
and in the course of subsequently integrating over the @xmath the
Faddeev-Popov determinant then cancels.

Another remarkable point about this procedure is that the integration
over the Zweibeine @xmath is not restricted at all. In
Eddington-Finkelstein gauge ( 2.107 ) the volume element is @xmath ,
which classically should be restricted to positive values. But in order
to carry out the nonperturbative path integration one has to integrate
over the whole range of @xmath to arrive at the classical equations of
motion for the @xmath eqs. ( 3.12 )-( 3.14 ). Including quantum
fluctuations of the metric corresponding to zero and negative volumes
may thus also be the correct approach for quantizing other gravity
theories, including general relativity.

Furthermore, this quantization of the geometric degrees of freedom is
background independent in the sense that the metric has not been divided
into a fiducial and a fluctuation part. Although the homogeneous parts
in the solutions of eqs. ( 3.12 )-( 3.14 ) (the @xmath ) fix an
asymptotic background at the infinitely far boundary, the geometry in
the interior of the manifold is subjected to the quantum dynamics of the
system and the quantization procedure does not depend on specific
properties of special asymptotic backgrounds but is valid for all
choices.

The resulting nonlocal and nonpolynomial effective action eqs. ( 3.15 )
and ( 3.32 ) depends on the spinors, external sources for the geometry
and the asymptotic values @xmath . It includes three ambiguous terms,
which arise as a homogeneous solution of the (regularized) partial time
derivative @xmath . They have to be present for several reasons
discussed in sec. 3.4 , namely ensuring quantum triviality of first
order gravity without matter and for agreement with results obtained in
cases where the more “natural” order of integrating first the momenta
@xmath and then the coordinates @xmath (as e.g. in the Katanaev-Volovich
model, the fourteenth entry in table 2.1 ) is possible. At the end of
chapter 3 the resulting effective action was shown to be conformally
invariant at tree-level in the matter fields.

#### 5.1.3 Matter Perturbation Theory and Bosonization

Chapter 4 treats the remaining path integral over the Dirac fermions in
the usual perturbative approach. The fermions were shown to propagate on
an effective background which consistently includes matter backreactions
to arbitrary orders in the matter fields. At one-loop level both
conformal and chiral symmetries develop anomalies, which where used to
calculate the one-loop effective action consisting of a Polyakov and a
Wess-Zumino part.

In that course it was shown that the quantum equivalence between bosons
and fermions in flat two dimensional space-time found by Coleman, Jackiw
and Susskind [ 34 , 35 ] can also be applied to the situation when
dilaton gravity is quantized nonperturbatively. The prescription has
been used, with the caveat that it only holds in regions where the
space-time curvature is small compared to the microscopic length scale
of the quantum theory, in [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] for semi-classical studies of
the effects of pair production on the global structure of black hole
space-times. It is now clear that this caveat can be dropped at the
expense of the quantum theory becoming more complicated, with a path
integration over the nonlocal Wess-Zumino action to be evaluated.

In the second part of this chapter the lowest order (i.e. four-particle)
tree-level vertices where calculated for massless, not self-interacting
fermions. They turn out to be nonlocal in the @xmath -coordinate and
related to an intermediary off-shell geometry which can be thought of as
a geometric state forming during the scattering process. For spherical
reduced gravity (cf. the first model in table 2.1 ) the line element of
this intermediary state contains a Schwarzschild and a Rindler term
which is interpreted as the formation of a virtual black hole.

Though being a gauge-dependent feature it is noteworthy that two of the
gravitationally induced four-fermion scattering vertices (( 4.98 ) and (
4.99 )) found are the same as for a real, massless scalar field coupled
to first order gravity [ 48 ] . These two vertices are invariant under
conformal transformations. The third vertex, ( 4.100 ), although being
new compared to the scalar case and not conformally invariant, was seen
to vanish on-shell (cf. ( 4.113 )), and thus for tree-level four-fermi
scattering only the symmetric and non-symmetric vertices ( 4.98 ) and (
4.99 ) contribute. The corresponding S-matrix elements are conformally
invariant because the vertices @xmath and @xmath and the asymptotic
states ( 4.112 ) are. Furthermore, all tree-level Feynman diagrams
containing pairs of outer @xmath -legs attached to the same vertex are
found to vanish, such that scattering of @xmath -particles into @xmath
-particles necessarily involves the exchange of virtual @xmath
-excitations, i.e. the presence of internal @xmath -propagators in the
corresponding Feynman diagrams.

Minimally coupled ( @xmath ) models with @xmath and @xmath are found to
be scattering trivial, i.e. all tree-level vertices vanish, as can be
seen from eq. ( 3.15 ) and ( 3.32 ). This is a stronger requirement
compared to the scalar case, where the last term in ( 3.32 ) was not
present and where it thus was sufficient to require constancy of the
@xmath -term in ( 3.32 ) (and minimal coupling). The CGHS black hole and
Rindler ground state models (cf. table 2.1 ) could thus exhibit
non-trivial fermion scattering and the class of scattering trivial
models will be strongly restricted.

### 5.2 Possible Extensions

In [ 19 ] a number of interesting ideas have been listed for the case of
first order gravity coupled to a real scalar field. Most of the remarks
made there also apply to dilaton gravity with fermionic matter and will
not all be repeated here. For other applications specific to fermions
cf. also sec. 6.3. in [ 98 ] .

As all needed tools (asymptotic states, vertices) for the evaluation of
the scattering matrix elements for four-fermion scattering are provided
in this thesis, such a calculation is the next natural step. For a
massless real boson coupled to spherical reduced gravity (cf. the first
model in table 2.1 ) the amplitude obtained in [ 19 , 99 ] has been
shown, among other things, to be unitary and the cross section to be CPT
invariant [ 100 , 101 ] . This is rather remarkable for two reasons:
First, the effective theory obtained after quantizing geometry is
non-local and thus the CPT theorem [ 102 ] does not apply. Secondly, as
argued first in [ 103 ] and clarified later in [ 104 ] , if the
information paradox was really to hold and pure states could evolve into
mixed ones through quantum gravity effects, then quantum mechanics
itself should be modified to incorporate this non-unitary time evolution
which in turn would lead to CPT violation. Reversely, the found CPT
invariance of the S-matrix in the scalar case shows that the time
evolution in these lowest order tree-level scattering processes is
unitary. Investigation of CPT invariance in higher-order tree-level
scattering and for loop calculations could thus shed some light on the
information paradox. Also, on a real boson field charge conjugation acts
trivially, while parity transformation is respected per constructionem
in a spherical symmetric theory and time reversal can be achieved by
changing from outgoing to ingoing Eddington-Finkelstein gauge. Hence
investigating the case of Dirac fermions, on which C and P act
nontrivial too, would be more interesting.

Besides that it is clear now how bosonization works on the level of the
path integral ( 4.17 ), the fact that two of the vertices calculated in
sec. 4.2 are exactly the same as for a free massless scalar field
coupled to first order gravity [ 48 ] and that the contribution of the
new vertex ( 4.100 ) vanishes for a large class of Feynman diagrams is
another indication that bosonization also holds for the tree-level
S-matrix elements. To clarify this issue the S-matrix elements for
fermion scattering in some specific model (e.g. spherical reduced
gravity) should be compared with the ones from the bosonic side of the
correspondence. Another remarkable fact is that the structure functions
@xmath and in particular @xmath of the constraint algebra (cf. ( 2.79 )
for couplings @xmath and @xmath ) is mapped to its counterpart in a free
massless scalar theory [ 19 ] by the identification

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being the scalar field and @xmath a phase. The Faddeev-Popov
operators ( 2.110 ) of both theories are mapped onto each other, which
however does not affect the quantum theories because the Faddeev-Popov
determinant cancels during the exact path integral quantization of
geometry in both cases. The constraints @xmath themselves are however
not identified under this mapping.

The treatment of boundaries in first order gravity coupled to matter
fields is another open problem. As pointed out by Carlip [ 105 , 106 ,
107 ] , the universality of black hole entropy could be connected to the
presence of a black hole horizon, which imposes constraints on the
physical phase space, and an underlying symmetry somehow attached to the
horizon. The last point seems to be connected to a conjecture by ’t
Hooft [ 68 ] that physical degrees of freedom should be converted into
gauge degrees of freedom at a horizon. Indeed, in [ 69 , 60 ] this was
shown to be the case for first order gravity ( 2.3 ) without additional
matter fields by constructing the reduced phase space. For the case of a
generic boundary one physical degree of freedom was found, whereas for a
horizon boundary the reduced phase space turned out to be empty. It
would be interesting to see whether such a phenomenon also occurs in the
presence of physical matter degrees of freedom. An indication in favor
of such a phenomenon is the changing rank of the Dirac matrix ( 2.57 )
at a horizon @xmath . Boundary conditions for the matter fields can be
introduced by means of imposing constraints at the boundary. On the
technical side the Dirac consistency algorithm is more involved [ 108 ]
, with the Dirichlet boundary constraint for a scalar field generating
an infinite tower of constraints similar to the flat space example
considered in [ 109 ] . The Dirac matrix ( 2.57 ) then contains terms
with distributional support at the boundary (i.e. @xmath terms), so that
a naive definition of the inverse matrix and construction of the Dirac
bracket does not seem feasible. On the other hand, as opposed to the
situation in flat space [ 109 ] , on a curved space-time one can not
impose the boundary conditions directly in Fourier space. A possible way
out that could lead to a sensible constraint algebra allowing to judge
which gauge symmetries survive in the presence of boundaries may be to
use a regularization of the @xmath -functions at the boundary, define
the Dirac bracket, calculate the constraint algebra and remove the
regularization afterwards, but our efforts in that direction [ 108 ] so
far have not been successful in removing all divergent contributions
with support at the boundary.

## Appendix A Notational Conventions

Throughout this thesis natural units @xmath are used. Space-time is
assumed to be a Lorentzian manifold with signature @xmath . Latin
indices @xmath are local Lorentz indices, while Greek indices @xmath
refer to the manifold. The totally antisymmetric symbol both in tangent
space and on the manifold is defined by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
symbols with upper indices are defined as the usual matrix inverse. In
light cone coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

it becomes @xmath , where local Lorentz indices are raised with the flat
metric @xmath and @xmath . Space-time indices are raised and lowered
with the metric @xmath .

The components of a p-form are defined via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Hodge dual of a p-form (in D dimensions) is defined with the
coefficients

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the Levi-Civita tensor @xmath . For even dimension @xmath and
Lorentzian signature this yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the Hodge star acting on the volume form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

With these conventions the hermitian conjugate of the exterior
derivative [ 61 ] reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The volume form can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A Dirac fermion in two dimensions has two complex components, @xmath .
Dirac matrices in two-dimensional Minkowski space are chosen as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The analogue of the @xmath matrix is @xmath . They satisfy @xmath and
@xmath . For calculations in Euclidean space @xmath is defined as above,
but @xmath and @xmath , thus satisfying @xmath . The Dirac matrices in
Euclidean space are thus hermitian, @xmath , whereas @xmath becomes
anti-hermitian.

## Appendix B Details from Ch. 2

### b.1 Poisson Brackets of the Secondary with the Second Class
Constraints

To calculate the Dirac brackets, all Poisson brackets of the @xmath with
the @xmath are needed. They are easily obtained by using the algebraic
properties of the graded Poisson bracket, eqs. ( 2.45 )-( 2.46 ), and
read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A little care is needed when integrating by parts derivatives of the
delta distributions. This is most easily done by smearing the fields
with test functions and use of the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus obtaining

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Several technical points in the calculation of the constraint algebra
may deserve some comments. Only obtaining ( 2.79 ) needs some care, the
other brackets are calculated rather straightforward using the Poisson
structure on phase space ( 2.43 ). The tricky part of ( 2.79 ) is
actually not the @xmath -term in the Dirac bracket, but the bracket
@xmath and therein the integrations by parts which have to be performed
using smeared constraints

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The bracket itself reads with ( 2.66 ), ( 2.67 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here @xmath denote the constraints with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The tricky parts are the second and third bracket in ( B.1 ) ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

One arrives at an expression for the graded Poisson bracket of @xmath
and @xmath reading

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The @xmath -terms of the Dirac bracket are (with @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With these results one obtains (omitting the @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### b.2 Dirac Brackets used in Sec. 2.2.3

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### b.3 Calculations from Sec. 2.3

The BRST charge @xmath is fermionic, thus the left hand side of ( 2.103
) reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus if both Dirac brackets do not contain any terms proportional to
derivatives of the delta function this expression is just twice the
first bracket which reads

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Dirac bracket @xmath contains no @xmath contributions because of the
following argument: There are three Poisson brackets in the Dirac
bracket ( 2.63 ); the bracket between the two arguments, and the
brackets between the first and second argument and the second class
constraints, respectively. The first one, @xmath , does not give @xmath
contributions because the constraints ( 2.65 )-( 2.67 ) contain
derivative terms @xmath and @xmath , but the structure functions @xmath
only depend on @xmath and @xmath , cf. eqs. ( 2.76 ) - ( 2.79 ). The
same reasoning holds for @xmath , and the brackets @xmath are given in
App. B.1 . Thus all fields in the term containing @xmath can be taken at
the same point,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the Dirac bracket between the constraints and the structure
functions can be calculated as if the fields where ordinary variables in
classical mechanics (i.e. without the delta functions in eqs. ( 2.43 )
and ( 2.97 )). Terms quadratic in the ghosts cancel, such that only the
following Dirac brackets are necessary for evaluating the first term in
@xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Thus the left hand side of eq. ( 2.103 ) reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It cancels eq. ( 2.102 ), but produces a new contribution which in turn
is cancelled by the bracket

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here antisymmetry of the structure functions @xmath has been used in the
penultimate step, and the explicit form of the @xmath (cf. eqs. ( 2.75
)-( 2.79 )) in the ultimate one. The homological perturbation theory
thus terminates at Yang-Mills level.

For calculating eqs. ( B.2 )-( B.5 ) it is helpful to know the following
Poisson brackets of the second class constraints eqs. ( 2.53 )-( 2.56 )
with the structure functions,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

0]Bibliography Bibliography]0