In this thesis we deal with the specific collective phenomena in
condensed matter â€” striped-structures formation. Such structures are
observed in different branches of condensed matter physics, like surface
physics or physics of high-temperature superconductors. These
quasi-one-dimensional objects appear in theoretical analyses as well as
in computer simulations of different theoretical models. Here, the main
topic of interest is the stability of striped structures in certain
quantum models, where a tendency towards crystallization competes with a
tendency towards phase separation, and some basic properties of these
structures.

We consider two strongly correlated two-component quantum systems,
consisting of quantum mobile particles and immobile ones. By immobile
particles we mean those particles whose occupation numbers are invariant
with respect to the hamiltonian evolution. But this does not mean that
these occupation numbers serve as a kind of a fixed disorder field. They
are varied to reach the minimum of the energy of the total system (an
analog of annealing). The both systems are described by Falicov-
Kimball-like Hamiltonians on a square lattice, extended by direct
short-range interactions between the immobile particles, that favor
phase separation. In the first system the mobile particles are spinless
fermions while in the second one they are hardcore bosons. We construct
rigorously ground-state phase diagrams of the both systems in the
strong-coupling regime and at half filling. Two main conclusions are
drawn. Firstly, short-range interactions in quantum gases are sufficient
for the appearance of charge stripe-ordered phases. When they occur, a
first order phase transition between a checkerboard-crystal phase and
phase-separated state (a segregated phase) is impossible: by varying the
intensity of a direct nearest-neighbor interaction between the immobile
particles, the both systems can be driven from a segregated phase via
striped phases (for instance, via a diagonal-striped phase in the case
of fermions, and via vertical- (horizontal-) striped phases in the case
of hardcore bosons) to the checkerboard phase. Secondly, the phase
diagrams of the two systems (mobile fermions or mobile hardcore bosons)
are definitely different. However, if the strongest effective
interaction in the fermionic case gets frustrated gently, then the phase
diagram becomes similar to that of the bosonic case.

We show that any anisotropy of nearest-neighbor hopping eliminates the
@xmath -rotation degeneracy of the so called dimeric and axial-stripe
phases and orients them in the direction of a weaker hopping. Moreover,
due to the same anisotropy the obtained phase diagrams of fermions show
a tendency to become similar to those of hardcore bosons.

Finally, introducing a next-nearest-neighbor hopping, small enough not
to destroy the striped structure, we examine rigorously how the presence
of the next-nearest-neighbor hopping anisotropy reduces the @xmath
-rotation degeneracy of the diagonal-striped phase. The effect appears
to be similar to that in the case of anisotropy of the nearest-neighbor
hopping: the stripes are oriented in the direction of the weaker
next-nearest-neighbor hopping.
