##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 The Falicov–Kimball models
    -    2.1 Definition
    -    2.2 Symmetries and other basic properties
    -    2.3 Strong-coupling expansion of the ground-state energy at
        half-filling — the method
        -    2.3.1 Local projections
        -    2.3.2 First-order unitary transformation for fermions
        -    2.3.3 Second-order unitary transformation for fermions
        -    2.3.4 The case of hard-core bosons
        -    2.3.5 Building the ground-state phase diagram
    -    2.4 @xmath -potential method
        -    2.4.1 Definition of @xmath -potentials
        -    2.4.2 Definition of zero-potentials
        -    2.4.3 First kind zero-potentials
        -    2.4.4 Second kind zero-potentials
        -    2.4.5 Some remarks on constructing zero-potentials
-    3 Stability of striped phases
    -    3.1 Introducing the modifications to the Falicov–Kimball model
    -    3.2 Zeroth- and second-order effective interactions — phase
        diagram
    -    3.3 Fourth-order effective interactions — phase diagram
    -    3.4 Discussion of phase diagrams
-    4 Influence of nearest-neighbor anisotropy on axial striped phases
    -    4.1 The effective interaction up to the fourth order
    -    4.2 The smallest deviation from the isotropic case
    -    4.3 The intermediate deviation from the isotropic case
    -    4.4 Discussion of the phase diagrams and conclusions
-    5 Influence of next-nearest-neighbor anisotropy on
    diagonally-striped phases
    -    5.1 The effective interaction up to the fourth order
    -    5.2 Diagonally-striped phase versus n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy
-    6 Conclusions
-    Acknowledgments
-    Appendix A
-    Appendix B
-    Appendix C
-    Appendix D
-    Appendix E

## 1 Introduction

In the passing decade, some specific phases, having
quasi-one-dimensional structure, the so called striped phases, have been
a highly debated subject in condensed-matter physics. Apparently, a
broad interest in such phases was initiated by reports presenting
experimental evidence for the existence of charge stripes in doped
layered perovskites, some of which constitute materials exhibiting
high-temperature superconductivity [ 1 , 2 ] .

However, striped phases had been observed much earlier, for instance in
physisorbed monolayers on metallic surfaces (see [ 3 ] and references
therein), or in ultrathin magnetic films [ 4 ] . Many other instances of
experimental observations of stripe-ordered phases are listed in [ 5 ] ,
where Monte-Carlo studies of formation of striped phases in a continuous
gas with hardcore and short-range repulsive interactions are reported.
Theoretical descriptions, including computer simulations, of these
phenomena involve various kinds of classical lattice-gas models (also
termed classical spin models) with competing interactions: for
physisorbed monolayers see Ref. [ 6 ] , for ultrathin magnetic films see
Ref. [ 7 ] . Striped phases have been also studied in the framework of
quantum-spin models, like @xmath model for instance [ 8 ] . Interesting
theoretical considerations of stripe phases in a two-dimensional
electron gas, physically realizable in MOSFET’s, based on classical spin
models with competing interactions, can be found in Ref. [ 9 ] .

Quite interestingly, theoretical studies of striped phases in systems of
strongly correlated electrons [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] have preceded
experimental observations of such phases. But only after those
observations, the discussion became much more vigorous, and the nature
of stripe-ordered phases started to attract attention of numerous
researchers. In the context of the Hubbard model, a comprehensive review
of the problem can be found in [ 14 ] . The existence of the same kind
of striped phases was investigated also in the @xmath – @xmath model [
15 , 16 , 17 ] . A bird’s eye view on the problem of stripe-ordered
phases in high-temperature superconductors, but emphasizing its general
relevance for contemporary condensed-matter physics can be found in [ 18
] . The general relevance of striped phases is underlined also in [ 19 ]
, where they are viewed as an emergent phenomenon resulting from
collective motions of microscopic particles, somewhat analogous to
quasi-particles like phonons.

The Hubbard or @xmath – @xmath -like models belong to the most realistic
models, in the framework of which the problem of striped-ordered phases
in doped layered perovskites can be investigated (see a review paper by
Oleś [ 14 ] ). In the both models, the spin and the charge degrees of
freedom are taken into account, and it is believed that it is the
competition between these degrees of freedom that is decisive for the
formation of striped phases. The major difference between Hubbard,
@xmath – @xmath , and similar quantum-particle models for stripe
formation, on one side, and the classical or quantum spin models
(mentioned above) on the second side, is the role of the kinetic energy.
It is absent in the second group of models while it plays a crucial role
in the first group. The model studied by us in this thesis belong to the
first group.

The question of formation of striped phases is closely related to the
question of relative stability of these phases against mixtures of an
electron-reach phase and a hole-reach phase (segregated phases). Due to
the tiny energy differences between both phases, the results obtained by
means of approximate methods, which introduce hardly-controllable
errors, are disparate. Therefore, as pointed out in [ 19 , 20 ] further
careful studies are necessary to settle the problem of formation of
stripe-ordered phases. One of possible ways of attacking this problem is
to formulate analog problems in less realistic but simpler models, where
some control over the results obtained by means of various methods of
statistical physics and many-body physics can be gained. This leads
hopefully to a deeper insight into the, mentioned above, stability
problem.

Such an approach has been adopted by many researchers, using models of
the both groups mentioned above. Here are two examples concerning
classical spin models. To investigate the phenomenon of frustrated phase
separation in high-temperature superconductors, Löw et al [ 21 ]
consider a spin 1 two-dimensional Ising model with short-range
ferromagnetic coupling competing with long-range antiferromagnetic
Coulomb interactions, where spin variables are coarsegrained
representations of the local density of mobile holes. By means of
combined analytical and numerical techniques they show that the
transition between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic states proceeds
via numerous phases, among which there are striped phases. In a recent
paper, Valdez-Balderas and Stroud [ 22 ] investigate, by means of Monte
Carlo techniques, a competition between superconductivity and other
types of order in two dimensions. Each site of the underlying lattice,
occupied by a classical @xmath spin (plane rotator), is interpreted by
them as a mobile, positively charged superconducting domain, and the
orientation of the spin as a phase of the superconducting order
parameter of this domain. Vacant sites represent negatively charged
nonsuperconducting domains. The nearest neighbor spins are coupled
ferromagnetically (a representation of Josephson tunneling) and the
occupied sites repel each other with a kind of a screened Coulomb
interaction. By varying the relative strength of the two competing
interactions, the system is driven from a phase separated state to a
checkerboard-like state via a series of complex patterns of
self-organization, including some kinds of striped phases.

And here are examples concerning quantum-particle models. Buhler et al [
23 ] have found, by means of Monte Carlo simulations, that upon hole
doping antiferromagnetic spin domains and charge stripes, whose
properties are in very good agreement with experiments, appear in a
spin-fermion model for cuprates. Using the so called restricted phase
diagrams, the stability problem of charge-stripe phases has been studied
in the spinless Falicov–Kimball model by Lemański et al [ 20 , 24 ] . In
their study the formation of charge stripe-ordered phases can be looked
upon as a way the system interpolates between a periodic charge-density
wave phase (the chessboard phase) and the segregated phase (a mixture of
completely filled and completely empty phases), as the degree of doping
varies. A considerable reduction of the Hilbert space dimension in a
spinless fermion model with infinite nearest-neighbor repulsion (as
compared to a Hubbard model) has been exploited by Zhang and Henley [ 19
, 25 ] to study carefully, by means of an exact diagonalization
technique, the formation of charge stripe-ordered phases upon doping.
They addressed also an interesting question of the role of quantum
statistics in the problem of striped phases, by replacing fermion
particles with hardcore-boson ones.

Our work has been inspired mainly by the recent studies of Lemański et
al [ 20 , 24 ] and by Zhang and Henley [ 19 , 25 ] . To investigate the
key question, whether charge stripe-ordered phases are stable compared
to a phase-separated state, we study rigorously the strong-coupling
limit of an extended spinless Falicov–Kimball model on a square lattice,
with mobile particles being spinless fermions or hardcore bosons. The
usual spinless Falicov–Kimball Hamiltonian (such as that studied in [ 26
] ) has been augmented by a direct, Ising-like interaction between the
immobile particles.

In the framework of striped-structures formations, one of the
interesting questions, the influence of hopping anisotropy on striped
phases, was investigated by means of the Hartree–Fock method in [ 14 ,
27 ] . They showed that under an anisotropy in hopping intensities,
stripes become oriented in the direction of weaker hopping. This problem
is investigated here rigorously, using the introduced model.

The thesis is organized as follows. In the next section we give some
insight into the Falicov–Kimball model, providing its main properties,
and we introduce technics which are used for deriving our results. Then,
in Section 3 we present the considered models and construct phase
diagrams due to truncated effective interactions. After that, in
Sections 4 and 5, we analyze the influence of hopping anisotropy on
striped phases. Finally, we draw conclusions and provide a summary.
Various technical details a placed in Appendices (from A to E). Our
original results are contained in Sections 3,4, and 5, and have been
published in [ 28 , 29 , 30 ] , respectively.

## 2 The Falicov–Kimball models

In this section we give the definition of the spinless Falicov–Kimball
model and it basic properties. First of all, we discuss possible
interpretations of the model in respect to history of its development.
We also shortly mention about today’s topics of interest. In the second
paragraph we present some useful properties of the model. The following
paragraphs deal with technics we use to investigate the model: we make a
sketch of a perturbation scheme and discuss the @xmath -potential method
in more details.

### 2.1 Definition

The spinless Falicov–Kimball model, on arbitrary lattice @xmath is
described by the Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where sites on lattice @xmath are denoted as @xmath , whose number is
@xmath , and the first summation is over the pairs of different sites
@xmath and @xmath , with each pair counted once. The system described by
Hamiltonian ( 1 ) consists of two sorts of spinless particles: quantum
which can hop (usually between nearest-neighbors sites) on the lattice
with hopping amplitude @xmath (we call them electrons ) and classical
which are immobile ( ions ). The electrons, as quantum particles, are
described by creation and annihilation operators on site @xmath : @xmath
and @xmath , respectively, which satisfy the appropriate commutation
relations: canonical anticommutation relations for spinless fermions or
commutation relations of spin @xmath operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
for hard-core bosons. The total electron-number operator is @xmath and
corresponding electron density is @xmath . Classical ions, are described
by pseudo-spin (or simply, spin ) @xmath on cite @xmath : if @xmath ,
site @xmath is occupied by an ion and, if @xmath the site @xmath is
empty. Ions are described in terms of spins for convenience: instead of
spin variable @xmath we can use occupation-number variable @xmath . The
collection of spins values @xmath is called the ion configuration . The
total number of ions is @xmath and the ion density is @xmath . There is
no direct interaction either between the electrons or between the ions,
although there is the simple on-site interaction between the two kinds
of particles with coupling constant @xmath . It is clear that the
particle-number operators @xmath , @xmath , and spins @xmath are
conserved. Therefore, the description of the classical subsystem in
terms of the ion configurations @xmath remains valid. Whenever periodic
configurations of pseudo-spins are considered, it is assumed that @xmath
is sufficiently large, so that it accommodates an integer number of
elementary cells.

The Falicov–Kimball model was first considered by Hubbard [ 31 ] and
Gutzwiller [ 32 ] as a simplification of the one-band Hubbard model,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath , and @xmath for arbitrary sign of coupling constant @xmath
. This is an approximation of the Hubbard model in the case of
infinitely heavy spin-up electrons.

In 1969 this model was introduced by Falicov and Kimball in order to
explain metal–insulator transitions in mixed valence compounds of
rare-earth materials [ 33 ] . Experiments suggested that these
transitions occur only due to the interactions between electrons:
localized immobile @xmath -electrons (ions) and @xmath -electrons in
Bloch-like states. The model described by ( 1 ) is the simplification of
the original model, suggested in [ 33 ] .

In 1986, Kennedy and Lieb reinvestigated Falicov–Kimball model as a
“static Hubbard model”. It was used in [ 34 ] and [ 35 ] to study
crystallization. Some rigorous results concerning the model were
presented in these works for the first time. Mainly, they proved the
existence of the phase transition in the model for any value of @xmath
and for sufficiently low temperature.

In the last years the Falicov–Kimball model is intensively studied in
the frame of the dynamical mean field theory, where properties of the
system could be calculated exactly in the limit of infinite dimension
(see review [ 36 ] ).

We would like to mention about the numerical studies of the
Falicov–Kimball-like models, which are provided on finite clusters and
are performed by Farkašovský and co-workers (see for e.g. [ 37 ] , [ 38
] , [ 39 ] ).

Due to the relative simplicity of the model, a variety of modifications
have been applied to it. First of all it can be considered on different
types of lattices. In [ 40 ] , the model was considered on a triangular
lattice. Due to increasing interest of such systems on lattices such as
Kagomé or pyrochlore, studies of the Falicov–Kimball model on them are
going to be instructive.

An interesting problem arises on changing the statistic of quantum
particles. In [ 40 ] the electron subsystem, whose particles obey Fermi
statistic where replaced by a system of hard-core bosons. Since two
bosons cannot occupy the same site, because of hard-core interaction,
the subsystem consists of interacting particles. A comparison of this
two statistics might be useful for computer simulations, where fermions
are often replaced by hard-core bosons, in order to make computations
easier.

One of the alterations, which was studied recently, is the so-called
correlated hopping , i.e. the hopping intensity @xmath depends on
occupation numbers of ions on sites @xmath and @xmath . Influence of the
correlated hopping on the phase diagram of the simple Falicov–Kimball
model was investigated in [ 41 ] in the case of 1D model, and in [ 42 ]
and [ 43 ] in 2D.

Another simple modification, which perhaps makes the model more
realistic, is introduction of a spin degree of freedom. It was studied
by Brandt et al. in [ 44 ] and [ 45 ] . Recently, using perturbation
technique, the Falicov–Kimball model in case of infinite Coulomb
repulsion between classical ions with different spin orientation at the
same site was investigated in [ 46 ] . The model with an additional
spin-depended Ising-type interaction (Ising–Falicov–Kimball model) was
studied recently in [ 47 ] .

Historical review and list of new trends, as well as extended comments,
concerning the field of the Falicov–Kimball model are given in a short
guide [ 48 ] .

### 2.2 Symmetries and other basic properties

We are interested in ground-state properties of the Falicov–Kimball
model. We describe its ground state from the point of ion subsystem, so
the main question is the ground-state configuration of ions. Here the
model on a square lattice is considered, though many properties of the
model can be extended to a wider class of latices. The most convenient
ensemble for our purposes is the grand-canonical ensemble. Let,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath , @xmath are chemical potentials of electrons and ions,
respectively.

First, we notice, that for a fixed configuration @xmath Hamiltonian ( 1
), in the case when electrons obey Fermi statistic, describes a system
of free Fermi particles in an external field @xmath . The Hamiltonian (
1 ) is the second-quantized version of the single particle Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is @xmath -matrix with the elements @xmath . However, the
configuration of ions @xmath is not fixed in the system: the
configuration of ions should minimize the whole Hamiltonian @xmath , and
the main question of describing the ion subsystem is to find such a
configuration for specific values of @xmath . This follows from the form
of a partition function,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the sum runs over all the configurations and the trace is taken
over the fermion Fock space ( @xmath is the inverse temperature). In
other words, if @xmath is the ground-state energy of @xmath for a given
configuration @xmath of the ions, then we are looking for the
ground-state energy of @xmath , which is given by,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

The minimum is attained at the set @xmath of the ground-state
configurations of ions. The task is to determine the set @xmath in the
@xmath -plane.

For this purpose, it is useful to examine the spectrum of the
Hamiltonian ( 4 ) (in the case of fermions). When @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath is the coordination number of the underlaying lattice (
@xmath , for square lattice), there is a gap in the spectrum @xmath (the
so-called universal gap ). This gap is of great importance, because if
we suppose the chemical potential of electrons @xmath to be in the
universal gap,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

then the ground-state energy expansion, we use below, is absolutely
convergent, and uniformly in @xmath . Quite interestingly, a similar
condition holds in the case when quantum particles are hard-core bosons,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

This condition was obtained by Messager and Miracle-Solé in [ 49 ] ,
using a cluster expansion. Under conditions ( 7 ) and ( 8 ), for @xmath
positive (negative) and in the zero-temperature limit, the half-filling
condition , @xmath ( neutrality condition , @xmath ), is implied, either
for fermions or hard-core bosons.

In studies of grand-canonical phase diagrams an important role is played
by unitary transformations ( hole–particle transformations ) that
exchange particles and holes: @xmath , for electrons, and @xmath , for
ions.

The peculiarity of the model is that the case of attraction ( @xmath )
and the case of repulsion ( @xmath ) are related by a unitary
transformation (the hole–particle transformation for ions): if @xmath is
a ground-state configuration at @xmath for @xmath , then @xmath is the
ground-state configuration at @xmath for @xmath . This property holds
for both statistics, and does not depend on the form of hopping term.
Consequently, without any loss of generality one can fix the sign of the
coupling constant @xmath . In the following paragraphs we choose @xmath
and express all the other parameters of the Hamiltonian ( 3 ) in the
units of @xmath , i.e. formally we set @xmath , preserving previous
notations.

In the case, when only nearest-neighbor (n.n.) hopping terms are
present, i.e. @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath , this transformation for
some @xmath leave the Hamiltonian @xmath invariant. An example of such
transformation for the electrons is given by @xmath , where @xmath for
bosons; for fermions @xmath at the even sublattice of @xmath and @xmath
at the odd one. Since @xmath is invariant under the joint hole–particle
transformation of mobile and localized particles (when only n.n. hopping
is non-zero), @xmath is hole–particle invariant at the point @xmath . At
the hole–particle symmetry point, the system under consideration has
very special properties, which simplify studies of its phase diagram [
34 ] . Moreover, by means of the defined above hole–particle
transformations one can determine a number of symmetries of the
grand-canonical phase diagram [ 50 ] . With the sign of @xmath fixed,
applying joint hole–particle transformation for electrons and ions, one
concludes that there is an inversion symmetry of the grand-canonical
phase diagram. If @xmath is a ground-state configuration at @xmath ,
then @xmath is the ground-state configuration at @xmath . Therefore, it
is enough to determine the phase diagram in a half-plane specified by
fixing the sign of one of the chemical potentials.

Let us note, that in the case when the next-nearest-neighbor (n.n.n.)
hopping amplitude is nonzero, @xmath for @xmath , Hamiltonian ( 3 ) is
not invariant with respect to the joint hole–particle transformation for
any values of @xmath and @xmath .

Let us consider symmetry properties of the model with the following
restrictions: n.n. hopping is supposed to be independent of direction,
i.e. @xmath , for @xmath , and n.n.n. hopping amplitude differs @xmath
in two different directions. Moreover, we consider the system of
fermions only. Then applying the hole–particle transformation for
electrons, i.e. @xmath , and the hole–particle transformation for ions,
one finds that if @xmath is the ground-state configuration at @xmath ,
then @xmath is the ground-state configuration at @xmath . Thus, it is
enough to consider only one sign of n.n.n. hopping. We shall consider
the case of positive n.n.n. hopping intensities: @xmath . Using another
hole–particle transformation for electrons, @xmath , and the
hole-particle transformation for ions, we obtain that if @xmath is the
ground-state configuration at @xmath , then @xmath is the ground-state
configuration at @xmath . Applying consecutively the two joint (with
respect to electrons and ions) hole–particle transformations, we obtain
that if @xmath is the ground-state configuration at @xmath , it is also
the ground-state configuration at @xmath . So the relative sign of n.n.
and n.n.n. hopping amplitudes does not play any role in the model.

Above, we have briefly discussed those properties of our model, which
shall be useful in the sequel. For more extended picture of the
Falicov–Kimball model, its modifications, results and applications,
readers are referred to a series of reviews [ 48 ] , [ 51 ] , [ 52 ] and
[ 53 ] .

### 2.3 Strong-coupling expansion of the ground-state energy at
half-filling — the method

There are different ways of obtaining ground-state energy expansion. In
the case of fermions, when @xmath and @xmath , the ground-state energy
of the model can be written in the form [ 50 , 51 ] :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the one-particle Hamiltonian @xmath is given by ( 4 ), and @xmath
. The trace of @xmath , can be rewritten in the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, @xmath is the unity operator, @xmath stands for small
perturbation, @xmath . Expanding the square root into a power series of
@xmath , one obtains the ground-state energy expansion. Such a “square
root expansion” was applied in [ 50 ] .

An alternative way for fermions, the “resolvent expansion”, was used in
[ 40 ] . Ground-state energy ( 9 ) can be rewritten in the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a contour in the complex plain enclosing all the
negative eigenvalues of @xmath . In order to calculate the above
integral trace of resolvent is expanded into a power series of @xmath .

Unfortunately, the above methods are not applicable in the case when
quantum hopping particles are hard-core bosons. To obtain the
ground-state energy expansion in this case, a closed-loop expansion is
used, which was first applied in [ 49 ] for fermions, and then used for
hard-core bosons in [ 40 ] .

We use another, more powerful method, the method of unitary-equivalent
interactions, which is suitable not only for both systems, fermions and
hard-core bosons, but can also be applied to a wide class of
Hamiltonians. It was proposed in a series of papers [ 54 ] , [ 55 ] , [
56 ] and summarized in [ 57 ] . The main advantage of this method is
that the unitary transformations are applied locally, and that is why
the method is well-defined: the expansion is convergent, uniformly in
@xmath .

The idea of the method is the following. Considering the Hamiltonians
which are sums of local terms, @xmath ( @xmath is a finite set of sites
in @xmath ), they are supposed to consist of two parts: classical, which
is diagonal in some basis, and small quantum perturbation, which is
off-diagonal. With @xmath being the small parameter considered in the
model, we are looking for some unitary operator @xmath , which makes the
original Hamiltonian @xmath block-diagonal to order @xmath in some
basis, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the leading block-diagonal part @xmath contains terms up to the
@xmath -th order in @xmath , and off-diagonal part @xmath consists of (
@xmath )-th and higher order terms. Following this procedure, the
convergence of the expansion can be rigorously proven. Moreover, by
applying quantum Pirogov–Sinai theory, it was established that some
parts of the grand-canonical zero-temperature phase diagram of the
leading part is modified “slightly” when the whole expansion is taken
into account at zero or low-temperature regimes [ 57 ] .

Here we present a scheme of obtaining the ground-state energy expansion
for the Falicov–Kimball model up to the fourth order. We consider the
case where nearest-neighbor and next-nearest-neighbor hopping
intensities are anisotropic.

#### 2.3.1 Local projections

First we consider the system, where quantum hopping particles obey Fermi
statistic. Following [ 57 ] , we rewrite FK Hamiltonian ( 3 ) in the
form convenient for perturbation (up to some constant), i.e. “classical
part” plus “small quantum perturbation”:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the classical part,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

with the classical on-site potential,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the quantum perturbation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Operators @xmath are defined in the following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

and the role of the small parameter @xmath is played by @xmath , (the
so-called strong-coupling regime ). The method is applied in the
situation where for certain value of energy of the classical part there
are infinitely many states. Then, it is possible that the quantum
perturbation reduces this degeneracy by splitting the energy levels. Let
us look at the classical part, or the “zeroth order”. The phase diagram
of the classical interaction (Fig. 1 ) is partitioned into four parts.

On each boundary line between any two phases the degeneracy is infinite.
We are interested in the case of half-filling which corresponds to the
boundary line @xmath , ( @xmath ), the configurations on this line with
the lowest energy are characterized by the condition: each site of
lattice @xmath is occupied by one particle only, either ion or electron.

On the line @xmath we introduce the projection onto the ground state at
site @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

The projection onto excited states @xmath . It is easy to extend these
projections to the ground-state projection on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

In this case unity is given by @xmath , and hence the definition of the
projection onto exited states at the set @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

For calculation we need the following simple relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

If @xmath , then @xmath or @xmath commute with any projection at site
@xmath . These relations give immediately very useful properties for any
operator @xmath , with pair @xmath on lattice @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Another pairs of relations which correspond to ( 20 ) and ( 21 ) are
obtained by Hermitian conjugation.

Using these properties and the partition of unity, for @xmath , we can
rewrite @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

for @xmath ; where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

So the whole Hamiltonian ( 12 ) is rewritten in the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

#### 2.3.2 First-order unitary transformation for fermions

We are looking for a unitary transformation, that eliminates the
first-order off-diagonal term @xmath . The transformation can be written
in the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the operator @xmath is of order one, i.e. it depends on @xmath
with @xmath . Applying the first unitary transformation ( 26 ) and using
the Lie–Schwinger series, the transformed Hamiltonian can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where, the operation @xmath is defined as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Rewriting ( 27 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

and choosing the operator @xmath in the way to eliminate @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the above formula,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now our problem is to find the operator @xmath . If we suppose it to be
a sum of local operators,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

in order to satisfy the condition @xmath , @xmath can be chosen in the
form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Introducing the spectral decomposition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the spectral decomposition of @xmath there are three eigensubspaces
with eigenvalues @xmath and with the corresponding projections @xmath ,
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Note, that @xmath , and @xmath . Then, the spectral
decomposition of @xmath consists of six eigenvalues @xmath and
eigenprojections @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Considering the products @xmath , one finds that only two of them are
nonzero: @xmath and @xmath , for any @xmath . Using the projections
defined above, we can write the expression for operator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

To proceed, we have to consider commutators @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath . First, let us note that the commutator for @xmath vanishes
unless @xmath . In this case, the product,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

The first term in the brackets runs over all the possible pairs of
sites, i.e. @xmath . In the second term we introduce the extended
indices of summation, @xmath and @xmath , in order to stress that first
sum runs over all @xmath and pair @xmath is the n.n. pair of the @xmath
-type, and the second sum runs over @xmath (shown on Figs. 2 , 3 , 4 ),
such that pair @xmath is the n.n. pair of @xmath -th type. Whenever we
skip the index of direction (like ‘ @xmath ’ or ‘ @xmath ’) this means
that the summation is over all the possible directions. So, the notation
@xmath stands for sum over all n.n.n. pairs, each counted once.

The second-order term is @xmath , which after somewhat lengthy
calculations can be written in the form:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We have got all the elements which are necessary for obtaining the
effective Hamiltonian up to the third order (the second-order
ground-state energy expansion):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the ground state @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

and finally the second-order ground-state energy expansion is of the
form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.3.3 Second-order unitary transformation for fermions

Applying the second unitary transformation, we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the remainder of the fifth order:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In order to eliminate the second-order off-diagonal term @xmath , we
put:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The operator @xmath can be chosen in the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where, analogously as for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The spectral decomposition used in the above formula, is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Operator @xmath is constructed in the similar way as @xmath was. It
reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (39)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The next step, consists in calculating double commutators, @xmath that
appear in in ( 37 ) and ( 38 ). Each commutant @xmath , of these
commutators, has the form @xmath . Applying the same argument as before
(commutators vanish unless commutants are defined on subsets
intersection of which is not empty), we restrict ourselves to the
products where the sets of sites, on which each multiplier is defined,
forms a connected path, i.e. each site on a path has nearest neighbor,
or next-nearest neighbor, or both. Another thing, worth mentioning, is
that, even considering the fourth order only, we do not need to
calculate all the expressions in ( 37 ) and ( 38 ). The result, we are
interested in, is projected onto ground state, hence, some of the terms
vanish. The following property of operators @xmath is useful. Because of
relations ( 20 ) it is clear, that if we consider the path, @xmath , the
expression

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

only if each of indices @xmath in the subscript of @xmath repeated even
number of times. With this condition satisfied, let us note that any
operator @xmath or @xmath is equal to zero after projecting onto ground
states. We will use these properties during calculations third- and
fourth order terms.

##### Third order.

The calculation of the third order terms is the calculation of @xmath .
First note, that in our case there is only one type of path that
consists of three pairs of n.n. or n.n.n sites and product of three
operators @xmath on it satisfies the condition ( 40 ) (see Fig. 5 ).

In addition, after ground-state projection only @xmath is nonzero. Using
the multiplication rule in a way described above, we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

or in terms of spin variables:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where the set of paths @xmath splits into two parts, @xmath and @xmath ,
where n.n.n. part of the path has the slope @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The @xmath stands for the product of spins which belong to
@xmath . This is the third-order correction to the effective
Hamiltonian.

##### Fourth order.

To consider fourth-order products, we start with describing connected
paths that satisfy condition ( 40 ) for a product of four operators
@xmath . There are three types of such paths: @xmath -type path, i.e the
path consisting of the pair (n.n. or n.n.n.) of two sites @xmath ;
@xmath -type path, i.e. the path consisting of three sites that formed
by two pairs @xmath and @xmath ; @xmath -type path, i.e. the path
consisting of four sites which are in the form of closed loop and are
formed by four different pairs of sites, — @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The corresponding product of @xmath ’s to the @xmath -type path
is @xmath . The product proportional to @xmath corresponds to @xmath
-type path. The product of the type @xmath corresponds to the @xmath
-type path. Only these types of products contribute to the ground-state
projection of @xmath . Another thing connected with calculations, is
that some terms, like @xmath , vanish on projecting onto the
ground-state. Performing all necessary calculations, we finally obtain:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The paths @xmath are shown in Fig. 6 .

We group the terms and rewrite it using spins variables. Note, that
during this procedure the summation over @xmath is replaced. Summing up,
the fourth-order correction to the ground-state energy expansion, reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

The whole ground-state energy expansion up to the fourth order,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given by ( 34 ), ( 41 ) and ( 42 ),
respectively. The remainder @xmath is independent of the chemical
potentials, and collects all the terms proportional to @xmath , with
@xmath .

#### 2.3.4 The case of hard-core bosons

On replacing the hopping fermions with hard-core bosons, the commutation
rules change: operators of creation and annihilation at different sites
commute. Using the same technic as in the case of fermions we obtain the
ground-state energy expansion in the case of hard-core bosons. For the
system of hard-core boson we consider only the case @xmath . The second
order correction to the “classical” part @xmath remains the same as for
fermions. The third order disappears (due to the absence of n.n.n.
hopping, on the square lattice the path that satisfy condition ( 40 )
for a product of three @xmath operators does not exist), and the
fourth-order correction, reads:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

#### 2.3.5 Building the ground-state phase diagram

We make some remarks on the expression of the ground-state energy
expansion ( 43 ) in both cases: hopping fermions and hard-core bosons
(in the case of hard-core bosons @xmath and @xmath in ( 43 ) is replaced
with @xmath , given by ( 44 )). In the above expressions we keep even
the terms, that are independent of spin variables, hence have no
influence on the phase diagram and so can be omitted. The effective
Hamiltonian ( 43 ) depends only on @xmath , which we call the unique
chemical potential parameter .

The procedure of building the phase diagram is recursive. The phase
diagram of the effective interaction truncated at the order @xmath is
constructed on the basis of the phase diagram obtained at the preceding
order @xmath : the conditions imposed on the ground-state configurations
by the @xmath -th order effective Hamiltonian have to be obeyed by the
ground-state configurations of the @xmath -th order effective
Hamiltonian. In other words, the @xmath -th order terms of the expansion
cannot change the hierarchy of configuration’s energies established by
the @xmath -th order effective Hamiltonian; they can only split the
energies of configurations in cases of degeneracy.

### 2.4 @xmath-potential method

To proceed, we need to introduce some definitions. First, as was already
mentioned, we denote the configuration of spins on the lattice @xmath as
@xmath , and @xmath takes two values, either @xmath or @xmath , at any
site @xmath . We call @xmath the restriction of the configuration @xmath
to the subset of sites @xmath with @xmath sites, i.e. @xmath . Instead
of talking about functions of spin variables @xmath , it is convenient
to use the function of configuration @xmath (spin @xmath depends on the
configuration at site @xmath , @xmath ). For @xmath , let @xmath be a
function of configurations such that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.4.1 Definition of @xmath-potentials

The concept of the @xmath -potential was introduced in [ 58 ] , and its
idea is the following. Suppose that for some @xmath , it is possible to
write a Hamiltonian, which is a function of configurations, in the form,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

where by the sum @xmath we understand the summation over all
translations of @xmath in @xmath . Assume, that there exists a certain
set of periodic configurations @xmath (global configurations) which
minimize the potential @xmath for @xmath (local configurations). If it
holds for all translations of @xmath in @xmath , then we say that @xmath
is an @xmath -potential and the set @xmath is the set of the
ground-state configurations.

Let us present two examples. Consider the antiferromagnetic Ising model
on a square lattice ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

The potential @xmath is an @xmath -potential. Indeed, the local minimum
for this potential is for configurations of nearest-neighbor pairs of
spins where one is up and the second is down: @xmath or @xmath . There
exist two global configurations, called the chessboard configurations,
which minimize the potentials @xmath for all @xmath : if we choose any
nearest-neighbor pair of sites, then the local configuration of the pair
will be one of those which minimize the @xmath . In other words, if we
can extend the local configuration (which is the ground-state
configuration locally) to the global one, in a way that other local
configurations with higher energy do not appear, we call the local
potential @xmath the @xmath -potential, and the global configuration is
the ground-state configuration because every potential under the sum has
minimum on it.

Now, we consider the same Ising model ( 46 ) on a triangular lattice. As
in the case of square lattice, local nearest-neighbor configurations
remain the same. But the problem appears while trying to extend the
local configurations to the whole lattice @xmath : there is no such
global configuration, which is ground-state configuration locally. This
means that @xmath is not an @xmath -potential in this case (rewriting (
46 ) as a sum over elementary triangles, it appears that the
corresponding potential is @xmath -potential, however the number of
ground states is infinite).

Practically, potentials depend on some parameters and often they are
@xmath -potentials only for some range of these parameters. In order to
find the complete phase diagram, i.e. all ground-state configurations
for the whole range of the parameters, we are forced to build new @xmath
-potential. There is no recipe for constructing @xmath -potentials. The
only way to deal with the problem, as far as we know, is to introduce
the so-called zero-potentials.

#### 2.4.2 Definition of zero-potentials

The idea is simple: if some local potential does not satisfy the @xmath
-potential condition, then let’s change it by adding zero, which means
that we change it locally, but in a way that the total Hamiltonian
remains the same. So the most general definition of zero-potential
reads: a potential @xmath , is a zero potential if it satisfies the
zero-potential condition:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now, it is clear that adding such a potential to the @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

modifies only the local potential @xmath . Under the zero-potential
condition ( 47 ), @xmath has no definite structure. In the sequel we
shall consider two ways of constructing @xmath .

#### 2.4.3 First kind zero-potentials

In physics literature one can find two different ways of constructing
zero-potentials. The first method was proposed in [ 50 ] , where a part
of the ground-state phase diagram of the Falicov–Kimball model was
obtained for the first time in the fourth order. To illustrate the idea
of this method we provide an example. Let us consider Hamiltonian @xmath
with a local potential @xmath which is not an @xmath -potential. Now we
take some function (or several functions) of configurations on a set of
sites @xmath . For example, one of the simplest choices is @xmath ,
where @xmath is a number. We add and subtract this function, so the
Hamiltonian does not change,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

Next we chose a new set of sites @xmath (or several sets), and rewrite
the Hamiltonian in the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (50)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The problem is to find such a value of the coefficient @xmath that
converts potentials @xmath and @xmath into @xmath -potentials. Here it
means that the @xmath -potential condition must be satisfied for the
both types of sets @xmath and @xmath : the restriction of a global
ground-state configuration to any @xmath and @xmath should minimize the
corresponding potentials @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.4.4 Second kind zero-potentials

Another method, was proposed in [ 59 ] and in [ 40 ] . In contrast to
the first method, where zero-potentials are of the form @xmath (i.e. the
zero-potential condition is satisfied locally), no such restrictions are
applied to its form. However, it is convenient to choose a
zero-potential in a way that leaves the Hamiltonian’s symmetry
unchanged. We show here how to obtain zero potentials for the case when
@xmath is a @xmath -plaquette, later on called the @xmath -plaquette
(Fig. 7 ).

We assume that @xmath does not change under rotations by @xmath and
reflections.

Any function @xmath can be rewritten in a form,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath runs over all possible configurations, @xmath is a value of
function @xmath for specific configuration @xmath and @xmath is an
indicator function of configuration @xmath , i.e. it is equal to @xmath
when @xmath and is zero otherwise.

The construction of an indicator function @xmath for specific
configuration @xmath is simple. At a site @xmath the indicator function
for spin up is @xmath , for spin down is @xmath . The indicator function
at @xmath , is defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

Performing the summation in ( 51 ) and taking into account the form of
the indicator functions ( 52 ), any function @xmath , can be written as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (53)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath are the values which determine the function @xmath .
Notation @xmath stands for the product of all spins which belong to
@xmath , @xmath . For @xmath , the coefficient @xmath and @xmath .

Another way to show the identity ( 53 ) and give a formula for finding
the coefficients in ( 53 ) is to consider the functions @xmath instead
of indicator functions @xmath . If @xmath is the number of spins in
@xmath oriented down, then @xmath . Let us define the scalar product in
the set of functions of configurations:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath runs over all possible configurations on @xmath . Now we
show, that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

Let us consider the product,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which follows simply from the form of @xmath ; here @xmath . Using the
fact, that for any set X,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

we obtain expression ( 55 ). Since the functions @xmath are orthonormal
and there are as many @xmath as @xmath , they constitute an orthonormal
basis, and any function @xmath , can be expanded as follows,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to ( 53 ), where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

We are looking for a zero-potential @xmath in a form ( 53 ). We can
always set @xmath although it can change the Hamiltonian only by a
constant. So for a @xmath -plaquette, which we will use later, we choose
the zero-potential in a form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (58)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Now applying to these objects the symmetry operations of the Hamiltonian
and the zero-potential condition ( 47 ) we can eliminate some of the
arbitrary coefficients @xmath . For instance, we consider the first
term:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

Demanding @xmath to be invariant with respect to symmetry operations
(rotations or reflections), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

The zero-potential condition ( 47 ) now reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and holds for any configuration @xmath . That directly implies the
condition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

Expressing @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

only two coefficients remain independent, and the expression is of the
form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

Similarly, we can obtain other zero-potentials applying the procedure
sketched above to products of nearest-neighbors spins,
next-nearest-neighbors, etc. Finally, we can rewrite @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

are the only two symmetric zero-potentials of the form ( 59 ). For a
@xmath -plaquette, there are @xmath independent symmetrical zero
potentials. The complete list of them is presented in Appendix A.

Now, having zero potentials, we are trying to find such a vector @xmath
that makes the total potential (the original potential @xmath plus the
zero potential @xmath ) an @xmath -potential. Components @xmath are
called the zero-potential coefficients. Both, in the first and the
second methods, there are no restrictions for @xmath but we suppose,
that they are functions of the Hamiltonian’s parameters @xmath . For
convenience, we write the set of parameters @xmath as a vector @xmath .

The both methods have their own advantages and disadvantages. For our
purposes the second one is more suitable for two reasons. First of all,
adding a zero-potential conserves the symmetry of the system. As a
result, the number of block configurations whose energies we have to
compare is reduced significantly. The second reason is that extending
some local configurations to the whole lattice is much simpler in the
case when we have one type of blocks, say @xmath -plaquettes only. If
other blocks are present, like @xmath in the first method, then we have
to check if potential @xmath in ( 50 ), is an @xmath -potential for a
configuration we have built using ground-state configurations of the
potential @xmath , or vice versa.

#### 2.4.5 Some remarks on constructing zero-potentials

Let the Hamiltonian, a function of configurations, be the linear
function of parameters @xmath (by linear function we understand function
which is convex and concave simultaneously), and it is possible to
rewrite it in the following form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is linear in @xmath and is not an @xmath -potential. Adding
the zero-potential @xmath in the form ( 64 ), we suppose that a
zero-potential vector @xmath is the linear function of a vector of
parameters @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

and we are looking for a vector @xmath for which the above potential is
an @xmath -potential for any vector of parameters @xmath .
Unfortunately, we hardly ever succeed in finding a zero-potential vector
which converts @xmath into an @xmath -potential for the whole range of
the parameters; usually coefficients @xmath can be found in a certain
range of the parameters only. So sometimes we need several sets of
zero-potential coefficients to cover the whole range of the considered
parameters. Such an approach is used in Section 3.

In studies of the minimum of the potentials, the following observation
is useful. Consider two points in the parameters space, @xmath and
@xmath , and such @xmath , @xmath in each point, respectively, that the
potentials @xmath and @xmath are minimized at some sets of local
configurations @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and @xmath . There
exist only one linear function @xmath on the line segment between points
@xmath and @xmath whose values are equal to @xmath at @xmath and @xmath
at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

This definition ensures that potential @xmath is linear in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

We claim that a set of block configurations that realizes the minimum of
energy @xmath on the line segment between @xmath and @xmath , is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

Indeed, let @xmath , i.e.:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

Then by ( 69 ) and ( 70 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any configuration @xmath and any @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath .

Now we shall demonstrate that for @xmath the opposite inclusion holds.
Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath . In particular, the above inequality holds for @xmath ,
and can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

for any @xmath . Simultaneously, since each of the energy differences
(in square brackets) in ( 71 ) is nonnegative,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

By ( 71 ) and ( 72 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath , hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies in turn that @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proof has a simple geometrical interpretation (Fig. 8 ).

All energies are linear functions of @xmath , so if there exist a point
at @xmath where some block configuration @xmath has a lower energy than
that of @xmath , then at least at one of the points, @xmath or @xmath ,
the energy of @xmath is lower than the energy of local ground state
configuration.

So, there is no need to find zero-potential coefficients everywhere: in
order to find them for some interval @xmath , it is enough to find them
at @xmath and at @xmath , where the sets of local ground state
configurations are @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The construction
described above guarantees that with @xmath for @xmath , the set of
local ground state configurations @xmath on the line segment @xmath is
given by @xmath . Such an approach is used in Section 4 and 5, where
zero-potential coefficients are given only on some semi-infinite lines
and at certain points.

## 3 Stability of striped phases

In this Section ¹ ¹ 1 This section is based on [ 28 ] . we consider two
strongly correlated quantum systems, described by Falicov–Kimball-like
Hamiltonians on a square lattice, extended by direct short-range
interactions between the immobile particles. In the first system hopping
particles are spinless fermions while in the second one they are
hardcore bosons. Ground-state phase diagrams of the both systems in the
strong-coupling regime and at half-filling are constructed rigorously.
Two main conclusions are drawn. Firstly, short-range interactions in
quantum gases are sufficient for the appearance of charge stripe-ordered
phases. By varying the intensity of a direct nearest-neighbor
interaction between the immobile particles, the both systems can be
driven from a phase-separated state (the segregated phase) to a
crystalline state (the chessboard phase) and these transitions occur
necessarily via charge-stripe phases: via a diagonal striped phase in
the case of fermions and via vertical (horizontal) striped phases in the
case of hardcore bosons. Secondly, the phase diagrams of the two systems
(mobile fermions or mobile hardcore bosons) are definitely different.
However, if the strongest effective interaction in the fermionic case
gets frustrated gently, then the phase diagram becomes similar to that
of the bosonic case.

### 3.1 Introducing the modifications to the Falicov–Kimball model

The task is to generate the physical situation, where the striped phases
appear, in the framework of Falicov–Kimball model. For technical
reasons, our analysis is restricted to the case of half-filling, where
the well-defined expansion can be written. However, it is now well
established (proven) [ 26 , 60 ] that, in the fermion spinless
Falicov–Kimball model the phase-separated state, the segregated phase,
is stable only off the half-filling. Thus, an additional interaction is
needed to stabilize the segregated phase at half-filling.

In the regime of singly occupied sites and for strong-coupling, the
strongest effective interaction in the Hubbard model is the Heisenberg
antiferromagnetic interaction. Doping of holes can be seen as means to
weaken the strong tendency toward antiferromagnetic ordering and to make
possible a phase separated state with hole-reach and electron-reach
regions. Under similar conditions, in the spinless Falicov–Kimball model
an analogous role is played by the Ising-like n.n. repulsive interaction
between the immobile particles that favors a chessboard-like ordering.
The effect of weakening of the strong tendency toward chessboard
ordering can be achieved by an extra Ising-like n.n. interaction that
compensates the strongest repulsive interaction, and consequently
permits the system to reach a phase-separated state, the segregated
phase. On varying, in a suitable interval of values, the corresponding
interaction constant, which is our control parameter, we can study how
the both systems “evolve” from the crystalline chessboard phase to the
segregated one.

Here, we would like to make a remark concerning physical interpretations
of our extended Falicov–Kimball model. The classical spin models, like
those studied in [ 21 , 22 ] can be considered as classical effective
models of crystallization that contain the necessary “ingredients” of
such models. Namely, in these models there are two competing
interactions, one favoring phase separation into macroscopic regions,
which are either empty or completely filled with particles, the other
favoring periodic arrangements of particles. Our extended
Falicov–Kimball model, with hopping fermions, can be thought of as a
microscopic quantum model of crystallization. In this case, the
necessary “ingredients” are: the tendency towards crystalline orders,
coming from the kinetic energy of itinerant electrons and from the
screened (in our case on site) electron-ion Coulomb interaction, a kind
of Van der Walls attractive forces, favoring phase separated state, and
finally the hard-core repulsion provided by the underlying lattice and
the Pauli principle.

In what follows, the modified Hamiltonian reads:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is given by ( 1 ), and a direct Ising-like interaction
@xmath between the immobile particles is of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath stands for an intensity of direct n.n. interaction between
ions. We also include a subsidiary direct interaction between the
immobile particles, an Ising-like n.n.n. interaction with intensity
@xmath , much weaker than the n.n. interaction. This interaction can
reinforce or frustrate the n.n. interaction, depending on the sign of
its interaction constant. It appears that on varying @xmath , the
systems (fermion or boson) characterized by different values of n.n.n.
interactions, may undergo different sequences of transitions between the
chessboard phase and the segregated one. We find, in particular, that if
we set appropriate values of the n.n.n. interaction in the fermion
system and in the boson one, then the both systems settle in the same
phases, for typical values of the control parameter. On the other hand,
the n.n.n. interaction enables us to demonstrate that the ground-state
phase diagrams in the cases of mobile fermions and mobile hardcore
bosons are definitely different.

To simplify the model, we consider the case where only n.n. hopping is
nonzero and does not depend on direction. So we put @xmath , and @xmath
. We are interesting in investigation of the ground-state phase diagrams
of our systems, so the grand-canonical formalism is used. We use the
expansion ( 43 ) which was obtained in the strong-coupling regime and at
half-filling. In this case, with the expansion terms up to order four
shown explicitly, it reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (75)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

for fermions, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (76)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

for hardcore bosons, up to a term independent of the ion configuration
and the chemical potentials. The remainders @xmath , @xmath , are
independent of the chemical potential @xmath and the parameters @xmath
and @xmath , and collect those terms of the expansion that are
proportional to @xmath , with @xmath .

Due to the convergence of the expansions ( 75 ) and ( 76 ), it is
possible to establish rigorously a part of the phase diagram (that is
the ground-state configurations of ions are determined everywhere in the
@xmath -plane, except some small regions), by determining the phase
diagram of the expansion truncated at the order @xmath , that is
according to the @xmath -th order effective Hamiltonians @xmath and
@xmath . In order to construct a phase diagram according to a @xmath -th
order effective Hamiltonian, we use the @xmath -potential method.

### 3.2 Zeroth- and second-order effective interactions — phase diagram

As was discussed above, up to the second order the effective
Hamiltonians for fermions and hardcore bosons are the same. Hence, the
discussion that follows applies to the both cases, and the common
effective Hamiltonians are denoted as @xmath , @xmath .

In the zeroth order,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the primed sums in ( 78 ) are restricted to a plaquette @xmath . For
any @xmath , the plaquette potentials @xmath are minimized by the
restrictions to a plaquette @xmath of a few periodic configurations of
ions on @xmath . Namely, @xmath — the empty configuration ( @xmath — the
completely filled configuration), where @xmath at every site ( @xmath at
every site), and the chessboard configurations @xmath , where @xmath ,
and @xmath (where @xmath ), with @xmath if @xmath belongs to the even
sublattice of @xmath and @xmath otherwise. Moreover, out of the
restrictions of those configurations to a plaquette @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , only four ground-state configurations on
@xmath can be built, which coincide with the four configurations named
above. Clearly, this is due to the direct n.n.n. attractive interaction
between the ions. The section of the phase diagram in the @xmath space
by a plane with @xmath , according to the effective Hamiltonian @xmath ,
is shown in Fig. 10 .

In the second order,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (79)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the primed sums are restricted to a plaquette @xmath . Since @xmath
differs from @xmath by the strength of n.n. interactions, the only
effect on the phase diagram is that the coexistence lines are translated
by the vector @xmath . The section of the phase diagram in the @xmath
space by a plane with @xmath , according to the effective Hamiltonian
@xmath , is shown in Fig. 10 .

### 3.3 Fourth-order effective interactions — phase diagram

It follows from the investigation of the phase diagram up to the second
order that the degeneracy is finite, independently of the size of @xmath
, everywhere except the coexistence lines in the ( @xmath )-plane, where
it grows exponentially with @xmath . Only there the effect of the fourth
order interactions can be most significant. The meeting point of the
coexistence lines in the ( @xmath )-plane, where the coexistence line of
@xmath and @xmath sticks to the stability domain of chessboard
configurations, appears to be particularly interesting. In that point,
the energies of all the configurations are the same. In what follows, we
shall study the phase diagrams of spinless fermions and spinless
hardcore bosons up to the fourth order, in a neighborhood of radius
@xmath of the point @xmath . In this neighborhood, it is convenient to
introduce new coordinates, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

and a new (equivalent to @xmath ) @xmath -independent effective
Hamiltonian, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

Then, in the spirit of the @xmath -potential method, we express @xmath
by the potentials @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

where, in terms of the new variables,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (84)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

In ( 83 ) and ( 84 ), @xmath stands for a @xmath -plaquette of a square
lattice (see Fig. 7 ). The double-primed sums are restricted to a @xmath
-plaquette. For bosons, we introduce @xmath and @xmath in the same
manner as for fermions, with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (85)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

We have to search for the lowest-energy configurations of @xmath and
@xmath among all the configurations. Consequently, the potentials @xmath
and @xmath have to be minimized over all the @xmath -plaquette
configurations. There are (up to the symmetries of @xmath ) 102
different @xmath -plaquette configurations, shown in Fig. 29 in Appendix
B.

Unfortunately, in contrast to the lower-order cases, the potentials
@xmath and @xmath turn out to be the @xmath -potentials only in a small
part of @xmath -space. This difficulty can be overcome by introducing
the zero-potentials @xmath , that are invariant with respect to the
symmetries of @xmath and are given by ( 64 ). Coefficients @xmath ,
depending on @xmath in general, have to be determined in the process of
constructing the phase diagram, and the potentials @xmath are listed in
Appendix A. We set all @xmath for @xmath .

Following ( 48 ), new candidates for @xmath -potentials can be
introduced,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

with an analogous representation of @xmath , and now the task is to
minimize the potentials @xmath and @xmath over all the @xmath -plaquette
configurations.

In our study of the ground-state phase diagrams we limit ourselves to
the ( @xmath )-plane, where the both considered systems are
hole-particle invariant, and to the ( @xmath )-plane. Our analysis of
the minima of the @xmath -plaquette potentials, @xmath and @xmath
augmented by the zero-potentials @xmath , shows that these planes are
partitioned into a finite number of open domains @xmath , each with its
unique set of periodic ground-state configurations on @xmath , denoted
also by @xmath . There is a finite number, independent of @xmath , of
configurations in @xmath and they are related by the symmetries of
@xmath . The last two statements do not apply to only one of the
domains, denoted @xmath , which will be described in the sequel.

The domains @xmath are characterized as follows: at each point @xmath (
@xmath or @xmath ) of a domain @xmath , there exist a set of
coefficients @xmath such that the corresponding potentials are minimized
by a set @xmath of @xmath -plaquette configurations. Moreover, from the
configurations in @xmath one can construct only the configurations in
@xmath . The set of the restrictions to @xmath -plaquettes of the
configurations from @xmath , @xmath , is contained in each set @xmath
with @xmath . In Table 11 of Appendix E we mark by asterisk the cases,
where the set @xmath contains, besides @xmath , some additional @xmath
-plaquette configurations.

Specifically, for @xmath the ground-state phase diagrams due to the
effective Hamiltonians @xmath and @xmath are shown in Fig. 12 and Fig.
12 ,

respectively, while the corresponding ground-state phase diagrams for
@xmath , in Fig. 14 and Fig. 14 .

In Fig. 15 we display the representatives of the sets @xmath of
ground-state configurations.

That is, the remaining configurations of @xmath can be obtained easily
by applying the symmetries of @xmath to the displayed configurations.
The domain @xmath , having no representative in Fig. 15 , consists of
the two translation-invariant configurations @xmath and @xmath , related
by the hole-particle transformation.

Only in the domain @xmath , which appears in the phase diagrams shown in
Fig. 14 , that is off the hole-particle symmetry plain, the situation is
not that simple. In @xmath one can distinguish two classes, @xmath and
@xmath , of periodic configurations with parallelogram elementary cells.
A configuration in @xmath consists of vertical (horizontal) dimers of
filled sites that form a square lattice, where the sides of the
elementary squares have the length @xmath and the slope @xmath . In a
configuration of @xmath , the elementary parallelograms formed by dimers
have the sides of the length @xmath and the slope @xmath , and the sides
of the length @xmath and the slope @xmath . Two configurations, one from
@xmath and one from @xmath , having the same kind of dimers (vertical or
horizontal), can be merged together along a “defect line” of the slope
@xmath (dashed line in Fig. 15 ), as shown in Fig. 15 , without
increasing the energy. By introducing more defect lines one can
construct many ground-state configurations whose number scales with the
size of the lattice as @xmath . While for a finite lattice all the
configurations are periodic, many of them become aperiodic in the
infinite volume limit.

As mentioned above, except @xmath all the other sets @xmath contain
exclusively periodic configurations. The set @xmath (of
plaquette-chessboard configurations) contains configurations built out
of elementary plaquettes with filled sites, forming a square lattice
according to the same rules as filled sites form a square lattice in the
chessboard configurations from @xmath . The remaining sets @xmath
consist of configurations that have a quasi-one-dimensional structure.
That is, they are built out of completely filled and completely empty
lattice lines of given slope. Such a configuration can be specified by
the slope of the filled lattice lines of the representative
configuration and the succession of filled (f) and empty (e) consecutive
lattice lines in a period. For instance, the representative
configuration of @xmath (see Fig. 15 ) is built out of filled lines with
the slope @xmath and, in the period, two consecutive filled lines are
followed by two consecutive empty lines, which is denoted @xmath .
Similar description of the remaining quasi-one-dimensional
configurations is given in Fig. 15 .

The coefficients @xmath for which the fourth order potentials, @xmath
and @xmath , become @xmath -potentials are given in the tables collected
in the Appendix E (Tables 8 – 11 ).

Finally, a remark concerning ground-state configurations at the
boundaries between the open domains @xmath is in order. Let @xmath and
@xmath be two domains of the considered phase diagram, sharing a
boundary. At this boundary, the set of the minimizing @xmath -plaquette
configurations contains always the subset @xmath , but it may contain
also some additional @xmath -plaquette configurations of minimal energy.
Consequently, the set of the ground-state configurations at the boundary
contains always the subset @xmath and typically a great many of other
ground-state configurations, whose number grows indefinitely with the
size of the lattice. In the considered diagrams, the only exception is
the boundary between @xmath and @xmath , where the set of the
ground-state configurations amounts exactly to @xmath .

### 3.4 Discussion of phase diagrams

We start with a few comments concerning the phase diagrams due to the
fourth order effective interactions. In the fourth order effective
interaction, the parameters @xmath and @xmath control the strength of
n.n. and n.n.n. interactions, respectively. The n.n. interaction is
repulsive and favors the chessboard configurations if @xmath , for
fermions ( @xmath , for bosons). In the opposite case (attraction) it
favors the @xmath , @xmath configurations. In turn, the n.n.n.
interaction is attractive if @xmath , for fermions ( @xmath , for
bosons), and then it reinforces the tendency towards chessboard and
uniform, @xmath , @xmath , configurations. When it becomes repulsive, it
frustrates the n.n. interaction: the more negative it is the larger
@xmath is needed to stabilize the chessboard configurations and the
smaller @xmath is needed to stabilize the @xmath , @xmath
configurations. Therefore, whatever the value of @xmath is, there is a
sufficiently large @xmath such that @xmath and a sufficiently small
@xmath such that @xmath .

Apparently, the fourth order phase diagrams in the cases of hopping
fermions and hopping bosons are quite similar if we compare the geometry
of the phase boundaries and the sets of ground states. The main
difference is in the domain occupying the central position: in the case
of fermions the ground-state configurations are diagonal-stripe
configurations, @xmath , while in the case of bosons this is the set
@xmath of plaquette-chessboard configurations. These two sets of
configurations are ground-state configurations of the corresponding
fourth-order effective interactions with the site, n.n., and n.n.n.
terms dropped, which corresponds to the points @xmath and @xmath . This
means that the fourth order phase diagrams can be looked upon as the
result of perturbing an Ising-like Hamiltonian, that consists of pair
interactions at distance of two lattice constants and plaquette
interactions, by n.n. and n.n.n. interactions. More generally, it is
easy to verify that the set of ground-state configurations of the
Ising-like Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

amount to @xmath if @xmath , and to @xmath if @xmath . These ground
states are stable with respect to perturbations by n.n. and n.n.n.
interactions, if the corresponding interaction constants are in a
certain vicinity of zero. Otherwise, new sets of ground states, shown in
Fig. 12 and Fig. 12 emerge.

The basic question to be answered, before discussing the phase diagrams
due to the complete interaction, refers to the relation between these
phase diagrams and the diagrams due to the truncated effective
interactions, obtained in the previous section.

Firstly, we note, by inspection of the phase boundaries in Fig. 12 and
Fig. 12 , that the @xmath -plaquette configurations @xmath are missing
in the phase diagram corresponding to fermion mobile particles. In turn,
the @xmath -plaquette configurations @xmath are missing in the phase
diagram corresponding to boson mobile particles. Consequently, the
ground-state configurations of @xmath cannot appear not only in the
fourth order fermion phase diagram but also in the fermion phase diagram
of the complete interaction. Similarly, the ground-state configurations
of @xmath do not appear in boson phase diagrams.

Secondly, by adapting the arguments presented in [ 59 , 40 ] , we can
demonstrate, see for instance [ 61 ] , that if the remainder @xmath is
taken into account, then there is a (sufficiently small) constant @xmath
such that for @xmath the phase diagram looks the same as the phase
diagram due to the effective interaction truncated at the fourth order,
except some regions of width @xmath , located along the boundaries
between the domains, and except the domain @xmath . For @xmath and each
domain @xmath , @xmath , there is a nonempty two-dimensional open domain
@xmath that is contained in the domain @xmath and such that in @xmath
the set of ground-state configurations coincides with @xmath .

Now, consider our systems for specified particle densities, @xmath .
According to the phase diagrams in the hole-particle symmetry plane (
@xmath ), shown in Fig. 12 and Fig. 12 , if @xmath is in @xmath , then
the ground state is a phase-separated state, where ion configurations
are mixtures of @xmath and @xmath configurations, called the segregated
phase. Another phase-separated state, where the ion configurations are
mixtures of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath configurations, exists
at a line that is a small ( @xmath ) distortion of the boundary between
the domains @xmath and @xmath [ 62 ] . In all the other domains @xmath
of these diagrams the ground-state phase exhibits a crystalline
long-range order of ions.

By the properties of the fourth order phase diagrams, whatever the value
of @xmath is, there is a sufficiently large @xmath such that the systems
are in the chessboard phase ( @xmath ) and a sufficiently small @xmath
such that the systems are in the segregated phase ( @xmath ). In
between, the systems undergo a series of phase transitions and visit
various striped phases. Consider first unbiased systems ( @xmath ).
Then, it follows from the phase diagram in Fig. 12 , that the fermion
system visits necessarily the diagonal striped phase, described by the
configurations in @xmath . In turn, the phase diagram in Fig. 12 implies
that the boson system has to visit the dimerized-chessboard phase,
described by the configurations in @xmath , then the vertical/horizontal
striped phase, described by the configurations in @xmath , and after
that a dimerized vertical/horizontal striped phase, described by the
configurations in @xmath . These scenarios are preserved, if @xmath in
the fermion case, and @xmath in the boson case.

Note that the same sequence of transitions, as found in the unbiased
boson system, can be realized by the fermion system if @xmath is
sufficiently small ( @xmath ).

For somewhat larger values of @xmath , @xmath , on its way from the
chessboard phase to the segregated phase the fermion systems visits the
dimerized chessboard phase, then the diagonal striped phase, and after
that the dimerized vertical/horizontal striped phase. The
vertical/horizontal striped phase is closer to the segregated phase than
the diagonal striped phase. In case the both kinds of stripe phases
(vertical/horizontal and diagonal) appear in a phase diagram, such a
succession of striped phases is perhaps generic, see also [ 20 , 63 ] .

For sufficiently large @xmath , the tendency toward the chessboard and
the uniform configurations is so strong that the both systems jump
directly from the chessboard phase to the segregated phase.

Above, we have described the states of the considered systems for
typical values of the control parameter @xmath . Only in small intervals
(whose width is of the order of @xmath ) of values of @xmath , about the
transition points of the diagrams in Fig. 12 and Fig. 12 , the states of
the systems remain undetermined.

For completeness we present also ground-state phase diagrams of the both
systems off the hole-particle symmetry plane, for @xmath , see Fig. 14 ,
14 . Away from the hole-particle symmetry plane new phases appear. In
particular we find the phases described by the quasi-one-dimensional
configurations @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , well known from the
studies of the phase diagram of the spinless Falicov–Kimball model [ 40
] . In the boson phase diagram, Fig. 14 , there appears the domain
@xmath that is not amenable to the kind of arguments used in this
thesis.

## 4 Influence of nearest-neighbor anisotropy on axial striped phases

In this Section ² ² 2 This section is based on [ 29 ] . we show that any
anisotropy of nearest-neighbor hopping eliminates the @xmath -rotation
degeneracy of the dimeric and axial-stripe phases and orients them in
the direction of a weaker hopping. Moreover, due to the same anisotropy
the obtained phase diagrams of fermions show a tendency to become
similar to those of hardcore bosons.

### 4.1 The effective interaction up to the fourth order

We consider the model similar to ( 73 ): only a n.n. hopping is taken
into account and we allow for its anisotropy. We set @xmath , and @xmath
, with @xmath . In this case, up to a term independent of the ion
configurations and the chemical potentials, the ground-state energy
expansion ( 43 ) reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (88)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

in the case of hopping fermions, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (89)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

in the case of hopping hardcore bosons. As previously, the remainders,
@xmath and @xmath , are independent of the chemical potentials and the
parameters @xmath and @xmath , but in this case, they depend on @xmath ,
and collect those terms of the expansions that are proportional to
@xmath , with @xmath . The expressions ( 4.1 ) and ( 4.1 ) refer to ( 75
) and ( 76 ) for @xmath , respectively.

In the previous Section we have obtained the ground-state phase
diagrams, according to the fourth-order isotropic effective Hamiltonians
@xmath , for hole-particle symmetric systems ( @xmath ) with a weak (of
fourth order) n.n.n. subsidiary interaction, and for unsymmetrical
systems without the subsidiary interaction ( @xmath ), see the top phase
diagrams in Figs. 12 - 14 . Second-order phase diagrams of the isotropic
case consist exclusively of phases whose configurations are invariant
with respect to @xmath -rotations, with macroscopic degeneracies (i.e.
the number of configurations grows exponentially with the number of
sites) at the boundaries of phase domains. Stripe phases, whose
configurations are not invariant with respect to @xmath -rotations,
appear on perturbing the second-order phase diagrams by the fourth-order
isotropic interactions. Here, we would like to observe the influence of
a weak anisotropy of n.n. hopping on these stripe phases. Since we are
working with truncated effective Hamiltonians, we have to assign an
order to the deviation of the anisotropy parameter @xmath from the value
@xmath (corresponding to the isotropic case). Therefore, we introduce an
anisotropy order, @xmath , and a new anisotropy parameter, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

The orders of the deviations can be neither too small, not to modify the
second-order effective Hamiltonians, nor too high, to effect the
considered effective Hamiltonian of the highest order. Since here, the
highest order of the effective Hamiltonians is @xmath , the weakest
admissible deviation from the isotropic case corresponds to the highest
anisotropy order @xmath . Then, we can consider an intermediate
deviation, i.e. @xmath . The strongest deviation, i.e. @xmath , is not
admissible, since it modifies the second-order effective Hamiltonians.

### 4.2 The smallest deviation from the isotropic case

In the sequel, we drop the arguments of ground-state energies, that is
we set @xmath , etc. In the case of the smallest deviation from the
isotropic case the fourth-order effective Hamiltonian for fermions
reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

while for hardcore bosons only the first term, representing the
isotropic fourth-order effective Hamiltonian, has to be changed
properly.

Apparently, the effective Hamiltonians of order zero and two are
isotropic, and there is no difference between the cases of hopping
fermions and hopping bosons (see Figs. 10 , 10 ). To observe the effect
of the fourth-order anisotropy term of ( 91 ) the construction of the
fourth-order diagrams has to be carried out again. As in the isotropic
case, this is facilitated by introducing new variables, @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath given by ( 81 ), and rewriting the fourth order effective
Hamiltonian in the form,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

with analogous expressions in the bosonic case, and with the isotropic
potentials @xmath , @xmath given by ( 84 ) and ( 85 ), respectively.

We would like to get an idea of the phase diagram in the space of the
four energy parameters @xmath , that appear in the Hamiltonian. Due to
the fact that the domains occupied by the phases are polyhedral sets,
this goal can be achieved by studying phase diagrams in two-dimensional
hyperplanes. Of particular interest are those hyperplanes that result
from intersecting the four-dimensional space by hyperplanes @xmath and
@xmath , and by hyperplanes @xmath and @xmath . A collection of such
sections for suitable values of @xmath , forming a finite increasing
from zero sequence, enable us to observe how the anisotropy effects our
system if it is hole-particle symmetric and if it is not, respectively.

Specifically, in Fig. 16 we show phase diagrams in the
hole-particle-symmetric case, while in the absence of the hole-particle
symmetry, the phase diagrams are shown in Fig. 17 – for fermions, and in
Fig. 18 – for bosons.

The phases that appear in these phase diagrams can conveniently be
described in terms of the phases found in ground-state phase diagrams of
the isotropic systems, with Hamiltonian @xmath given by ( 73 ) (see Fig.
15 ). The phases of anisotropic systems, considered here, either
coincide with or are simple modifications of the isotropic phases. In
fact, in Fig. 15 only representative configurations of the phases of
isotropic systems are displayed. The remaining configurations can be
obtained by means of the spatial symmetry operations of isotropic
Hamiltonian, like translations and rotations by @xmath . The numbers in
curly brackets, placed by the symbols of phases, stand for the numbers
of the @xmath -plaquette configurations (according to Fig. 30 ) that are
obtained by restricting the configurations of a phase to a @xmath
-plaquette. By the same symbols as the phases we denote also their
domains.

Among the phases of isotropic systems, we can distinguish a class of
dimeric phases , @xmath , …, @xmath , and a class of axial-stripe phases
, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The configurations of dimeric phases
consist of isolated pairs of n.n. occupied sites (in the sequel called
the dimers ). In the configurations of axial-stripe phases, the ions
fill completely some, parallel to one of the axes, lattice lines, so
that a periodic pattern of stripes is formed. Out of the dimeric or
axial-stripe configurations of Fig. 15 , only those with dimers or
stripes, respectively, oriented vertically appear in the phase diagrams
of anisotropic systems. Such a restricted phases are marked in
anisotropic phase diagrams by the additional superscript, @xmath .

In comparison with the isotropic phase, a new domain @xmath appears in
the phase diagrams shown in Fig. 17 . Similarly to @xmath , its
degeneracy grows indefinitely with the size of the lattice. This phase
consists of three classes of periodic configurations of dimers. In the
class @xmath , the elementary cell can be chosen as a parallelogram
whose two sides of length @xmath are parallel to dimers (which are
vertical or horizontal). If the dimers are oriented vertically, then the
other two sides have the slope @xmath and the length @xmath . By
reflecting an elementary cell of @xmath in a lattice line passing
through its side that is parallel to dimers, we obtain an elementary
cell of the class @xmath . In the third class, @xmath , an elementary
cell can be chosen as a rhomb formed by the centers of dimers, with the
sides of length @xmath . Two configurations, one from @xmath and one
from @xmath , having the same kind of dimers (vertical or horizontal),
can be merged together along a “defect line” parallel to dimers (dashed
line in Fig. 19 ) without increasing the energy. In this way, a numerous
family of configurations can be constructed, with the number of
configurations growing like @xmath .

It follows from the polyhedral shape of the phase domains, that the set
of values of @xmath is partitioned into open intervals, where the
boundary lines of phase domains do not change their direction, only
their distance to the origin varies in an affine way. The boundary
points of these open intervals are special values of the anisotropy for
the phase diagrams, and in the sequel we call them the critical values .
As a critical value of anisotropy is approached, some boundary lines
merge into a line or a point, which results in disappearance of some
phase domains. And vice versa, some points and lines break off, creating
new phase domains.

In particular, in the hole-particle symmetric case it can be inferred
from (Fig. 16 ) that at least up to @xmath – for hopping fermions, and
at least up to @xmath – for hardcore bosons, there is only one critical
value of @xmath . For fermions, it amounts to @xmath , where the phase
@xmath disappears, while for hardcore bosons it is @xmath , where the
phase @xmath disappears.

Off the hole-particle symmetry, for bosons, there are no critical values
of @xmath , at least up to @xmath . On the other hand, for fermions and
for @xmath there are as many as three critical values of @xmath . In
increasing order, the first is @xmath , where the phases @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath appear. The second is @xmath , where the phases @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath appear. And the last one is @xmath , where @xmath is
replaced by @xmath .

If there are no more critical values of the anisotropy parameter @xmath
, the shape of the fourth-order phase diagrams for any value @xmath
larger than the greatest considered in Figs. 16 , 17 , 18 remains the
same. On increasing the anisotropy parameter, the diagrams undergo only
some translations. To verify whether for the values of @xmath larger
than those considered in this section new critical values do appear, we
proceed to investigating stronger, i.e. intermediate, deviations from
the isotropic case.

### 4.3 The intermediate deviation from the isotropic case

Now, the fourth-order effective Hamiltonian for fermions assumes the
form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

and for hardcore bosons an analogous formula holds true. Obviously, the
phase diagrams in the zeroth and second orders remain the same as in the
isotropic case, described above. Therefore, we proceed to constructing
the phase diagram in next order, which is ( @xmath )-order with @xmath ,
and the corresponding effective Hamiltonian reads:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath stands for the, common for fermions and bosons,
second-order effective Hamiltonian. For the reasons given in the
previous subsection, we consider a neighborhood of the point @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , where the energies of all the configurations are
equal. In this neighborhood it is convenient to introduce new variables,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

and rewrite the expansion up to the order @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (97)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

The summations in the primed sums run over a plaquette @xmath . The
plaquette potentials @xmath have to be minimized over all the plaquette
configurations. As in the previous case, we are interested in phase
diagrams of hole-particle symmetric systems ( @xmath ) or unsymmetrical
systems with @xmath . It turns out that for such energy parameters and
plaquette configurations the potentials @xmath are m-potentials. The
resulting phase diagrams are shown in Fig. 21 and Fig. 21 .

We note that each of the points @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath :
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath : @xmath ,
@xmath , is the coexistence point of three periodic phases. That is, the
only plaquette configurations minimizing the potential @xmath at such a
point are those obtained by restricting the configurations of coexisting
phases to a plaquette (these plaquette configurations are shown in Fig.
21 )

Now, following our recursive procedure of constructing phase diagrams to
some order, we are ready to investigate the effect of fourth-order
interactions. As in earlier steps, it is enough to consider
neighborhoods of the coexistence points @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath of
Figs. 21 , 21 (the diagram in a neighborhood of @xmath can be obtained
from that around @xmath by a symmetry operation).

##### A. A neighborhood of @xmath

@xmath Here @xmath , hence the systems are hole-particle invariant. A
convenient change of variables is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

In these variables, the fourth-order effective Hamiltonian reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a similar formula for hard-core bosons, where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the previous order, it has been established that the only plaquette
configurations minimizing @xmath are the ones obtained by restricting to
a plaquette @xmath the periodic configurations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath . Let us denote this set of plaquette configurations by
@xmath . Consequently, the minimization of the fourth-order potentials
@xmath , @xmath , should be carried out only over the set @xmath of
those @xmath -plaquette configurations whose restriction to a plaquette
@xmath belongs to @xmath . The configurations of the set @xmath are
displayed in Fig. 31 . It appears that on the set @xmath , the
potentials @xmath , @xmath , are @xmath -potentials. The obtained phase
diagrams, independent of the anisotropy parameter @xmath , are shown in
Fig. 23 and Fig. 23 .

##### B. A neighborhood of @xmath

@xmath Here the system is not hole-particle symmetric and @xmath . A
convenient change of variables is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the fourth-order effective Hamiltonian takes the form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a similar formula for hard-core bosons. The minimum of @xmath is
attained at the configurations belonging to @xmath , i.e. the plaquette
configurations obtained by restricting the periodic configurations
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath to a plaquette @xmath . Let @xmath be the
corresponding set of @xmath -plaquette configurations (there are no
vertical pairs of n.n. sites occupied by one ion). This set is shown in
Fig. 32 . Here the potentials @xmath are not the @xmath -potentials. The
obtained phase diagrams are shown in Figs. 25 , 25 .

##### C. A neighborhood of @xmath

@xmath Here the system is not hole-particle symmetric and @xmath . A
convenient change of variables is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fourth-order effective Hamiltonian reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a similar formula for hard-core bosons, where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

The potentials @xmath are minimized by restrictions to a plaquette
@xmath of periodic configurations @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , that
constitute the set @xmath . The corresponding set @xmath of @xmath
-plaquette configurations consists of configurations where no horizontal
pair of n.n. sites is occupied by two ions (see Fig. 33 ). Here the
potentials @xmath are not the @xmath -potentials. The corresponding
phase diagrams are shown in Fig. 27 and Fig. 27 .

### 4.4 Discussion of the phase diagrams and conclusions

In previous subsection, we have obtained phase diagrams according to the
truncated effective Hamiltonians of fourth order, with an intermediate
anisotropy of hopping. These diagrams have been constructed to see what
happens to the fourth-order phase diagrams with the weakest anisotropy
if the anisotropy parameter @xmath grows beyond the values taken into
account in subsection 4.2. Let us consider firstly the diagrams in a
neighborhood of point @xmath . Apparently, up to a rescaling the phase
diagram in Fig. 23 looks the same as the part in the dotted circle of
the fermionic phase diagram in Fig. 16 . Similarly, up to a rescaling
the phase diagram in Fig. 23 looks the same as the the part in the
dotted circle of the bosonic phase diagram in Fig. 16 . The same remarks
apply to the phase diagrams in neighborhoods of points @xmath and @xmath
. The phase diagram in Fig. 25 reproduces the part in the upper dotted
ellipse in Fig. 17 , while the diagram in Fig. 25 – the part in the
upper dotted ellipse in Fig. 18 . Then, the phase diagram in Fig. 27
reproduces the part in the lower dotted ellipse in Fig. 17 , while the
diagram in Fig. 27 – the part in the lower dotted ellipse in Fig. 18 .
Therefore, we conclude that in the case of the weakest anisotropy in the
fourth-order effective Hamiltonians, we have determined all the critical
values of the anisotropy parameter @xmath . For the both kinds of
hopping particles, if @xmath exceeds the greatest critical value, the
obtained phase diagram undergoes only a translation (varying with @xmath
).

Now, the basic question to be answered is concerned with the relation
between these fourth-order phase diagrams and the phase diagrams of
quantum systems described by Hamiltonians @xmath , given by ( 73 ). By
adapting the arguments presented in Refs. [ 59 , 40 ] , we can
demonstrate, see for instance Ref. [ 61 ] , that if the remainders,
@xmath and @xmath , are taken into account, then there is a sufficiently
small @xmath such that for @xmath the phase diagrams of quantum systems
look the same as the phase diagrams according to the effective
Hamiltonians truncated at the fourth order, except some narrow regions,
of width @xmath (at the diagrams displayed above), located along the
phase-domains boundaries, and except the domains @xmath and @xmath . For
@xmath and for each domain @xmath , which is different from @xmath and
@xmath , there is a nonempty two-dimensional open domain @xmath that is
contained in the domain @xmath and such that in @xmath the set of
ground-state configurations coincides with @xmath . Moreover, in
comparison with the critical values of the anisotropy parameter @xmath ,
determined according to the fourth-order effective Hamiltonians, the
corresponding critical values of the quantum systems described by
Hamiltonians @xmath differ by @xmath , i.e. for a quantum system @xmath
.

Remarkably, in the fourth-order the hole-particle symmetric phase
diagrams of fermions and of hardcore bosons are geometrically similar.
That is, a phase diagram of hard core bosons, with any @xmath , can be
obtained from a phase diagram of fermions, with @xmath , by the
translation whose vector reads: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The
existence of this translation vector is related to the fact that for
both kinds of systems there is one critical value of the anisotropy
parameter. Additionally, for fermions with @xmath , it is necessary to
replace the phase @xmath in the central domain by @xmath . Off the
hole-particle symmetry, the relation between the bosonic and fermionic
phase diagrams is not that close. For fermions, there are three critical
values of @xmath , while for hardcore bosons there is no critical
values. Thus, the system with hopping hardcore bosons is less sensitive
to the anisotropy of hopping, than the system with hopping fermions.
Nevertheless, if @xmath , then the phase diagrams of both kinds of
systems are topologically similar, except that in the bosonic phase
diagrams the phases @xmath and @xmath are missing. However, we know from
Ref. [ 61 ] that this deficiency can be removed by switching on the
n.n.n. interactions with negative @xmath .

In the fourth-order effective Hamiltonians ( 91 ), the weakest
anisotropy of n.n. hopping assumes the form of a fourth-order attractive
n.n. interaction in vertical direction (i.e. the direction of a weaker
hopping). This interaction favors n.n pairs of occupied or empty sites
that are oriented vertically. As a result, the dimeric and axial-stripe
phases oriented vertically are stabilized for any value of the
anisotropy parameter @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath are replaced by
@xmath above a critical value of @xmath . Note however, that at any
higher order @xmath , @xmath the weakest anisotropy of n.n. hopping will
cause the same effects, in the effective Hamiltonians as well as in the
corresponding phase diagrams. This implies that in the quantum systems
described by @xmath , arbitrary small anisotropy of n.n. hopping orients
the dimeric and axial-stripe phases in the direction of a weaker
hopping.

## 5 Influence of next-nearest-neighbor anisotropy on diagonally-striped
phases

In the previous Section the influence of n.n. anisotropy of hopping
intensity on axial striped phases, was investigated. At the regime where
stripes are stable, we have proved rigorously that for both systems, of
hopping fermions and hard-core bosons, an arbitrarily small anisotropy
of n.n. hopping orients the axial striped phases in the direction of a
weaker hopping. The analogous, arising naturally, question is how the
anisotropy of the next-nearest-neighbor (n.n.n.) hopping influences the
degeneracy of diagonal-striped phases. To answer this question, we
investigate the influence of n.n.n. hopping on the phase @xmath (Fig. 12
), whose stability was proved for fermions in Section 3.

In this Section ³ ³ 3 This section is based on [ 30 ] . we introduce a
next-nearest-neighbor hopping, small enough not to destroy the striped
structure and examine rigorously how the presence of the
next-nearest-neighbor hopping anisotropy reduces the @xmath -rotation
degeneracy of the diagonal-striped phase. The effect appears to be
similar to that in the case of anisotropy of the nearest-neighbor
hopping: the stripes are oriented in the direction of the weaker
next-nearest-neighbor hopping.

### 5.1 The effective interaction up to the fourth order

We consider our model in the case when only next-nearest-neighbor
hopping is anisotropic, and nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude remains
the same in different directions, i.e. @xmath . For simplicity @xmath .
In this case, the ground-state energy expansion ( 43 ) with the
expansion terms up to the fourth order, i.e. @xmath , reads:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The remainder @xmath is independent of the chemical potentials and
@xmath , and collects all the terms proportional to @xmath , with @xmath
. The above expansion is absolutely convergent for sufficiently small
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , uniformly in @xmath . In the special case
of @xmath and @xmath it was obtained in [ 64 ] .

In Section 3, we have obtained the phase diagram of the isotropic model
without n.n.n. hopping, i.e. for @xmath . Here, our aim is to determine
the influence of the n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy on the diagonal-striped
phase @xmath (see Fig. 12 ). For this job, the value of the
n.n.n.-hopping intensities, @xmath , @xmath , cannot be too large, in
order to preserve the phase diagram up to 4th order. On the other hand,
the n.n.n.-hopping intensities cannot be too small, in order to appear
in the fourth-order effective Hamiltonian. In an attempt to satisfy the
both requirements, we choose the smallest n.n.n.-hopping intensities
@xmath , @xmath , i.e. such that they do not appear in the expansion
terms of order smaller than four: @xmath and @xmath . In this case, the
effective Hamiltonian assumes the form:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

i.e. the second requirement is satisfied. To answer the question
concerning the influence of anisotropy of n.n.n. hopping on the
degeneracy of the phase @xmath , there is no need to consider the whole
phase diagram. For @xmath , we fix a point, well inside the domain of
the diagonal-striped phase @xmath , say @xmath and @xmath , i.e. @xmath
(see Fig. 12 ). Then, with the fixed point in @xmath -plain, we
introduce a n.n.n. hopping which does not change the ground-state
configurations. Calculations show that @xmath has the minimal energy for
@xmath , where @xmath (we suppose that the difference between @xmath and
@xmath is not large, so they are of the same sign). Therefore, with our
choice of n.n.n.-hopping intensities, the first of the above two
requirements can also be satisfied. Eventually, we fix the values of
n.n.n.-hopping intensities: @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath varying about
@xmath (say, @xmath ).

Since all the energy parameters, except the parameter @xmath of
n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy, have been fixed, the effective Hamiltonian (
109 ) depends only on @xmath . In the following subsection, we examine
how n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy, @xmath , influences the degeneracy of the
diagonal-striped phase @xmath .

### 5.2 Diagonally-striped phase versus n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy

For technical reasons (see paragraph 2.4.5), it is convenient to deal
with such energies of configurations that are affine functions of the
parameters of the effective Hamiltonian. However, the effective
Hamiltonian ( 109 ) contains the terms proportional to @xmath and @xmath
. To get rid of nonlinearities, we replace @xmath and @xmath by two
independent parameters @xmath and @xmath , respectively, with @xmath
varying in the rectangle @xmath and @xmath , in which the Hamiltonian is
affine. After constructing the phase diagram in @xmath -plane, we
restrict it to the @xmath curve.

To compare the energies of configurations, we rewrite @xmath as the sum,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

over @xmath -plaquettes. The potential @xmath is of the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (111)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the central site of a @xmath -plaquette (Fig. 7 ).

Unfortunately, the potential ( 111 ) is not an @xmath -potential in the
rectangle of considered values of @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, we
introduce appropriate zero-potentials given in Appendix A. In order to
obtain the phase diagram, we have to compare the energies of all the
possible @xmath -plaquette configurations. The zero-potential
coefficients @xmath needed for this are given in Tab. 33 in the
Appendix. We provide their values only at certain generating points,
since we can assume that the coefficients @xmath are affine functions of
parameters @xmath .

The phase diagram of @xmath is shown in Fig. 28 .

The rectangle of considered points @xmath breaks down into two domains.
In the lower one, where @xmath and @xmath , it is the phase @xmath ,
with stripes being parallel to the direction of @xmath -hopping, that is
stable. The analogous situation is in the upper domain, where @xmath and
@xmath : the stable phase, @xmath , consists of stripes oriented along
@xmath -hopping. At @xmath , we have the isotropic phase @xmath whose
configurations consist of @xmath and @xmath .

So we see that, at least for the truncated effective Hamiltonian,
switching on of a n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy reduces the rotational
degeneracy of diagonal-striped phases: they become oriented in the
direction of the weaker hopping.

This result is similar to that described in Section 4, where the
influence of n.n.-hopping anisotropy on axial-striped phases was
investigated. In that case, not only for a truncated effective
Hamiltonian but also for the corresponding quantum one, it was proved
that for any nonzero value of n.n.-hopping anisotropy the rotational
degeneracy of axial-striped phases is reduced by making them oriented
along the direction of the weaker n.n. hopping. Now in turn, the natural
question is whether the conclusions we arrived at, concerning
n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy, hold true for the quantum model, described by
Hamiltonian ( 73 ). Applying the arguments presented in [ 40 , 59 ] , it
could be demonstrated, that the stable phases of the obtained above
phase diagram remain stable for the model ( 73 ), but in some smaller
domains. That is, if the remainder @xmath is taken into account, then
there exist such a small @xmath , that for @xmath the phase diagram
looks the same for the quantum model, excepting of some narrow regions
(of width @xmath in the scale of the fourth-order phase diagram shown in
Fig. 28 ), located along the phase-boundary lines. In our case that
means that the breaking of the rotational symmetry occurs for @xmath ,
when the n.n.n.-hopping intensities are @xmath . Unfortunately, we
cannot claim that any non-zero n.n.n.-hopping anisotropy reduces the
rotational degeneracy of the quantum model, as it was the case for n.n.
hopping (see Section 4). Here it seems, at least for small
n.n.n.-hopping intensities, that there is certain critical value of
@xmath , above which the degeneracy of phase @xmath is reduced.

## 6 Conclusions

In Sections 3 and 4, we have succeeded in constructing ground-state
phase diagrams of some classical (i.e. diagonal in some basis)
Hamiltonians, in the whole range of parameters (coupling constants,
chemical potentials). These Hamiltonians have been derived as effective
Hamiltonians in certain orders of quantum Hamiltonians (termed the
extended Falicov–Kimball Hamiltonians), in the strong-coupling regime.
In other words, we have proved that the considered classical
Hamiltonians can be expressed by @xmath -potentials, for arbitrary value
of parameters. Such Hamiltonians are sometimes referred to as
frustrationless. It should be emphasized however, that, a priori,
nothing guarantees that the method we used here will “produce” any phase
diagram: one can fail to construct @xmath -potentials or they might not
exist.

Those ground-state phase diagrams of effective Hamiltonians constitute
the basic input of the quantum extension of the Pirogov–Sinai theory of
phase diagrams, developed in [ 57 ] . This theory enables us to claim
that not only the periodic ground states of effective classical
Hamiltonians are also ground states of the corresponding quantum
Hamiltonians, but that, at sufficiently low temperatures, to each
periodic ground-state phase there corresponds a thermodynamic phase
characterized by the same kind of long-range order. The above mentioned
properties of periodic ground-states of effective Hamiltonians are
referred to as stability with respect to higher-order effective
interactions and to small thermal fluctuations.

Several basic problems concerning striped phases in a system of strongly
correlated electrons were considered. First of all, we addressed the
problem of the stability of charge-stripe phases versus the phase
separated state — the segregated phase, in strongly-interacting systems
of fermions or hardcore bosons. There are numerous works devoted to this
problem, where it is studied, by approximate methods, in the framework
of models relevant for experiments. Unfortunately, due to tiny energy
differences involved, it is difficult to settle this problem by means of
approximate methods, which bias the calculated energies with hardly
controllable errors of various nature. We have studied simple models,
that by many physicists can be considered less realistic, but which, in
return, are amenable to a rigorous analysis. Our models are described by
extended Falicov–Kimball Hamiltonians, with hopping particles being
spinless fermions or hardcore bosons. The ground-state phase diagrams of
these models have been constructed rigorously in the regime of strong
coupling and half-filling. In the both cases, of fermions and hardcore
bosons, we have found transitions from a crystalline chessboard phase to
the segregated phase via striped phases.

After the stability of striped phases had been proven, both system (with
the hopping particles being either spinless fermions or hardcore bosons)
have been studied in order to show rigorously the influence of
nearest-neighbor and next-nearest-neighbor hopping anisotropy on phase
diagrams. In the case of nearest-neighbor hopping only, two main
conclusions have been drawn. Firstly, arbitrary small anisotropy of
nearest-neighbor hopping orients the dimeric and axial-stripe phases in
the direction of a weaker hopping. Secondly, even a weak anisotropy of
hopping reveals a tendency of fermionic phase diagrams to become similar
to the bosonic ones.

In the case of next-nearest-neighbor hopping we have shown that a weak
anisotropy of the next-nearest-neighbor hopping reduces the degeneracy
of a diagonal-striped phase, it orients the stripes in the direction of
the weaker next-nearest-neighbor hopping.

## Acknowledgments

The author is deeply indebted to Prof. Janusz Jȩdrzejewski for his
unstinting support over years.

The author thanks Łukasz Andrzejewski and Paweł Musiał for their
comments on the manuscript.

The author is grateful to the University of Wrocław for Scientific
Research Grant 2479/W/IFT, and to the Institute of Theoretical Physics
for financial support. The Max Born Scholarship is gratefully
acknowledged.