## 17 Spontaneous compactification of massive type IIA supergravity

The ten-dimensional action that we consider is that of massive type IIA
supergravity [ 95 ] which reads, up to two fermion terms,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (17.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The indices @xmath run from 0 to 9, and the ten-dimensional coordinates
are @xmath . In the NS-NS sector the action contains the bosonic fields
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which are the ten-dimensional dilaton, a
massive two-form and the metric, together with the fermionic fields
@xmath and @xmath , which are the gravitino and dilatino. The RR sector
contains the three-form @xmath . We have fixed our units by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

This action differs from the ’massless’ type IIA supergravity that is
the low energy limit of type IIA string theory in two important ways.
The first is the presence of a mass term for the NS two-form @xmath and
the second is the absence of the RR one-form @xmath . The explanation
for this is that the original action has a gauge symmetry under @xmath .
@xmath is therefore a Stucklberg field which can be gauged away breaking
the gauge invariance and leaving the two-form @xmath with a mass in a
Higgs-type mechanism. The action ( 17.1 ) can also be interpreted as the
low energy limit of type IIA string theory in the background of D8-brane
flux. A D8-brane couples to a ten-form flux which is dual to a constant
@xmath . Therefore in the string embedding of the supergravity the
parameter @xmath is also quantised in units of @xmath .

We now turn to the spontaneous compactification solution. Because fluxes
are now present the vacuum configuration is not as simple as the CY case
( 9.3 ). The most general solution that preserves @xmath supersymmetry
was found in [ 96 , 92 , 93 , 94 ] and takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

All the quantities correspond to their vacuum expectation values. The
internal manifold is an @xmath -structure manifold with metric @xmath
and the usual forms @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath denoting the real
part of @xmath and @xmath denoting the imaginary part. The parameter
@xmath is the purely external part of the vacuum expectation value of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two form @xmath is the traceless part of @xmath (the @xmath ) and so
satisfies @xmath . The internal manifold is constrained to have all the
torsion classes ( 7.16 ) vanishing in the vacuum apart from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Within the classification of section 7.1 the manifold is a subset of
half-flat manifolds with @xmath . A property of the solution which we
use in section 19.1 is that the gravitino mass takes the form ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14
This can be deduced from the fact that in a supersymmetric vacuum the
scalar potential is given by @xmath which can be compared with the
quantity @xmath in [ 94 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution ( 17.6 ) constrains the fluxes that are allowed to be
present. To see this we can decompose the internal fluxes in terms of
@xmath -structure modules using ( 7.7 ). The flux modules for @xmath are
a complex singlet @xmath , a complex vector @xmath and a @xmath which we
denote @xmath . The internal part of the four-form flux @xmath
decomposes into a real singlet @xmath , a complex vector @xmath and an
@xmath which we denote @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are singlets, we
see that the solution only has @xmath and @xmath present and so the
fluxes are not the most general type possible.

The solution ( 17.6 ) can form the basis for a spontaneous
compactification and indeed we use the information on the torsion
classes ( 17.8 ) in section 19 where we look for @xmath supersymmetric
vacua. However, the conclusions that we can draw from the solution are
more general. Consider a vacuum with fluxes which preserves no
supersymmetry. This vacuum is not included in the solution and so the
compactification manifold need not take the form ( 17.8 ) but can take
some other form. However, we would still expect the manifold to be of a
general @xmath -structure with torsion since the @xmath solution has
taught us that fluxes induce torsion on the manifold. The same reasoning
can be applied to all the different possible vacuum solutions and also
to the action away from the vacuum. The conclusion is that flux
compactifications of type IIA string theory should be considered on a
general @xmath -structure manifold.

### 18 The four-dimensional action

In this section we dimensionally reduce the action ( 17.1 ) to four
dimensions on a product manifold @xmath using a metric ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we take the internal manifold to be a general @xmath -structure
manifold. The metric ansatz now includes the perturbations of the metric
as opposed to ( 17.5 ) which is the vacuum expectation value. The metric
ansatz ( 18.1 ) is not the most general type as we have not included a
possible warp-factor as in ( 7.1 ). Warping may be induced by flux in
the same way that torsion is. The ansatz we consider therefore requires
that the flux present does not induce warping. An example of fluxes that
do not induce warping are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , since we know
they correspond to an unwarped solution. Some flux modules may induce
warping and the main contenders are the vector flux modules since they
could take the form @xmath . It is therefore tempting to conclude,
although is not yet proved, that in the absence of vector flux modules
there is no warping induced and the ansatz ( 18.1 ) is valid. A final
comment regarding warping is that even if warping is induced it may be
possible to consistently neglect it as is the case in type IIB for large
CY volume.

As was the case for CY compactifications the resulting effective
four-dimensional action should be an @xmath supergravity. However since
fluxes are present we expect a potential to be induced and therefore the
supergravity should be a gauged supergravity. In the upcoming sections
we keep the analogy with @xmath supergravity as explicit as possible. In
this compactification we are primarily concerned with the scalar sector
of the theory, however as shown in section 8 , once the geometry of the
scalar sector is specified it is possible to deduce also the gauge field
sector and then also the fermionic sector by supersymmetry.

The derivation of the action follows two steps. We first derive the
relevant terms in the action without assuming anything other than @xmath
-structure. In sections 18.1 and 18.2 we derive the kinetic terms of the
action. Section 18.3 discusses the possible flux that can be present in
the theory and in section 18.4 we derive the four-dimensional gravitini
mass matrix from which it is possible to deduce the scalar potential.
The next step is to assume there exists a basis of forms on the manifold
in which we can expand the ten-dimensional fields into four-dimensional
components. The justifications for assuming such a basis and a summary
of its properties are given in section 18.5 . Finally we write down the
complete action and show its @xmath structure in section 18.6 .

#### 18.1 The Ricci scalar

In section 9 we outlined how the kinetic terms for the geometrical
moduli are derived from the Ricci scalar for CY manifolds. In summary,
there were two types of metric variations, the @xmath variations which
we termed Kähler moduli and the @xmath variations that are the complex
structure moduli. The variations were shown to be harmonic and so could
be decomposed in terms of the harmonic bases on the CY. Substitution of
these decompositions into the Ricci scalar lead to the kinetic terms for
the moduli which were subsequently shown to match the geometric form
expected from @xmath supergravity.

The approach we take to finding the geometric moduli for a general
@xmath -structure manifold is different. The reason is that we have much
less information about the geometry of the internal manifold. In general
it need not be Kähler or even complex. It does not have to be Ricci-flat
and so the metric variations need not be harmonic, further we do not
even know what the harmonic forms on the manifold are or if any exist at
all. The only information we have is the existence of the @xmath
-structure forms and the fact that the resulting four-dimensional action
should be an @xmath supergravity. The first step in the method we adopt
is to relate the possible internal metric deformations to the @xmath
-structure on the manifold and this is the topic of this section.

Having @xmath -structure on a manifold is a stronger condition than
having a metric. In fact the forms @xmath and @xmath induce a metric on
the space via the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of @xmath . This relation was derived by
writing down the combination of structure forms with the correct
symmetry properties and then using the @xmath -structure identities in
the appendix to evaluate the right-hand-side of ( 18.2 ). Taking
variations of ( 18.2 ) we reach

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.3)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Equation ( 18.3 ) expresses variations of the metric in terms of
variations of the structure forms. The possible variations are not
arbitrary but rather we require that the varied structure forms
themselves define an @xmath -structure. This is part of the assumptions
that form the idea of compactifying on manifolds with @xmath -structure
and is analogous to the condition ( 9.11 ) where we required variations
of the metric to keep the manifold CY. The variations of the metric can
be classified into variations induced through variations of @xmath and
variations induced through @xmath . In analogy with the CY case we call
the variations induced through @xmath Kähler moduli and the variations
induced through @xmath complex structure moduli. It is important to
remember that @xmath is not necessarily the Kähler form nor is there a
complex structure defined on the manifold. Note that we have not
introduced complex co-ordinates.

The separation of the metric variations into Kähler and complex
structure moduli is the first step towards classifying the relevant low
energy fields. This separation should done be done carefully however and
in particular we should make sure that the two types of variations are
distinct. The @xmath -structure relations ( 7.8 ) show that in fact this
is not the case since a rescaling of @xmath is equivalent to an
appropriate rescaling of @xmath . In order not to count the same degrees
of freedom twice we introduce a new three-form @xmath which we define as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have also introduced the Kähler potential @xmath defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (18.5)
  -- -- -- --------

and the volume of the internal manifold @xmath is given by integrating
the unique volume form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definition ( 18.4 ) means that under a rescaling of @xmath the
left-hand-side remains invariant and so these rescalings are now
parameterised only in @xmath and are not present in @xmath . The extra
factor of @xmath is introduced in anticipation of the @xmath geometric
structure that the complex structure moduli span. At this point it
appears somewhat arbitrary but it turns out to be the correct Kähler
potential on the complex structure moduli space.

As the metric is determined uniquely in terms of the structure forms,
all the metric variations can be treated as variations of the structure
forms. The converse however is not true as it is possible that different
structure forms give rise to the same or equivalent metrics. Therefore,
when expressing the metric variations in terms of changes in the
structure forms we must take care not to include the spurious variations
as well. In particular the expression ( 18.2 ) shows that the metric is
invariant under an arbitrary phase rotation of @xmath . We can
understand this phase freedom by noting that under a rescaling @xmath
where @xmath is a function holomorphic in the complex structure moduli
we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

which through ( 18.4 ) precisely corresponds to a phase rotation of
@xmath . We have come across this structure in section 8 where we
calculated the covariant derivative on @xmath by identifying a
correspondence with a section of a @xmath bundle, which in this case is
played by @xmath . The spurious variations therefore correspond to the
Kähler transformations which are gauged by the Kähler covariant
derivative as given in ( 8.14 ).

Having identified the appropriate metric variations we can go on to
calculate how such variations appear in the action and replace them with
variations of the structure forms. The full calculation is given in the
appendix and here just outline how it proceeds. Consider the metric
ansatz ( 18.1 ) with four-dimensional metric fluctuations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 18.8 ) into the ten-dimensional Ricci scalar and only
keeping terms to order @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we define the four-dimensional dilaton as in the CY case ( 9.19 ).
We have also performed the Weyl rescalings

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We now use the expressions for the metric variations ( 18.3 ) to arrive
at the terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we dropped the @xmath term in ( 18.1 ) to leave the kinetic terms.
The action ( 18.1 ) contains the kinetic terms for the dilaton, the
complex structure moduli and the Kähler moduli. @xmath is the Kähler
covariant derivative ( 8.17 ). The important result is that the kinetic
terms for each sector have decoupled from the others. In section 18.6 we
show that these terms have the structure expected from @xmath
supergravity.

#### 18.2 The form fields

The reduction of the kinetic terms for the form fields in the action is
a much simpler task than the Ricci scalar. The relevant terms in the
ten-dimensional action read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These terms give after the appropriate Weyl rescalings

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

There is not much to say except that already at this stage the Kähler
moduli and the @xmath fields pair up into the complex combination @xmath
.

#### 18.3 Flux

In this section we summarise the fluxes that could be present in the
theory. The flux parameter @xmath already appears in the ten-dimensional
action and we have argued that it can be interpreted as D8-brane flux.
It takes integer values quantised in units of @xmath [ 97 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From the form fields the internal background fluxes that preserve
Lorentz invariance are ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Note that any two-form RR flux in the
massless formulation of IIA string theory can be absorbed into the vev
of @xmath in the massive formulation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We have decomposed the fluxes into a exact and a non-exact parts. The
non-exact parts, @xmath and @xmath , are the usual fluxes, as discussed
at the beginning of this chapter, that arise from the forms @xmath and
@xmath which are not globally well defined. These fluxes are similar to
@xmath in that they come from branes and are quantised. There are also
exact parts of the fluxes @xmath and @xmath which arise from the vacuum
expectation values of the scalar fields coming from @xmath and @xmath
which we denote collectively as @xmath and @xmath to distinguish them
from the parts that are not globally well defined. See ( 18.43 ) and (
18.44 ) for the explicit decomposition. This second type of flux can not
arise in CY compactifications since the basis of forms in which we
decompose @xmath and @xmath is closed. For a general @xmath -structure
manifold this need not be the case and so we must allow for such a
possibility.

We also have the purely external flux ( 17.7 ) which is termed
’Freud-Rubin’ flux in analogy with a similar flux that occurs in
M-theory. The Freud-Rubin flux, @xmath , is not the true free parameter
but also depends on the internal value of the form fields. To see this
and to determine the true free parameter of the theory we must dualise
the purely external part of the three-form @xmath which we write as
@xmath . Reducing the relevant terms in ( 17.1 ) gives the
four-dimensional action for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The field @xmath is the purely external part of @xmath . To dualise
@xmath we eliminate it using its equation of motion from ( 18.17 ) which
gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an integration constant which is now the true free
parameter of the theory ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Note that the two terms @xmath and
@xmath can be absorbed into @xmath but we choose to keep them separate
so that @xmath and @xmath remain on the same footing as @xmath and
@xmath . .

#### 18.4 The gravitini mass matrix

As mentioned before, the effect of the fluxes is to gauge the @xmath
supergravity theory and induce a potential for the scalar fields. These
effects can be best studied in the gravitini mass matrix to which we now
turn. In an @xmath supersymmetric theory, the gravitino mass is given by
the Kähler potential and superpotential ( 8.40 ), while in an @xmath
theory we have a mass matrix which is constructed out of the Killing
prepotentials of the hypermultiplet sector ( 8.36 ). The mass matrix
therefore determines the prepotentials and in turn most of the scalar
potential. The exact procedure for calculating these quantities is
discussed in section 18.6 .

The gravitini mass matrix appears in the supersymmetry transformations
of the four-dimensional gravitini

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the supersymmetry parameters given in ( 7.3 ) and
@xmath is the mass matrix. Therefore its value in the vacuum gives
information about the amount of supersymmetry which is preserved. In
particular an unbroken supersymmetry requires a vanishing physical mass
for the gravitino associated with it. The emphasis of physical mass
arises because in anti-de Sitter (AdS) backgrounds physically massless
particles can have non-zero mass parameters in the Lagrangian [ 98 , 99
, 29 ] . If we consider the mass parameter of the gravitino in an @xmath
theory, @xmath , then the physical mass in AdS is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the AdS inverse radius and is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath the corresponding Ricci scalar. In an @xmath theory it is
the eigenvalues of the mass matrix that are required to be physically
massless. This is the case here and so although the masses @xmath and
@xmath in ( 18.29 ) are non-zero for non vanishing fluxes one of them
may still be physically massless. Non-vanishing physical mass
eigenvalues of the gravitini mass matrix in the vacuum imply partial or
complete spontaneous supersymmetry breaking. In the case of partial
supersymmetry breaking of an @xmath theory, the superpotential and
D-terms of the resulting @xmath theory are completely determined by the
@xmath mass matrix. In a compactification from a higher-dimensional
theory there are several ways to determine the gravitini mass matrix in
the four-dimensional theory. If we have explicit knowledge of the
four-dimensional degrees of freedom we can derive the complete bosonic
action and from the potential and gaugings derive the @xmath Killing
prepotentials. Alternatively we can perform a computation in the
fermionic sector and directly derive the gravitino mass matrix. The
advantage of the latter method is that we can obtain a generic formula
for the mass matrix in terms of integrals over the internal manifold
without explicit knowledge of the four-dimensional fields. This is
essential to keep things as general as possible. Once these fields are
identified in some expansion of the higher-dimensional fields one can
obtain an explicit formula for the mass matrix which should also be
identical to the one obtained from a purely bosonic computation.

In the following we determine the gravitino mass matrix by directly
identifying all the possible contributions to the gravitino mass from
ten dimensions. For this we first identify the four-dimensional
gravitini. For conventions and notations regarding spinors in various
dimensions the reader is referred to the appendix. As discussed in
section 7.1 the internal manifold with @xmath -structure supports a
single globally defined, positive-chirality Weyl spinor @xmath and its
complex conjugate @xmath , which has negative chirality. To decompose
the ten-dimensional gravitino, which for @xmath supersymmetry is
parameterised by a single Majorana spinor, we consider two
four-dimensional Majorana gravitini @xmath with @xmath which give the
@xmath supersymmetry in four dimensions. Since in both ten and four
dimensions Majorana spinors are real we can construct the
ten-dimensional gravitino by taking the two independent real
combinations of @xmath and @xmath giving the decomposition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are real parameters which have yet to be
determined. The four-dimensional gravitini are the components where
@xmath . There are also four-dimensional spin- @xmath fields @xmath . In
the reduction, in order not have cross terms between the gravitini and
the spin- @xmath fields the gravitini need to be redefined with some
combination of the spin- @xmath fields. This does not affect the mass of
the gravitini however, and so is not performed here. It is more
conventional to work with four-dimensional Weyl gravitini and so we
further decompose the four dimensional Majorana gravitini into Weyl
gravitini

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the chiral components of four-dimensional gravitini
satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can constrain the ansatz further by requiring that it should yield
canonical kinetic terms when reduced, which for the case of @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions are given in ( 8.29 ). The kinetic term
for the ten-dimensional gravitino reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substituting ( 18.23 ) into ( 18.26 ) and performing the Weyl rescalings
we arrive at the result that the four-dimensional gravitini kinetic
terms are of the form ( 8.29 ) if the ansatz ( 18.23 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The terms in the ten-dimensional action ( 17.1 ) that contribute to the
gravitino masses in four dimensions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The derivation of the four-dimensional mass matrix proceeds by
substituting the ansatz ( 18.27 ) into the terms and using the
definition of the structure forms in terms of the internal spinors ( 7.5
) to write the result as integrals over the structure forms. The full
calculation is given in the appendix and here we quote the result. After
performing the Weyl rescalings ( 18.10 ) the mass matrix @xmath ,
defined in ( 8.29 ), reads ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 This expression corrects a factor of
@xmath in the equivalent expression in [ 70 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We note here that in a generic vacuum the off diagonal components of the
mass matrix are non-vanishing and therefore the gravitini as defined in
equation ( 18.23 ) are not mass eigenstates. The masses of the two
gravitini are then given by the eigenvalues of the mass matrix evaluated
in the vacuum. If these masses are equal and the two gravitini are
physically massless then the full @xmath supersymmetry is preserved in
the vacuum. However this is not the case in general and then one
encounters partial (when one gravitino is physically massless) or total
spontaneous supersymmetry breaking. We shall come back to this issue in
section 19 .

#### 18.5 The Kaluza-Klein basis

So far in this chapter we have derived the important quantities of the
effective four-dimensional supergravity without assuming anything
regarding the spectrum of forms that exist on the internal manifold.
This has meant that we were unable to evaluate any of the internal
integrals that feature in the four-dimensional action. To proceed with
the compactification we must specify a basis of forms in which we expand
the ten-dimensional fields to arrive at the four-dimensional spectrum.
For the case of the CY compactification this basis was formed by the set
of harmonic two-forms and three-forms on the manifold, which implied
massless modes in four-dimensions. Forms that were not harmonic
corresponded to the next level KK massive modes which were truncated
leading to an effective theory below the KK scale. The generalisation of
this procedure is such that we should consider the basis of forms that
are the lowest mass states of the Laplacian and truncate the higher mass
modes. The difference lies in the fact that the lowest mass modes need
not necessarily be massless, or in terms of the cohomology, the form
basis need not be harmonic. There also exists the possibility that some
of the forms are still harmonic and the rest are not harmonic but still
of a lower mass than the next KK level. The construction, or even proof
of existence, of such a lowest mass basis for general @xmath -structure
manifolds has yet to be developed. However we proceed to define such a
basis and then argue, using supersymmetry and examples of manifolds,
that such a basis is generic to six-dimensional @xmath -structure
manifolds.

The lowest mass basis ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 We henceforth use the notation of
referring to the mass of the internal forms by which we mean the mass of
the four-dimensional modes that come from the expansion of the
ten-dimensional fields in those forms. is composed of a finite set of
two-forms @xmath where the index range of @xmath is as yet unknown. The
definition of the Laplacian ( B.19 ) shows that their four-form Hodge
duals @xmath have the same mass and so are also part of the basis. We
also include a finite symplectic set of three-forms and their Hodge
duals @xmath . There is also the unique six-form that is the volume
form. However we retain no one-forms or their five-form duals. The forms
therefore satisfy the following basis relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The truncation to this basis of forms also means that their possible
differential relations are limited and the most general construction
takes the form [ 100 , 74 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The matrices @xmath and @xmath are symplectic matrices that are for now
arbitrary.

Having defined the lowest mass basis we turn to its justification. The
first motivation arises from the expectation of an @xmath supergravity
in four dimensions. This means that the field spectrum should come in a
similar form to that of CY compactifications. In particular the fact
that we do not expect any spin- @xmath multiplets was shown [ 74 ] to
imply that there should be no one-forms. The argument relies on the
observation that the four-dimensional part of the ten-dimensional
gravitino decomposes under @xmath into two types of spin- @xmath fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.38)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The singlet gives the four-dimensional gravitini and the triplet spinors
give spin- @xmath fields that sit in their own multiplet. Therefore in
order to avoid these we require that no triplets, which are one-forms,
be present in the basis. By Hodge duality this rules out the presence of
five-forms as well.

The second type of motivation are examples of @xmath -structure
manifolds that are not CY. In particular it was shown in [ 101 ] that
the mirror manifolds to CY with NS flux are half-flat manifolds. Their
basis forms could then be derived through mirror symmetry and were shown
to have the expected structure. Explicit examples of such manifolds are
twisted-tori which were studied in [ 73 ] . In section 20 we give an
example of a @xmath -structure manifold where again it is possible to
calculate the lowest mass forms explicitly.

Finally, a comment is in order regarding the index ranges of the forms.
In the CY case the forms were harmonic and so their number was specified
by the topological Hodge numbers. For the case of general @xmath
-structure it was shown in [ 100 ] that basis forms do not carry
topological information. This means that we do not expect the index
range to be given by some topological quantity like the Hodge numbers.
In the CY case the forms could be thought of as the forms that calibrate
independent special Lagrangian submanifolds. This means that they were
the forms that, when integrated over the cycle, formed the lowest bound
on its volume. It is possible to think of them as the forms that
minimise the brane action of a brane wrapping those cycles since the
brane tension is proportional to the volume of the cycle. When flux is
present the brane action is no longer minimised by a minimum volume
cycle but rather by a balance between the increase in energy of the flux
for small cycles and increase in tension for large cycles. The forms
that form the lowest bound on the energy now are called generalised
calibrating forms [ 102 ] . Since it is the flux back-reaction which
induces the departure from CY manifolds it is tempting to conclude that
the basis forms are now the forms that generalised calibrate independent
sub-manifolds. This has yet to be shown however and so for now the form
indices ranges should be taken as arbitrary.

#### 18.6 The action as a gauged @xmath supergravity

The field content in four dimensions is given by the KK expansion of the
ten-dimensional fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the scalar field components of the matter fields are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The periods of @xmath are homogeneous functions of the complex structure
moduli @xmath . The three-form field @xmath carries no degrees of
freedom and is dual to the constant @xmath . The rest of the fields form
@xmath multiplets as shown in table 2 .

Note the presence of a tensor multiplet which can not be dualised to a
hypermultiplet since the field @xmath is massive. Its mass term is
directly inherited from mass term of the ten-dimensional field @xmath .
It is sometimes useful to distinguish the four-dimensional fields that
come from the ten-dimensional form-fields from the metric fields. We
refer to @xmath as axions and to @xmath as moduli. The axionic label is
inherited from CY compactifications and is slightly misleading since if
the basis form from which the four-dimensional field arises is not a
cycle the field does not have axionic symmetries.

The complex structure moduli kinetic term reads ( 18.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The complex structure moduli manifold is therefore a special Kähler
manifold with the Kähler potential ( 18.5 ). The Kähler moduli @xmath
pair up with the axions @xmath to form the complex fields @xmath . Their
kinetic terms read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (18.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Therefore the Kähler moduli sector also spans a special Kähler manifold
with Kähler potential as in ( 9.33 ).

Having shown that the moduli fields follow the geometry expected from
@xmath supergravity we turn to the potential. The two expressions for
the mass matrix ( 18.29 ) and ( 8.36 ) can be compared by going to
special co-ordinates where the periods @xmath . The prepotential of the
vector multiplets special Kähler manifolds can be deduced from the form
of the Kähler potential ( 18.46 ) and takes the form ( 9.34 ). From this
we can calculate the form of the period @xmath which reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.47)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We are now in a position to determine the quaternionic electric and
magnetic prepotentials. To do this we restrict to the case where the ill
defined field @xmath is vanishing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.48)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This only leaves integrals that can be evaluated explicitly. The
non-vanishing prepotentials for that case read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the real and imaginary parts of @xmath .
It can be explicitly seen from the kinetic terms ( 18.1 ) and ( 18.13 )
that there is no coupling between the vector multiplet scalars and the
gauge fields and so the vector multiplets Killing vectors always vanish.
We have therefore completely specified the four-dimensional @xmath
theory resulting from compactifications of type IIA string theory on
manifolds with @xmath -structure where the non-exact part of the NS flux
@xmath is vanishing.

### 19 The @xmath theory

Compactifying on manifolds with @xmath -structure leads to an @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions. The vacuum of the theory however need
not preserve the full supersymmetry. In this section we show that,
depending on the type of manifold and the fluxes present, the full
supersymmetry can be spontaneously broken to either @xmath or no
supersymmetry. We go on to examine a particular case of manifold where
the supersymmetry is broken to @xmath . For that case we derive the
effective @xmath theory about the @xmath preserving vacuum and argue
that generically all the moduli fields are stabilised for such
manifolds. We go on to consider an explicit example of such a manifold
and recover the expected properties.

#### 19.1 Spontaneous partial supersymmetry breaking

The gravitini mass matrix is a useful object for studying the
supersymmetry of a theory. The number of supersymmetries that the theory
preserves is given by the number of massless gravitini. This follows
directly from the supersymmetric variations of the gravitini which must
vanish to preserve supersymmetry. We can use this constraint to study
how much supersymmetry is preserved by the class of @xmath -structure
manifolds we are compactifying on. Consider the case where we have the
following vanishing torsion classes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (19.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

These type of manifolds are a subset of half-flat manifolds where also
@xmath and the solution in section ( 17 ) showed that they form the most
general @xmath vacuum. However it is important to note that this only
tells us about the vacuum, in general away from the vacuum more torsion
classes may be non-vanishing. Our choice of manifold constrains these
torsion classes to also vanish away from the vacuum and so the manifold
is not the most general one that could preserve @xmath supersymmetry in
the vacuum. Nonetheless they still form a wide range of possible
manifolds with nearly-Kähler manifolds being an important subset. The
non-exact NS flux @xmath is turned off as it is inconsistent with the
induced torsion classes. This can be verified by noticing that, with the
present torsion classes, the NS flux in the solution ( 17.6 ) is exact.

The @xmath terms in the mass matrix ( 18.29 ) vanish for all manifolds
that satisfy ( 19.1 ) and the mass matrix diagonalises. The gravitini
are then mass eigenstates and we can evaluate the mass gap @xmath
between the two gravitini which is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (19.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where all the quantities are evaluated in the vacuum. For general
fluxes, the masses of the gravitini are non-degenerate. This implies
that we no longer have @xmath supersymmetry. Indeed such a mass gap
corresponds to partial supersymmetry breaking with @xmath for a
physically massless lighter gravitino or full supersymmetry breaking
with @xmath for a physically massive lighter gravitino. We have already
encountered a flux configuration that gives a solution preserving @xmath
supersymmetry in section 17 . We can see how this is realised in terms
of gravitino masses and partial supersymmetry breaking by studying the
mass matrix for the solution.

We can check that one of our gravitini is indeed physically massless by
substituting the solution ( 17.6 ) into our mass matrix ( 18.29 ) and
checking that one of the gravitini has a mass corresponding to the
gravitino mass found in the solution. Putting the solution ( 17.6 ) into
the gravitino mass matrix and performing the rescalings ( 18.10 ), we
find firstly that @xmath . This means that @xmath are both mass
eigenstates, with eigenvalues given by ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 In order to compare this
to the expression ( 17.9 ), we have evaluated the mass in the
conventions of [ 94 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Comparison with ( 17.9 ) gives that @xmath . We therefore see that for
the background solution we have considered, a mass gap opens up for the
two gravitini such that the @xmath is physically massless and @xmath is
physically massive. With a slight abuse of terminology we shall
therefore refer to the lower mass gravitino as massless and the higher
mass one as massive.

Before concluding this section we mention some subtle issues related to
the spontaneous @xmath breaking. It has been shown [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 28 ,
29 ] that in Minkowski space spontaneous partial supersymmetry breaking
can only occur if the symplectic basis in the vector-multiplet sector is
such that no prepotential exists. However these results do not apply to
the cases we discuss in this paper for the following reasons. First of
all, the no-go result above has been obtained for purely electric
gaugings of the @xmath supergravity. Here we have magnetic gaugings as
well and going to purely electric gaugings requires performing some
electric-magnetic rotation which, in special cases, can take us to a
symplectic basis where no prepotential exists. The second argument is
that we encounter the phenomenon of spontaneous partial supersymmetry
breaking in AdS space and in such a case it is not clear how to extend
the no-go arguments of [ 23 ] .

#### 19.2 The superpotential and Kähler potential

For the cases where there is a mass gap between the two gravitini it is
possible to consider an effective theory below the mass scale of the
higher mass gravitino. This effective theory may be an @xmath
supergravity, if the other gravitino is massless, or not supersymmetric
if it is massive. The former case is easier to analyse because of the
supersymmetry and we have already discussed a scenario where the partial
supersymmetry breaking is realised. We therefore consider this case and
proceed to derive the effective @xmath theory about the vacuum.

We begin by calculating the @xmath superpotential and Kähler potential.
In the effective @xmath theory the remaining gravitino mass is given by
( 8.40 ). It is only this Kähler-invariant combination of @xmath and
@xmath that has any physical significance, although it is still natural
to decompose ( 8.40 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that, as discussed in section 19.1 , to retain consistency with the
torsion classes we have set @xmath . This gives a general form for the
superpotential and Kähler potential coming from the @xmath effective
action following spontaneous breaking of the @xmath . The theory may
also have D-terms corresponding to the off-diagonal elements of the
@xmath gravitini mass matrix, @xmath in ( 18.29 ), which vanish for type
of manifolds we are considering ( 19.1 ). Note that we have taken @xmath
to be the lower mass gravitino, the case where @xmath has the lower mass
corresponds to complex conjugation of @xmath .

To determine the theory fully we have to identify the correct degrees of
freedom to truncate. This amounts to identifying the massive @xmath
superfields that arise from the @xmath multiplets. Useful constraints
are imposed by the requirements for a consistent truncation of @xmath to
@xmath discussed in section 8 . These constraints are however not enough
to determine the truncation completely for the case of a general @xmath
-structure manifold. However we now argue that for the class of
manifolds we are considering ( 19.1 ), this is possible.

For the choice of manifold ( 19.1 ) the basis form differential
relations ( 18.37 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Applying ( 19.6 ) to ( 7.16 ) we arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 19.7 ) is the motivation that lies behind this choice of
manifold. We see that @xmath only has one component, which is @xmath .
This means that @xmath only has non-vanishing periods @xmath and @xmath
. The homogeneity of @xmath means that the two periods are not physical
and so we reach the conclusion that for the type of manifolds we are
considering @xmath carries no degrees of freedom or, in terms of the
field content, there are no complex structure moduli. There are
therefore no hypermultiplets present in the theory and just a single
tensor multiplet. The truncation of the @xmath hypermultiplet sector to
@xmath superfields is trivial and this is precisely the difficult sector
to truncate. With this simplification we are able to perform the
truncation.

From the constraints in section 8.3 we know that in order to have
partial supersymmetry breaking we need at least two massive vectors
@xmath and @xmath to form the massive spin- @xmath multiplet. The
vectors should become massive by eating two Goldstone bosons from the
hypermultiplet or tensor multiplet sector. In the scenario at hand this
is realised by one massive vector @xmath arising as the dual of the
massive two-form @xmath , and the other @xmath becoming massive by
eating one of the scalar components of the tensor multiplet. In the
model at hand we have two possible Pecci-Quinn shift symmetries which
can be gauged in this way. They correspond to the two scalar fields
which arise from the expansion of the three-form @xmath in the basis of
three-forms @xmath given in ( 18.44 ). In order to gauge one of these
two directions, or a combination thereof, we need that the corresponding
combination of the forms @xmath and @xmath is exact. Without loss of
generality we will assume that @xmath is exact. Consistency with ( 18.31
) implies then that @xmath is not closed. We therefore see that the
scalar field which comes from the expansion in the form @xmath , which
is @xmath , is a Goldstone boson and is eaten by one (or a combination)
of the vector fields which come from the expansion of @xmath . Therefore
we learn that the fields which survive the truncation in the @xmath
theory are the dilaton and the second scalar field from the expansion of
@xmath which is @xmath . Together they form the scalar components of an
@xmath chiral superfield. The final thing which we need to do is to
identify the correct complex combination of these two fields which
defines the correct coordinate on the corresponding Kähler submanifold.
Knowing that the @xmath gravitini mass matrix entries become the
superpotential in the @xmath theory, which has to be holomorphic in the
chiral fields, we are essentially led to the unique possibility

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (19.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity @xmath is a positive real number as in the particular
choice of symplectic basis we have made ( @xmath is exact) @xmath is
purely imaginary.

To check that this is indeed the correct superfield we should make sure
we recover the moduli space metric from the Kähler potential in the
gravitino mass. Inserting ( 18.42 ) into ( 17.1 ) we get the kinetic
term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that taking the second derivatives,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and so ( 19.4 ) is indeed the correct Kähler potential and ( 19.9 ) is
the correct superfield. Determining the superfields arising from the
@xmath vector multiplets is a much easier task as they are just the
natural pairing found in ( 22.16 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the index @xmath now runs over the lower mass fields.

Having identified the @xmath superfields we can write the superpotential
for those fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have decomposed the RR flux

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this flux becomes exact if

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (19.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any constant @xmath . In that case it simply corresponds to a
rescaling of the superfield @xmath and can be dropped. The Kähler
potential follows simply from ( 19.4 ). The superpotential is
particularly interesting since all the fields feature in it
non-trivially. This raises the possibility that all the moduli fields
are stabilised and indeed this is generally the case. To show this, and
to make explicit the whole construction discussed in this chapter we
consider an example manifold.

### 20 The coset @xmath

Having derived in section 19.2 the form of the @xmath effective theory
on a general manifold with torsion classes ( 19.1 ), in this section we
study an explicit example of such a manifold. Denoting the internal
manifold by @xmath we consider the coset space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

Cosets are particularly useful as examples of structure manifolds
because the spectrum of forms that respect the coset symmetries is
highly constrained. This allows us to calculate the structure forms, the
expansion basis and their differential relations. The particular case
@xmath was first considered in [ 103 ] , and there are more details
about cosets in general and about this coset in the appendix. As well as
forming an example of a manifold that leads to an @xmath theory the
coset makes the whole construction of manifolds with @xmath -structure
explicit and so serves to clarify the ideas presented in this chapter
and in section 7.1 .

The derivation of the form spectrum on the coset is given in the
appendix and here we summarise the results. The metric on the coset is
derived by calculating the most general symmetric two-tensor that
respects the coset symmetries which for this case is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all the parameters are real. The parameters of the metric are the
geometric moduli and we see that we have three real moduli fields. Note
that the volume of the coset is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

There exists a basis two-forms on the coset @xmath and their Hodge
duals. There are also two independent three-forms @xmath . The form
bases satisfies the algebraic relations ( 18.30 ) and have the only
non-vanishing intersection number

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

To find the structure forms @xmath and @xmath we impose the @xmath
-structure conditions ( 7.8 ) on the most general two-form and
three-form that respect the coset symmetries. This uniquely determines
their structure in terms of the metric parameters and the basis forms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of the moduli classification we see that the coset has three
Kähler moduli and no complex structure moduli.

The coset also restricts how the differential operator acts on forms and
using this we can determine the differential relations of the basis
forms which read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that these are of the form ( 19.6 ) where the free parameters
@xmath have been fixed by the geometry. With these relations the
structure forms satisfy the differential relations ( 7.16 ) with torsion
classes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The expression for the torsion classes 20.7 shows the explicit
dependence of the torsion on the moduli. An important feature is that
for particular values of the moduli some torsion classes vanish which
for general values are not zero. This makes explicit the point made in
section 19.2 that the torsion classes in the vacuum are a subset of the
torsion classes of the action.

#### 20.1 @xmath supersymmetric minima

The structure of the coset exactly matches the requirements of section
19.2 and so the results derived in the section apply for this case. We
can therefore go on to derive the effective @xmath theory on the coset.
We begin by identifying the fields of the theory. Comparing ( 18.39 )
with ( 20.5 ) we are able to relate the Kähler moduli to the metric
parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (20.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are no geometric moduli associated with complex structure
deformations. In the effective theory we therefore have three
superfields @xmath from the Kähler sector and the superfield @xmath
coming from the tensor multiplet. Using the decomposition of @xmath in (
18.40 ), together with ( F.6 ) and ( 20.5 ), gives @xmath , and so the
superfields are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of the superfields the superpotential ( 19.13 ) and Kähler
potential ( 19.4 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (20.10)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (20.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This completely specifies the @xmath low energy effective theory.

We are now in a position to consider moduli stabilisation. This amounts
to finding minima of the scalar potential with respect to all the
fields. Finding all the minima of the scalar potential is a difficult
task, however we can look for particular minima for which the analysis
is simplified. It is a well known result that supersymmetric minima are
stable vacua which are determined by the solutions to the F-term
equations for the superpotential ( 20.10 ), which read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the Kähler covariant derivative is given by @xmath . We arrive at
four independent complex equations which serve to fix the four complex
scalar fields present. To show that this is the case we solve them
explicitly for a simplifying choice of parameters. We choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (20.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means that the flux @xmath becomes exact and so can be absorbed
into the definition of @xmath . In effect this is equivalent to setting
@xmath . We can then look for a solution where the Kähler superfields
are equal @xmath . In this case the equations simplify to the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The unique solution for @xmath has @xmath and the vacuum expectation
values for the superfield components are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This forms an explicit example of a minimum where all the moduli are
stabilised thereby solving the difficult vacuum degeneracy problems
outlined in section 10 . The vacuum forms the first and, so far, only
example of a purely perturbative vacuum in string theory where all the
fields (moduli and axions) are stabilised. Non-perturbative effects are
not expected to play a role here since all the fields appear at
tree-level in the superpotential. It does not require the use of
orientifolds and the supersymmetry breaking occurs spontaneously rather
than through an orientifold projection. The absence of non-perturbative
effects means that the four-dimensional vacuum can be uplifted to the
full ten-dimensional solution and it can be checked that the vacuum (
20.16 ) satisfies the ten-dimensional constraints ( 17.6 ). This is a
non-trivial result and forms an independent check on the procedure of
supersymmetry breaking and, more importantly, on the basis of forms used
in the compactification.

Substituting the vacuum ( 20.16 ) into the expression for the torsion
class @xmath ( 20.7 ) we find that in the vacuum @xmath vanishes. This
makes explicit the difference between the torsion classes in the vacuum
and in the action. The vanishing of @xmath can be directly attributed to
the simplification we made in turning off the non-exact flux @xmath .
This in turn allowed a solution where the @xmath superfields took the
same values. In the presence of @xmath flux the superfields would take
differing values in the vacuum and the torsion class @xmath would be
non-zero.

We now turn to some brief phenomenological properties of the vacuum (
20.16 ). The first thing to check is the consistency of the solution in
terms of large volume and weak coupling. Substituting the vacuum
solution into the expressions for the volume ( 20.3 ) and the string
coupling, @xmath , gives that we can go to arbitrary large volume and
weak-coupling by taking @xmath . Although the vacuum is consistent it
lacks a number of key phenomenological features. In terms of the matter
fields the fact that there are only two three-cycles means that it is
not possible to embed a realistic intersecting @xmath -branes model.
Also all the axionic fields are massive which rules them out as
candidates for the QCD axion.

The most serious problem is that the vacuum is anti deSitter (AdS) which
can be seen from the value of the scalar potential in the vacuum

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (20.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Although the limit @xmath leads to Minkowski, the cosmological constant
is generally negative. This of course is a problem that plagues most of
the vacua found in supergravities. One possible resolution to this
problem is the introduction of new effects into the potential such as
anti- @xmath -branes which could uplift the potential to a positive or
zero value. Such a mechanism has yet to be constructed in type IIA
string theory but does exist in the type IIB case [ 89 ] . The
possibility of such an uplift motivates studying the local form of the
potential near the minimum. The fact that the vacuum is a supersymmetric
AdS vacuum means that it is stable even if it is a saddle point [ 98 ,
99 ] . However following a possible uplift to Minkowski or deSitter
space saddle points become unstable vacua. We can construct a Hermitian
block matrix from the second derivatives of the potential with respect
to the superfields evaluated at the solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then for the solution to be a local minimum in all the directions
associated with the components of the superfields the matrix @xmath must
be positive definite. Inserting the solution ( 20.16 ) into ( 20.20 ) we
find that out of the eight real eigenvalues only six are positive. This
means that there are two real directions for which the potential is at a
maximum. The vacuum is therefore unstable under a direct uplift to
Minkowski or deSitter space. It is possible however that since an uplift
requires new terms in the potential the local structure may be modified
by these new terms so that it is stable. The tachyonic directions are in
the Kähler superfields sector as can be seen by directly plotting the
potential in the axio-dilaton direction as in figure
LABEL:fig:dilatonpot .

Therefore it is that sector that would have to be modified to solve the
uplift problem.

### 21 Summary

In this chapter we studied compactifications of type IIA string theory
on manifolds with @xmath -structure. The presence of fluxes was shown to
generate a potential for the moduli fields in four dimensions. It was
then argued, using ten-dimensional solutions, that the flux energy
density back-reacts on the geometry of the manifold inducing torsion so
that the manifold is no longer CY. This formed the motivation for
considering compactifications on manifolds with general @xmath
-structure. We proceeded to derive the four-dimensional action and its
interpretation as a gauged @xmath supergravity with electric and
magnetic gauging. Through the form of the four-dimensional gravitini
mass matrix we were able to study the phenomenon of spontaneous partial
supersymmetry breaking and, by restricting the present torsion classes,
derive the resulting effective @xmath supergravity. We showed that this
supergravity has a stable vacuum where all the moduli are stabilised in
a perturbative manner thereby solving the vacuum degeneracy problem.

## Chapter \thechapter Compactification of M-theory on Manifolds with
SU(3)-Structure

In this chapter we study compactifications of M-theory on
seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure [ 104 ] . Similar
work can be found in [ 76 , 78 , 83 , 105 ] . Unlike the type IIA case
studied in chapter id1 these manifolds are not the type that preserve
the minimum amount of supersymmetry in four-dimensions, these are the
manifolds with @xmath -structure, for which compactifications have been
studied in [ 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 ] . However, as we saw in chapter id1
, the supersymmetry of the action need not be fully preserved by the
vacuum. Eleven-dimensional solutions that explore the structure of the
vacuum have been studied for the cases of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
-structure in [ 110 , 12 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 114 , 115 , 13 ] . An
interesting point to come out of these studies is that compactifications
on manifolds with @xmath -structure have a much richer vacuum spectrum
than manifolds with @xmath -structure. Indeed there are solutions that
preserve only @xmath supersymmetry in the vacuum putting them on an
equal phenomenological grounding with @xmath compactifications in that
respect. There are however many phenomenologically appealing features
that are not present in the @xmath compactifications such as warped
anti-deSitter solutions and solutions with non-vanishing internal flux.
Therefore manifolds with @xmath -structure form an important set of
compactifications to consider.

As was the case in type IIA, the presence of fluxes induces torsion on
the manifold and therefore the manifolds do not preserve @xmath
-holonomy but are of a more general @xmath -structure. This is important
since, as discussed in section 7.1 , compactifications of M-theory on
manifolds with @xmath -holonomy are equivalent to compactifications of
type IIA string theory on CY manifolds. In this chapter we show that
because the @xmath -structure naturally picks out a vector on the
internal manifold these compactifications can be cast into a form that
is similar to the type IIA compactifications on @xmath -structure
manifolds considered in chapter id1 . Indeed the structure of this
chapter is very similar in nature to chapter id1 and many of the
arguments used there apply for this case. For this reason the issues
that arise in this chapter which have a parallel in the IIA case are not
discussed extensively and the reader is referred to chapter id1 for more
detail.

We begin this chapter with a reduction of eleven-dimensional
supergravity on a general manifold with @xmath -structure deriving the
resulting @xmath theory in four dimensions. The four-dimensional
gravitini mass matrix is then used to explore the amount of
supersymmetry preserved by various manifolds. We begin by looking at
vacua that preserve @xmath supersymmetry in section 23 . We derive the
most general @xmath solution and use it as a check on the mass matrix.
We then show how this solution can be used to find explicit vacua of an
example manifold. In section 24 we move on to the more
phenomenologically interesting @xmath vacua and show that some classes
of @xmath -structure manifolds induce spontaneous partial supersymmetry
breaking that leads to an @xmath effective theory. We derive this theory
and go through an explicit example of moduli stabilisation.

### 22 Reduction of eleven-dimensional supergravity

The theory that we consider is the low energy limit of M-theory that is
eleven-dimensional supergravity. The action of the theory is given by [
7 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The field spectrum of the theory contains the eleven-dimensional
graviton @xmath , the three-form @xmath and the gravitino, @xmath . The
indices run over eleven dimensions @xmath . For @xmath matrix and @xmath
tensor conventions see the Appendix. @xmath denotes the
eleven-dimensional Planck constant which we shall set to unity
henceforth thereby fixing our units.

In this section we consider this theory on a space which is a direct
product @xmath with the metric ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes co-ordinates in four dimensions and @xmath are the
co-ordinates on the internal compact manifold. This ansatz is not the
most general ansatz possible for the metric as we have not included a
possible warp factor. As discussed in chapter id1 there are many
compactifications that can consistently neglect such a warp factor
because either a warp factor is not induced by the flux or it can be
perturbatively ignored if the internal volume is large enough. For now
we proceed with an unwarped ansatz bearing in mind that this is only
consistent for certain compactifications.

The four-dimensional effective theory is an @xmath gauged supergravity.
In the upcoming sections we derive the quantities necessary to specify
this theory. The kinetic terms for the low energy fields are derived
from the Ricci scalar and the kinetic term for the three-form. The
prepotentials are derived from the four-dimensional gravitini mass
matrix and the vector multiplet Killing vectors are calculated through
explicit dimensional reduction.

#### 22.1 The Ricci scalar

The reduction of the Ricci scalar follows the same methodology as in
chapter id1 . We begin by writing the metric variations in terms of the
structure forms and then decompose the Ricci scalar appropriately. In
fact we now show that the presence of the vector @xmath allows us to
cast the metric deformations into a form very similar to the IIA case
considered in chapter id1 . However, it is important to remember that a
decomposition of the seven-dimensional manifold into a six-dimensional
sub-manifold and a circle is never assumed and is not generally the
case. The analogy with IIA is done at the ’four-dimensional’ level while
all internal forms have a general dependence on all the seven internal
co-ordinates.

The @xmath -structure induces a metric on the manifold that we can write
in terms of the invariant forms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (22.3)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

This expression for the metric can be checked by performing the
contractions on the right-hand-side using the appropriate @xmath
-structure identities. Varying the formula above we can write the metric
deformations as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (22.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is very similar to CY compactifications where the metric variations
were expressed in terms of Kähler class and complex structure
deformations. Keeping the terminology we refer to the scalar fields
associated with @xmath and @xmath as Kähler moduli and complex structure
moduli respectively. Furthermore we denote the scalar associated to
@xmath as the dilaton in complete analogy to the type IIA
compactifications.

Before starting the derivation of the kinetic terms associated to the
metric deformations discussed above we mention that the metric
variations can be dealt with more easily in terms of the variations of
either of the two @xmath -structures which can be defined on
seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure ( 7.36 ). The
expression ( 22.4 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is interesting since it shows that the complete metric variations
can be parameterised in terms of either of the @xmath -structures and
the full @xmath -structure is not required. For each of the @xmath
-structures the formula coincides with the metric variations on a
manifold with @xmath -structure [ 107 ] .

We now proceed with the compactification of the Ricci scalar. Initially,
we do not decompose @xmath and @xmath into their four-dimensional scalar
components but with the vector @xmath we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the single vector we have on the internal manifold from
the @xmath -structure requirements. Note that it is still @xmath and not
@xmath that features in the @xmath relations ( 7.28 ). The difference
between @xmath and @xmath can be understood as @xmath is the @xmath
vector which also encodes the possible deformations of the manifold,
while @xmath is only a basis vector in which we expand @xmath .
Therefore, the factor @xmath encodes information about the deformations
associated to the vector @xmath . This is completely analogous to the
compactification of eleven-dimensional supergravity on a circle to type
IIA theory and in order to continue this analogy we call the modulus in
equation ( 22.6 ) the dilaton. We further define a quantity which, in
the case where the compactification manifold becomes a direct product of
a six-dimensional manifold and a circle, plays the role of the volume of
the six-dimensional space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the volume of the full seven-dimensional space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this quantity we can construct the same structure for the complex
structure moduli as in chapter id1 . We define the true holomorphic
three-form @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (22.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have also introduced the Kähler potential for the complex
structure deformations, @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The analogy with the IIA case of chapter id1 holds for the spurious
variations of @xmath so that the physical variations of @xmath
correspond to the Kähler covariant derivative.

Using the expression for the metric fluctuations ( 22.4 ) we derive the
variation of the eleven-dimensional Ricci scalar. The calculation is
presented in the appendix and here we recall the final result

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have dropped the @xmath term. We define the four-dimensional
dilaton as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally we note that in order to arrive at the four-dimensional Einstein
frame we performed the Weyl rescalings

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (22.13)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The important thing to notice in this result is that the metric
fluctuations have naturally split into the dilaton, the @xmath and
@xmath variations with separate kinetic terms. Moreover, due to the
dependence of @xmath on the dilaton, it can be seen that the all the
dilaton factors drop out from the kinetic terms of the Kähler and
complex structure moduli.

#### 22.2 The form fields

As we have seen in the previous subsection, the compactification of the
gravitational sector of M-theory on seven-dimensional manifolds with
@xmath -structure closely resembles the corresponding compactifications
of type IIA theory. Therefore we find it useful to continue this analogy
at the level of the matter fields and so we decompose the three-form
@xmath along the vector direction which is featured in the
seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure under consideration.
Consequently we write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is assumed to have no component along @xmath , i.e. @xmath
. As expected, in the type IIA picture @xmath corresponds to the RR
three-form, while @xmath represents the NS-NS two-form field. Then
compactifying the eleven-dimensional kinetic term, taking care to
perform the appropriate Weyl rescalings ( 22.13 ), we arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.15)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

One immediately notices that the kinetic term for fluctuations of the
@xmath -field along the internal manifold is the same as the kinetic
term for the fluctuations of the fundamental form @xmath . Therefore we
see that these fluctuations pair up into the complex field

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 22.3 Flux

The only background fluxes that can be turned on in M-theory
compactifications and which are compatible with four-dimensional Lorentz
invariance are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have decomposed the internal parts of the fluxes into an exact and a
non-exact part. The non-exact part is the usual flux, as discussed in
chapter id1 , that arises from the form @xmath which is not globally
well defined. This flux arises from the membrane and is quantised. There
is also an exact part of the flux which arises from the vacuum
expectation value of the field coming from @xmath which we denote @xmath
to distinguish it from the part that is not globally well defined. See (
22.35 ) for the explicit definition.

The external part of the flux @xmath is called the Freund-Rubin flux. As
observed in the literature [ 106 , 107 , 116 ] , the Freund-Rubin flux
is not the true constant parameter describing this degree of freedom.
Rather one has to consider the flux of the dual seven-form field
strength @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which should now be the true dual of the Freund-Rubin flux. As can be
seen the @xmath flux also receives a contribution from the ordinary
@xmath flux. Therefore, in general, the Freund-Rubin flux parameter is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant which parameterises the seven-form flux.

#### 22.4 The gravitini mass matrix

Recall from section 7.1 that on a seven-dimensional manifold with @xmath
-structure one can define two independent (Majorana) spinors which we
have denoted @xmath . We therefore consider the ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the four-dimensional gravitini which are Majorana
spinors and the overall normalisation factor is chosen in order to reach
canonical kinetic terms in four-dimensions. It is more customary to work
with gravitini which are Weyl spinors in four dimensions and therefore
we decompose @xmath above as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the chiral components of four-dimensional gravitini
satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then compactifying the eleven-dimensional gravitino terms in ( 22 ) and
performing the appropriate Weyl rescalings ( 22.13 ) we arrive at the
four-dimensional action ( 8.29 ). The main steps in deriving the mass
matrix are presented in appendix id1 . The result reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath               (22.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath denotes the internal non-exact part of the background flux
which was defined in equation ( 22.17 ), @xmath is the Freund-Rubin
constant and we have further introduced

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The eigenvalues of the gravitini mass matrix determine the amount of
supersymmetry in the vacuum. As we did in chapter id1 we use them to
study partial supersymmetry breaking in section 24 . An important
concept, that is not present in the six-dimensional case of chapter id1
, is the notion of an effective @xmath -structure. Consider a manifold
where the gravitini @xmath in ( 22.21 ) are mass eigenstates. This
corresponds to the case where the off-diagonal terms in the mass matrix
vanish. Then a mass gap between the gravitini also implies a mass gap
between the two internal spinors @xmath . This, in turn, through the
definitions of the two @xmath -structures ( 7.35 ) means that one @xmath
form becomes heavier than the other. In that sense performing the
truncation of the higher mass gravitini and its associated matter
spectrum corresponds to a truncation of one of the @xmath -structures.
The effective @xmath theory after the truncation is equivalent to a
compactification on a manifold with @xmath -structure where the @xmath
-structure is the lowest mass one, even though the full manifold has
@xmath -structure. The manifold can be said to have an effective @xmath
-structure. We study an explicit example of this phenomenon in section
25.1 . It is important to note however that not all truncations of the
@xmath -structure @xmath theory to an effective @xmath theory correspond
to an effective @xmath compactification. It is only the case when the
gravitino mass eigenstates correspond to the internal spinors from which
the two @xmath -structures are constructed. The notion of an effective
@xmath -structure is particularly important in M-theory
compactifications since all manifolds with @xmath -structure are known
to have @xmath -structure [ 13 ] and so lead to a @xmath
four-dimensional theory. An @xmath -structure contains two @xmath
-structures and so in this chapter we actually study compactifications
on an effective @xmath -structure where we assume the other @xmath
-structure is massive and can be truncated. This is not as strong an
assumption as it appears. In fact in this chapter we give two explicit
manifolds where such a mass hierarchy appears. These are the cosets of
section 23.2 and section 25 . Both of the cosets are such that only an
@xmath -structure is compatible with the coset symmetries. On coset
manifolds the forms that satisfy the symmetries are precisely the lowest
mass forms and so we recover an effective @xmath -structure.

#### 22.5 The Kaluza-Klein basis

As was the case for six-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure,
specifying the basis of lowest mass forms on the internal manifold is a
difficult task. Given the absence of such a classification in the
literature we propose a set of forms motivated through supersymmetry and
explicit examples. We first specify the forms and then motivate the
choice. The basis includes a single one-form @xmath . There are also a
set of two-forms @xmath , and four-forms @xmath ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Note that these
are not the Hodge duals of the two-forms since those are five-forms.
Rather the correspondence between the four-forms and the two-forms is of
the nature @xmath . , and set of three-forms @xmath which satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The forms satisfy the following relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (22.29)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

These forms can in general depend on all seven internal coordinates and
not be closed. We do not specify the differential relations in general
but calculate them explicitly for the examples considered.

The strongest motivation for this choice of basis is the analogy with
type IIA compactifications. We saw in chapter id1 how the basis of forms
lead to an @xmath supergravity and since we should recover an @xmath
supergravity also in this case the basis should follow a similar
structure. The major difference is the addition of a single one-form
@xmath which is obviously motivated through the extra vector @xmath in
the seven-dimensional @xmath -structure. Since there is only one
independent singlet vector we expect only one one-form. The other
possible one-forms are triplets and are therefore ruled out by the same
considerations as the six-dimensional case. The relations between the
forms ( 22.29 ) are motivated by the anticipation that the @xmath
-structure forms should be decomposed in terms of the basis. The
constraints then follow from the @xmath -structure relations ( 7.28 ).
As in the six-dimensional case the index range of the forms is not
topological.

#### 22.6 The action as a gauged @xmath supergravity

The eleven-dimensional forms are expanded in the basis ( 22.26 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that the @xmath -structure relations ( 7.28 ) rule out any
component along @xmath in the expansions of @xmath and @xmath .
Similarly @xmath can not be expanded along the @xmath direction as it
already comes from a three-form with one leg along @xmath , while @xmath
was assumed not to have any component along @xmath ( 22.14 ). As was the
case in IIA the two-form field @xmath can be massive and so is not
dualised to a scalar. The field content in four-dimensions is then
identical to the IIA case as given in table 2 .

We also find it useful to introduce at this level one more notation. As
we are mostly interested in the scalar fields in the theory we denote
all the fluctuations of @xmath which give rise to scalar fields in four
dimensions by @xmath . Just from its definition we can see that this is
a three-form on the internal manifold. In terms of the expansions above
it takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.35)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The geometry of the scalar manifold follows in the same was as the IIA
case from the Kähler potentials

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Since the two-form @xmath is massive the supergravity is electrically
and magnetically gauged. To derive the prepotentials we work with
special co-ordinates in the vector multiplet fields @xmath , and
decompose @xmath into

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.38)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where now @xmath is a function of only the hypermultiplet fields. The
prepotentials read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the parameters @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.40)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When @xmath is closed the magnetic gaugings vanish and the two-form
field @xmath becomes massless. To completely determine the supergravity
we need to specify the Killing vectors which are used in gauging the
vector multiplet scalars. These are not fixed by the gravitini mass
matrix and so we calculate them by explicit dimensional reduction of the
relevant terms. The @xmath action ( 8.1 ), after the gauging ( 8.25 ),
contains the term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.41)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have taken the Killing vectors @xmath to be real anticipating
the result. Note that since the Killing vectors should be holomorphic
this is only possible if they are constant with respect to the vector
scalars. Dimensionally reducing the third term in ( 22 ) we find the
term in the four-dimensional action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.42)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from which we determine the Killing vectors

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (22.43)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This completely determines the four-dimensional @xmath gauged
supergravity that results from compactifications of M-theory on
manifolds with @xmath -structure. The theory is quite rich with charged
vector multiplets and hypermultiplets as well as massive tensor fields.
Having specified the theory we move on to considering the vacuum
structure.

### 23 Preserving @xmath supersymmetry

In this section we consider the case where the @xmath -structure
manifolds are such that the vacuum preserves the full @xmath
supersymmetry. The case where the vacuum only preserves @xmath
supersymmetry is studied in section 24 . We begin by finding the most
general solution of eleven-dimensional supergravity on manifolds with
@xmath -structure that preserves @xmath supersymmetry. We use the
results to check the form of the gravitini mass matrix ( 22.4 ). We then
study an explicit example of a manifold that satisfies the solution and
show how the torsion classes can be combined with the eleven-dimensional
solution to determine the value of the moduli in the vacuum.

#### 23.1 @xmath solution

In this section we classify the most general manifolds with @xmath
-structure that are solutions to M-theory that preserve @xmath
supersymmetry with four-dimensional space-time being Einstein and
admitting two Killing spinors. In order to study such solutions in full
generality we allow for a warped product metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

but it turns out that the warp factor, @xmath , actually vanishes. This
class of solutions has also been recently discussed in [ 13 ] . We look
for solutions to the eleven-dimensional Killing spinor equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the background field strength @xmath above we consider the most
general ansatz compatible with four-dimensional Lorentz invariance.
Therefore, the only non-vanishing components of @xmath are @xmath and
@xmath .

Given that the internal manifold has @xmath -structure we know that
there exist at least two globally defined Majorana spinors and so we
take a Killing spinor ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are looking for a @xmath solution we treat @xmath and @xmath as
independent. This leads to more stringent constraints than the @xmath
case, where they may be related, which makes finding the most general
solution straightforward. As we are looking for four-dimensional
maximally symmetric spaces, the Killing spinors @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index @xmath labels the two spinors. The integrability
condition reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so one immediately sees that not all @xmath are independent, but
have to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (23.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

Decomposing the Killing spinor equation into its external and internal
parts we arrive at the following equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In order to classify this solution from the point of view of the @xmath
-structure we find the corresponding non-vanishing torsion classes by
computing the exterior derivatives of the structure forms. Using their
definition in terms of the spinors ( 7.1.3 ) and applying the results
above we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first thing to note is that the warp factor @xmath is constant in
this vacuum and therefore can be set to zero by a constant rescaling of
the metric. The second thing to observe, comparing with equation ( 7.34
), is that only the singlet classes @xmath and @xmath are non-vanishing.
Moreover, they are not independent, but proportional to each other as
they can both be expressed in terms of the Freund-Rubin parameter @xmath
.

From equations ( 23.7 ) we can also determine the parameters @xmath ,
which give the value of the cosmological constant, and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (23.12)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The Killing spinor equations ( 23.7 ) also give constraints on the
internal flux that imply it should vanish. However an easier way to see
this is to consider the integral of the external part of the
eleven-dimensional Einstein equation which reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that using ( 23.12 ) and ( 23.5 ) we indeed recover @xmath .
Since @xmath is a constant, this means that the Bianchi identity @xmath
is indeed satisfied and so follow all the equations of motion.

Finally we note that in terms of the two @xmath -structures @xmath ,
equations ( 23.1 ) can be recast into a simple form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows that both @xmath -structures are in fact weak- @xmath .

##### 23.1.1 The mass of the gravitini

We can now use this solution to illustrate the discussion on the
relation between the gravitini masses and supersymmetry and to check our
form of the mass matrix. Inserting the solution just derived into the
mass matrix we should find that the masses of the two gravitini
degenerate and that they are both physically massless. Taking the
solution ( 23.1 ) from the previous section the mass matrix ( 22.4 )
reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (23.15)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which indeed shows that the masses of the two gravitini are the same. To
show that the two gravitini are physically massless we recall that in
AdS space the physical mass of the gravitino is given by ( 18.21 ). In
order to obtain the AdS radius, @xmath in ( 18.21 ), correctly
normalised we recall that the mass matrix ( 23.15 ) was obtained in the
Einstein frame which differs from the frame used in the previous section
by the Weyl rescaling ( 22.13 ). Inserting this into ( 23.5 ) we obtain
the properly normalised AdS inverse radius

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that here, as well as in equation ( 23.15 ), the fields @xmath and
@xmath should be replaced with their particular values which they have
for this solution. Equation ( 23.16 ), together with ( 23.15 ), shows
that the physical mass of the gravitini ( 18.21 ) vanishes confirming
our expectations that the vacuum determined in the previous section does
indeed preserve @xmath supersymmetry.

#### 23.2 The coset @xmath

In order to see the above considerations at work we go through an
explicit example of a manifold that satisfies the @xmath solution
discussed in the previous sections. The manifold we consider is the
coset space @xmath . Cosets are particularly useful as examples of
structure manifolds because the spectrum of forms that respect the coset
symmetries is highly constrained. There are more details about cosets in
general and about this particular coset in the appendix. In this section
we summarise the results and construct a basis of forms with which we
can perform the compactification.

We begin by finding the most general symmetric two-tensor that respects
the coset symmetries, this is the metric on the coset and is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where all the parameters are real. The parameters of the metric are the
geometrical moduli and we see that we have four real moduli on this
coset. Note that there is a positivity domain @xmath . Having
established the metric on the coset we can move on to find the structure
forms. The strategy here is to find the most general one, two and
three-forms and then impose the @xmath -structure relations on them. It
is at this stage that we really see what the @xmath -structure of the
coset is. This analysis is performed in the appendix and we find that
the structure forms are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the relations between the @xmath s and the metric moduli are given
in the appendix. The basis forms satisfy the algebraic relations ( 22.26
) and the differential relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The structure forms ( 23.18 ) show that indeed the coset has @xmath
-structure. In terms of the moduli classification we have been using it
has a dilaton, one Kähler modulus and one complex structure modulus ²¹
²¹ 21 As is expected form @xmath supergravity the parameters @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath describe only two real degrees of freedom.
thus making up the four degrees of freedom in the metric. We also show
in appendix id1 that scalar functions are in general not compatible with
coset symmetries and therefore we conclude that for such
compactifications no warp factor can appear.

##### 23.2.1 Finding @xmath minima

In this section we consider if the potential which arises from the
compactification on the coset above has a minimum where the moduli are
stabilised. In particular we wish to look for minima that preserve
@xmath supersymmetry and correspond to the solution discussed in section
23.1 . As usual, in a bosonic background, the condition for
supersymmetry is the vanishing of the supersymmetry variations of the
fermions. This is precisely what we used in the previous section and
thus a supersymmetric solution should satisfy all the conditions derived
there, and in particular ( 23.1 ). Using ( 23.2 ) we see that the forms
( 23.18 ) obey

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Therefore these forms in general do not satisfy the solution constraints
( 23.1 ). Requiring them to match the solution gives a set of equations
for the moduli that exactly determine the value of the moduli in the
vacuum. For the coset at hand the solution is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have replaced the Freund-Rubin flux @xmath by the true flux
parameter @xmath from equation ( 22.20 ). Note that @xmath are not the
true complex structure moduli, but are related to them through ( 22.9 ).
However, the complex structure moduli defined in ( 22.32 ), which can be
most easily read off in special coordinates, do not depend on the
rescalings of @xmath and therefore, in our case the value of the single
modulus is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It can also be shown that the axionic scalar fields, which come from the
expansion of the three-form @xmath in the forms ( 23.2 ) are also
stabilised. A simple argument to support this statement is that
non-vanishing values of the axions leads to a non-zero internal @xmath
flux at this vacuum solution due to the non-trivial derivative algebra
that the basis forms satisfy ( 23.2 ), which in turn is ruled out by the
supersymmetry conditions found in section 23.1 . Hence, these scalar
fields are forced by supersymmetry to stay at zero vacuum expectation
value and therefore are fixed.

It is also worth observing one more thing regarding this solution. If we
think in terms of the type IIA quantities we see that the Kähler modulus
@xmath and the dilaton @xmath are not independent and choosing to stay
in the supergravity approximation on type IIA side, ie take @xmath ,
drives the theory to the strong coupling regime which explains why such
solutions can not be seen in the perturbative type IIA approach.

Finally we note that as the solution above is supersymmetric, the
four-dimensional space-time is AdS with the AdS curvature which scales
with @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (23.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, in the large volume limit, given by @xmath , the four-dimensional
space-time approaches flat space.

### 24 The @xmath theory

In this section we analyse the case where the vacuum only preserves
@xmath supersymmetry. We show that this occurs due to spontaneous
partial supersymmetry breaking and that it is possible to write an
effective @xmath theory about this vacuum. We derive the Kähler
potential and superpotential for this theory and go through an explicit
example of a manifold that leads to this phenomenon.

The partial supersymmetry breaking follows in exactly the same way as
the IIA case. In order to derive the low energy superfield spectrum we
need to restrict to the case where there are no complex structure
moduli. In the case of @xmath -structure in six dimensions this
corresponded to the subset of half-flat manifolds specified by ( 19.1 ).
The equivalent restriction for the seven-dimensional case in terms of
the torsion classes ( 7.34 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (24.1)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Under these conditions the three-form @xmath is exact and so the absence
of complex structure moduli follows from the same arguments as in
chapter id1 . The condition ( 24.1 ) appears to be quite strong and we
have already come across an example where this is violated in section
23.2 . On the other hand it was shown in [ 13 ] that an @xmath
anti-deSitter vacuum, which is required for all the moduli to be
stabilised, necessarily means that @xmath is not closed. Hence we always
expect at least one of the torsion classes in ( 24.1 ) to be
non-vanishing. Other than this we must take the condition as a
limitation of this work.

We further have to determine the gravitino mass matrix for this
situation. Using ( 22.4 ), ( 22.12 ), ( 22.7 ) we find that in the
particular case considered above, ( 24.1 ), the gravitino mass matrix
diagonalises.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (24.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we used the fact that the internal flux @xmath must be closed to
satisfy the Bianchi identity.

The low energy superfields follow in the same way as chapter id1 and we
recover a single chiral superfield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sign @xmath is determined by which of the gravitini is
massless and we drop the index unless required for clarity. Recall that
the quantity @xmath is a positive real number.

To check that this is indeed the correct superfield we should make sure
we recover the moduli space metric from the Kähler potential in the
gravitino mass. The appropriate kinetic terms in ( 22.15 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can use ( 24 ) to read off the Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is then easily shown that indeed the superfield and Kähler potential
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence we have identified the correct superfield in the truncated
spectrum. The superfields arising from the @xmath vector multiplets are
the usual

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index @xmath now runs over the lower mass fields.

The superpotential for the @xmath theory can be read off from the
gravitino mass to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (24.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this expression for the superpotential we can see that we should
generically expect a constant term @xmath , linear terms in @xmath ,
quadratic terms @xmath , @xmath as well as mixed terms @xmath . These
type of potentials will, in general, stabilise all the moduli and we go
through an example in the next section.

It is instructive to note that finding a supersymmetric solution for
this superpotential automatically solves the equations which are
required for a solution of the full @xmath theory to preserve some
supersymmetry. Therefore, for such a solution, it would be enough to
show, using the mass matrix ( 24 ), that a mass gap between the two
gravitini forms in order to prove that partial supersymmetry breaking
does indeed occur.

### 25 The coset @xmath

In this section we study an explicit example of a manifold that
preserves @xmath supersymmetry in the vacuum. The manifold we consider
is the coset @xmath . Details of the structure of the coset can be found
in the appendix and in this section we summarise the relevant parts. The
coset is specified by three integers @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath that
determine the embeddings of the @xmath in @xmath , where the integers
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

with all other choices corresponding to different parameterisations of
the @xmath . As with the previous coset example we can use the coset
symmetries to derive the invariant @xmath -structure forms and the
metric. The metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameters @xmath are all real. We can write the invariant
forms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This basis can be shown to satisfy the following differential relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced two vectors @xmath , and @xmath which encode
the information about the metric fluxes. The quantities @xmath and
@xmath are not independent, but satisfy @xmath and in terms of the
integers @xmath and @xmath take the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This ends our summary of the relevant features of the coset. We see that
this manifold indeed has the required torsion classes ( 24.1 ) and, as
expected, has no complex structure moduli and three Kähler moduli.

#### 25.1 @xmath supersymmetric minima

As explained in [ 117 ] , M-theory compactifications on the coset
manifold presented above are expected to preserve @xmath supersymmetry
in the vacuum. Therefore we can use the machinery developed at the
beginning of this section and derive the @xmath theory in the vacuum.
For simplicity we turn off the four-form flux @xmath and so, using
equations ( 24.5 ) and ( 24.8 ) we find the superpotential and Kähler
potential to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.6)
     @xmath   @xmath               (25.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the superfields @xmath were defined in ( 24.7 ) while for @xmath
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

as ( 25 ) gives @xmath . We can look for supersymmetric vacua to this
action by solving the F-term equations. For convenience we restrict to
the family of cosets with @xmath though the results can be reproduced
for more general choices of embeddings. We find the solution to the
F-term equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (25.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point we can go back to check which of the gravitini is more
massive. Inserting the solution ( 25.9 ) into the expression of the mass
matrix ( 24 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (25.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means @xmath is the lighter gravitino and the one that should be
kept in the truncated theory. This gravitino is physically massless as
expected. This also fixes the @xmath sign ambiguity in the superfield
and superpotential so that we have @xmath . Finally we note that as this
solution is a supersymmetric solution of the truncated @xmath theory and
that according to ( 25.10 ) the gravitino masses are not degenerate we
have indeed encountered the phenomenon of partial supersymmetry
breaking.

We have therefore obtained an explicit model where all the
four-dimensional fields are stabilised. It forms an example of an @xmath
-structure compactification that stabilises all the moduli. We expect
the moduli stabilisation property to be generic to @xmath -structure
compactifications since all the fields appear non-trivially in the mass
matrix ( 22.4 ) and we have already come across a different type of
manifold where the moduli are stabilised in section 23.2 .

##### 25.1.1 The structure in the vacuum

It is informative to look at the form of the G-structure of the coset in
the vacuum in terms of the @xmath -structures. The two @xmath forms (
7.36 ) satisfy the vacuum differential and algebraic relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is clear to see that only @xmath is weak- @xmath , and this is indeed
the @xmath -structure that features in the superpotential and is
associated with the lower mass gravitino. This shows an explicit mass
gap appearing between the two @xmath -structures which is the same mass
gap that corresponds to the partial supersymmetry breaking which we have
used to write an effective @xmath theory. Hence we have shown an example
of the idea of an effective G structure where we could have arrived at
this truncated @xmath theory through a @xmath -structure
compactification even though the manifold actually has @xmath
-structure. Finally we should note that we could have used the condition
that the manifold should be weak- @xmath in the vacuum to solve for the
values of the moduli as we did in section 23.2.1 instead of solving the
F-term equations.

### 26 Summary

In this chapter we studied compactifications of eleven-dimensional
supergravity on seven-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure. We
argued that these theories can be naturally cast into a form very
similar to type IIA compactifications on six-dimensional manifolds with
@xmath -structure as studied in chapter id1 . We then derived the
resulting four dimensional @xmath supergravity. We studied stable vacua
of the supergravity that preserve the full @xmath supersymmetry by
finding the most general solution to M-theory on manifolds with @xmath
-structure that preserves @xmath supersymmetry which, when combined with
an explicit manifold, lead to a successful moduli stabilisation
mechanism. We then used the gravitini mass matrix to study partial
supersymmetry breaking and derived the resulting effective @xmath theory
for a certain class of manifolds. By studying an explicit example of
such a manifold the @xmath theory was shown to have stable
supersymmetric vacua.

## Chapter \thechapter Mathematical Tools

In this appendix we review some of the mathematics used in this thesis
which also serves to fix the notation and conventions. It is not meant
as an introduction to the mathematics involved but rather as a
collection of the relevant ideas and definitions. For a more thorough
treatment of the subjects covered we refer the reader to [ 118 , 119 ] .

Throughout this work we use a bracket notation for symmetrising and
anti-symmetrising indices. The anti-symmetric bracket notation @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.1)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the sum is performed over the permutations group @xmath with
@xmath being a particular permutation and sgn @xmath being its
corresponding sign. The symmetric bracket notation @xmath is defined in
the same way but without the sgn @xmath factor. The notation @xmath is
used to omit an index range from the symmetry properties. Products of
@xmath matrices or basis forms are taken to be anti-symmetrised

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.2)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since we are interested in both Euclidean and Minkowski signature
manifolds a useful quantity to define is @xmath which takes the value of
@xmath for a Euclidean signature metric and @xmath for a Minkowski
signature.

The index notation in this work is such that in Minkoswki spaces indices
range from @xmath while for Euclidean spaces they start from @xmath . In
the case where an index is split into two ranges @xmath we generally
restart the second index from @xmath again unless otherwise specified.

The convention adopted regarding flat @xmath and curved @xmath indices
related by the vielbeins @xmath defined so that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.3)
  -- -------- -- ------

is that they are both denoted by @xmath to save clattered index
expressions. The appropriate indices to use should be apparent from the
particular expression but a general rule is that they are always curved
with the two exceptions being the @xmath matrices in section E and the
last two indices on the spin connection ( E.15 ).

## Appendix A Riemannian geometry

A Riemannian manifold is a differentiable manifold endowed with a metric
that is a symmetric two-tensor @xmath where the indices run over the
number of dimensions. In this thesis the metric signature is taken to be
of the Minkowski form @xmath in four, ten and eleven dimensions and of
the Euclidean form @xmath in six and seven dimensions. We define
connection components on the manifold @xmath that describe how the basis
vectors change throughout the manifold so that a connection @xmath
acting on a general vector @xmath and one-form @xmath (see section B )
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The torsion @xmath on the manifold is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also construct measures of the curvature of the manifold that are
the Riemann tensor, the Ricci tensor and the Ricci scalar which are
related by contraction of indices and given respectively by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

A connection @xmath is said to be metric compatible if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a metric compatible connection we can decompose the connection
coefficients as

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.5)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath are called Christoffel symbols and are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is called the contorsion and is given in terms of the torsion by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The connection where the contorsion vanishes is called the Levi-Civita
connection. The determinant of the metric @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

A useful identity involving the metric determinant is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is often important to consider small variations of the metric of the
form @xmath . Under such variations the relevant quantities vary as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Rescalings of the metric by a conformal factor are called Weyl
rescalings. Under a Weyl rescaling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the following quantities transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the number of dimensions. Finally a useful quantity
is the Levi-Civita tensor (density) @xmath defined in @xmath -dimensions
as purely anti-symmetric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices are raised and lowered by the flat metric @xmath and
in our conventions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Levi-Civita symbol satisfies the following useful identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is sometimes useful to define the quantity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is now raised and lowered by the full metric and in terms of which
the volume form (see section B ) @xmath , which measures the volume of a
space, is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Fibre bundles and differential forms

A fibre bundle is a manifold @xmath that specified in terms of a base
manifold @xmath and a typical fibre manifold @xmath through a projection
@xmath such that for each point @xmath there exists a neighbourhood
@xmath and a diffeomorphism @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the inverse of the projection

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The map @xmath is called the local trivialisation since
it maps locally the fibre bundle to the direct product of the base and
fibre. The structure of the bundle comes from the relation between maps
on different patches. Consider two overlapping sets on @xmath , @xmath ,
then we require that the transition functions @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

are smooth and form a group @xmath which is called the structure group
of the bundle. The example where the transition functions are all unity
is the trivial bundle which is just a direct product of the base and the
fibre. A section of the fibre bundle @xmath is a smooth map which
satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the identity element on @xmath .

Consider a fibre bundle @xmath where we choose local sections @xmath ,
@xmath that are linearly independent for all @xmath . Such sections are
said to define a frame. Consider another frame @xmath defined on the
patch @xmath where @xmath . Then then two frames are related by the
transition functions as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore the structure group is the group that transforms between the
possible frames.

A vector bundle is a fibre bundle where the typical fibre is a vector
space. The tangent bundle @xmath over a manifold @xmath is a vector
bundle with fibre @xmath for @xmath with the typical fibre @xmath (or
@xmath ) where @xmath . For a co-ordinate basis @xmath on a patch @xmath
we have the frame given by @xmath . The co-tangent bundle @xmath is the
bundle dual to the tangent bundle which is spanned by co-tangent vectors
or one-forms @xmath such that @xmath . In terms of co-ordinates the
one-forms are given by @xmath . We continue to use this coordinate basis
for clarity when dealing with components but the relations derived
henceforth hold for general forms in a basis independent way. The wedge
product @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the wedge product we can construct higher order forms with a
@xmath -form @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have adopted the notation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that through its definition a form as anti-symmetric components
only. The space of @xmath -forms on a manifold @xmath is denoted @xmath
. The Hodge star @xmath is a map @xmath which takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gives the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The inner product of two forms @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The external derivative @xmath is a map @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is nilpotent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and operates on products as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conjugate of the exterior derivative @xmath is a map @xmath defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which acts on forms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Laplacian @xmath takes @xmath and is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which operates on forms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Forms that satisfy @xmath and @xmath are called closed and co-closed
respectively. Forms that satisfy @xmath and are called harmonic.
Harmonic forms are closed and co-closed and vice-versa. A form that can
be written as an exterior derivative of another form @xmath is called
exact. Hodge’s decomposition theorem states that every form can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are forms that are uniquely specified
for every @xmath and @xmath is harmonic.

The Lie derivative @xmath of a general tensor @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath denote the number of components in the tangent and co-tangent
bundles respectively, is done with respect to a vector @xmath and is a
map @xmath that takes the following forms. For the case where the tensor
is a function @xmath ( @xmath ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For a vector @xmath ( @xmath ) it reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second term defines the Lie bracket of two vectors. For a
general @xmath -form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the interior product between a vector and a form defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that sometimes the notation @xmath is used in analogy with the
inner product of forms. A Killing vector is a vector whose Lie
derivative of the metric vanishes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix C Homology and co-homology

A @xmath -chain @xmath on a manifold @xmath is a formal sum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are p-dimensional submanifolds of @xmath and @xmath . The
boundary operator @xmath maps a @xmath -chain to a @xmath chain that is
its geometrical boundary. The sets of cycles @xmath and boundaries
@xmath on a manifold @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some @xmath chain. The homology group @xmath is defined
as the set of @xmath -cycles that do not differ by a boundary

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the modding out is done through the equivalence relation between
two cycles @xmath if @xmath . The dimension of @xmath is called the
Betti number @xmath . The Euler number @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and can be thought of as a measure of the number of holes in the
manifold.

A relation between a @xmath -form @xmath and a @xmath -chain @xmath can
be induced through the inner product

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Stokes’s theorem states that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and can be used to define a correspondence between the homology of the
manifold and its co-homology @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where forms are split into equivalence classes through @xmath if @xmath
. Hodge’s theorem ( B.21 ) states that each equivalence class in @xmath
has a unique harmonic representative and so @xmath measures the number
of harmonic forms. We can then identify representative cycles in the
homology for the harmonic forms through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is analogous to the basis forms and cycles used in CY
compactifications.

## Appendix D Complex and almost complex manifolds

Any even-dimensional real manifold @xmath admits locally, for a point
@xmath , a two-tensor @xmath of type @xmath , i.e. @xmath , which
satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the tensor @xmath is also globally well defined it is called an
almost complex structure and the manifold @xmath is called an almost
complex manifold. In that case it is possible to define projection
operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

that split the tangent and cotangent spaces into @xmath , @xmath .
Tensors that are in @xmath and @xmath are called holomorphic and tensors
that are in @xmath and @xmath are called anti-holomorphic.

The relation between a complex manifold and an almost complex manifold
arises from global properties. Consider a vector field @xmath that is a
set of smoothly connected vectors assigned to each point on @xmath . If
at some point @xmath this vector field is holomorphic @xmath it need not
be so in some other point @xmath since the transition functions may not
be holomorphic themselves. The condition that the transition functions
are holomorphic is the condition for an almost complex manifold to be a
complex manifold and is equivalent to the requirement that the Lie
bracket of two holomorphic vector fields remains holomorphic. In that
case the almost complex structure is said to be integrable and the
Nijenhuis tensor @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

vanishes. Correspondingly if @xmath the manifold is said to be complex.
This condition can be thought of as a restriction on the torsion on the
manifold. For example using the decomposition of torsion for
six-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure ( 7.16 ), a complex
manifold satisfies @xmath .

For a complex manifold it is possible to define complex co-ordinates
@xmath where @xmath runs over half the real dimension of the manifold.
In terms of these co-ordinates the complex structure takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is always possible to find an Hermitian metric @xmath on the manifold
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Forms and vectors can be decomposed in terms of the bases @xmath and
@xmath respectively. A form with @xmath holomorphic and @xmath
anti-holomorphic components is classified as a @xmath form. The
construction of homology and cohomology can be extended to the case of
complex manifold where now the number of harmonic forms (or cycles) of
type @xmath is given by the Hodge number @xmath which is the dimension
of @xmath .

An important @xmath form is the Kähler form @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the Kähler form is closed, @xmath , the manifold is called a Kähler
manifold and such manifolds have the property that the metric is given
in terms of a real function @xmath , termed the Kähler potential, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The only non-vanishing Levi-Civita connections on a Kähler manifold are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and its conjugate.

## Appendix E Spinors

In this section we consider spin representations of @xmath and @xmath
corresponding to rotations in @xmath -dimensional Minkowski and
Euclidean spaces respectively. For simplicity of notation we denote both
Minkowski and Euclidean metrics as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Clifford algebra is generated by @xmath , @xmath matrices @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the rank of the Cartan sub-algebra which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrices defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

span a representation of the Lie algebra of the @xmath groups. A set of
matrices satisfying ( E.2 ) can always be constructed as follows. We
consider first the Euclidean case and define the Pauli @xmath matrices
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is possible to construct @xmath matrices as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.7)
              @xmath   @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

To generalise this construction to the Minkowski case we set @xmath . At
this point the reader is reminded of the index conventions as set out in
the beginning of this appendix under which for Minkowski space we would
begin the index ranges from @xmath . In even dimensions a complete set
of @xmath matrices @xmath , where @xmath , is provided by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the last matrix we write as ²² ²² 22 In Minkowski space this reads
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath anti-commutes with all the other @xmath s and so can be used as
@xmath in the next odd dimension. The matrices defined in ( E.9 )
satisfy the Clifford algebra of ( E.2 ) and also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Products of @xmath matrices are often encountered and the following
formulae are useful for manipulating them. The identities can be derived
by writing down all the terms with the correct symmetry properties
(numerical coefficients are determined by the symmetries) and
determining the signs by substituting in explicit values for the
indices. The expressions are valid for all dimensions compatible with
the index ranges

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Dirac spinors @xmath have @xmath real components and transform under
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so form a representation of @xmath . The covariant derivative of a
spinor is taken with respect to the spin connection @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most convenient way to discuss different types spinors is for each
particular case of dimensions and metric signature. This is because the
different types of spinors can only exist in particular dimensions and
take particular forms for certain signatures. In general a charge
conjugation matrix @xmath can always be introduced so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath signs are fixed for particular dimensions and
signatures. If the number of dimensions also allows a consistent ²³ ²³
23 The consistency here is that for a spinor @xmath we can define a
complex conjugation operator @xmath such that @xmath . introduction of a
complex conjugation @xmath for (Dirac) spinors @xmath then we can define
the Dirac conjugate @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can also define the Majorana conjugate @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

A Majorana spinor is then one whose Majorana conjugate is equal to its
Dirac conjugate @xmath . In practice this translates to a reality
condition and halves the degrees of freedom in the spinor.

If the number of dimensions is even then a @xmath exists and we can
define Weyl (chiral) spinors by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which again have half the number of degrees of freedom. Left handed Weyl
spinors have negative chirality and right handed spinors have positive
chirality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### e.0.1 Spinors in four Minkowski dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . The general
relations ( E.10 ) and ( E.11 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The definition of @xmath can be used to derive useful relations of the
type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The form of these relations is obvious up to an overall complex factor
in front that can be deduced by putting in particular values for the
indices and multiplying both sides by the appropriate @xmath matrices.

We can choose a representation where the @xmath matrices are all real (
@xmath imaginary). In this representation @xmath and the Majorana
condition becomes a reality condition. Both Majorana and Weyl spinors in
four dimensions have four real components. Weyl spinors in
four-dimensions satisfy the useful relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes @xmath @xmath matrices.

The number of supersymmetry generators (charges) in four dimensions is
given by @xmath so that @xmath supersymmetry in four dimensions is
parameterised in terms of one Weyl spinor, @xmath using two Weyl spinors
and so on.

##### e.0.2 Spinors in six Euclidean dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . They satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are imaginary which
means Majorana spinors are real and have eight components. Weyl spinors
in six-dimensions satisfy the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### e.0.3 Spinors in seven Euclidean dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . They satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are imaginary which
means Majorana spinors are real and have eight components. Note that we
can not define Weyl spinors in seven dimensions.

##### e.0.4 Spinors in ten Minkowski dimensions

The @xmath matrices are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . They satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are real which means
Majorana spinors are real and have 32 components. In ten dimensions it
also possible to define Majorana-Weyl spinors which are real Weyl
spinors with 16 components.

The number of supercharges is given by @xmath which means @xmath
-supersymmetry is parameterised in terms of @xmath Majorana-Weyl
spinors.

In a compactification the full ten-dimensional manifold @xmath is
decomposed into the product of four-dimensional space-time, with
co-ordinates @xmath , and some internal manifold @xmath with
co-ordinates @xmath . Under this decomposition the ten-dimensional
@xmath matrices decompose as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that this decomposition is consistent with the reality conditions
on the matrices in various dimensions.

##### e.0.5 Spinors is eleven Minkowski dimensions

We denote the @xmath matrices @xmath with @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose a representation where all the @xmath are real which means
Majorana spinors are real and have 32 components.

There can only be 32 supercharges in eleven dimensions which means
supersymmetry is parameterised in terms of a single Majorana spinor.

The decomposition under compactification is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix F Useful identities

#### f.1 Six-dimensional @xmath-structure identities

The procedure for calculating the identities presented in this section
is to use the fact that we can always go to an orthonormal real frame
@xmath where the @xmath -structure forms take the explicit form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We can calculate relations explicitly using these forms and since they
are tensor relations they will hold in all frames. A more formal way to
derive the following is by using Fierz identities on the spinor
bilinears used to define the forms. Some of the relations are most
neatly written using projectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of which @xmath is holomorphic

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Some useful @xmath -structure identities read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is informative to go through an example derivation of the expressions
that relate derivatives of the forms to the torsion ( 7.28 ). Acting
with the Levi-Civita connection @xmath on the spinor bi-linear for
@xmath is evaluated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now using the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

we recover

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same method can be applied to derive all such relations.

#### f.2 Seven-dimensional @xmath-structure identities

In seven dimensions the @xmath -structure takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can define projectors that can be thought of as projections along and
perpendicular to the direction of the vector

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of @xmath , @xmath is holomorphic. The set of objects @xmath
satisfy the same subset of relations as in six dimensions. Some useful
relations involving also @xmath read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### f.3 @xmath-structure identities

@xmath -structure in seven dimensions can be mapped to the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it is possible to derive the following identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### f.4 ’t Hooft symbols identities

The ’t Hooft symbols [ 63 ] @xmath have index ranges @xmath and @xmath .
They are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Some useful relations that can be derived from their definition read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Chapter \thechapter Reduction of the Ricci Scalar in String and
M-theory

In this appendix we derive the kinetic terms for the geometric moduli in
both type IIA and eleven-dimensional supergravity by reducing the Ricci
scalar on a manifold of the product type. We begin by deriving the
kinetic terms for metric variations of seven-dimensional manifolds with
@xmath -structure in eleven-dimensional supergravity. The result are
cast into a form from which it is very easy to extract the kinetic terms
for type IIA theory on six-dimensional manifolds with @xmath -structure
by integrating out the extra dimension. During the derivation we only
assume the @xmath -structure relations ( 7.8 ) and ( 7.28 ) which, since
the set of forms @xmath follow the same algebraic relations in both
cases, allows us to simply integrate out @xmath from the
eleven-dimensional expression to reach the IIA case.

We consider the eleven-dimensional manifold @xmath to take an unwarped
product form @xmath . The eleven-dimensional metric, including the
fluctuations, takes the following form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Direct computation of the eleven-dimensional Ricci scalar gives

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where in the last equation we have performed a partial integration with
respect to the four-dimensional integral using ( A.9 ). At this point we
replace the metric variations with variations of the structure forms.
Although eventually we wish to parameterise the variations in terms of
the @xmath -structure forms at this point it is easier to work with the
@xmath -forms. Using equation ( 22.5 ) we arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To reach this expression we used the @xmath -identities ( F.32 ) and (
F.35 ) as well as the expression for the variations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also used the fact that only the symmetric part of @xmath contributes
to the gauge independent metric variations. Here @xmath is the volume of
the internal manifold as measured with the metric @xmath which thus
contains the metric fluctuations. Note that because we only consider the
lowest KK states, @xmath is independent of the internal coordinates and
thus its integration produces a factor of the seven-dimensional volume
@xmath . In order to put the four-dimensional action in the standard
form we further need to rescale the four dimensional metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Apart from normalising the Einstein-Hilbert term correctly this
rescaling also produces a term which precisely cancels the last term of
( F.45 ). The compactified eleven-dimensional Ricci scalar takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this stage we move back to using the @xmath -structure forms using
the translation equation ( 7.36 ). We also move to the string frame by
rescaling the internal metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dilaton is defined as in equation ( 22.6 ). Defining the
@xmath -structure forms with respect to the metric @xmath the
decomposition ( 7.36 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before identifying the correct degrees of freedom in four dimensions, as
discussed in section 18.1 , we need to take out the Kähler moduli
dependence from @xmath and we do this by defining a ’six-dimensional’
volume @xmath and the true ’holomorphic’ three-form @xmath as in
equations ( 22.7 ) and ( 18.5 ). With these definitions we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the four-dimensional dilaton

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be checked that the following condition holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so when we square the expression ( F.51 ) there is no mixing between
the various terms. Substituting ( F.51 ) into ( F.48 ) and using the
fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have replaced the variations of @xmath with the Kähler covariant
derivative as discussed in section 18.1 .

To reach the IIA expression we simply take the forms @xmath and @xmath
to only have six-dimensional dependence and components and use @xmath to
integrate out the unit vector @xmath . This directly gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It can be easily checked that the Weyl rescalings ( F.47 ) and ( F.49 )
are equivalent to the Weyl rescaling to reach the ten-dimensional Ricci
scalar first, and then performing the Weyl rescalings ( 18.10 ).

## Chapter \thechapter The IIA Gravitini Mass Matrix

In this appendix we derive the four-dimensional gravitini mass matrix
through dimensional reduction of the appropriate terms in the
ten-dimensional action of massive type IIA supergravity ( 17.1 ). We
consider the ten-dimensional gravitino decomposition ( 18.27 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We proceed to go through each term in ( 18.28 ).
The kinetic term
The ten-dimensional kinetic term for the gravitino induces a
four-dimensional mass for the particular index ranges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

This term is only non-vanishing when the internal spinors are not
covariantly constant and so corresponds to the potential induced by the
torsion on the manifold. To dimensionally reduce this term we substitute
the gravitino ansatz and decompose the @xmath matrices as in ( E.32 ).
This gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have acted on the spinors with the derivative and replaced the
resulting spinor bi-linears with the corresponding structure forms. We
can now use the relations ( 7.13 ) to eliminate the contorsion for
differential relations of the structure forms which gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.60)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This concludes the reduction of the kinetic term and we now move on to
the flux terms.
The flux terms
We begin by reducing the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Simple substitution of the gravitino ansatz yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rest of the flux terms follow again by simple substitution and
@xmath matrix algebra. They read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

After performing the Weyl rescalings ( 18.10 ), under which @xmath and
@xmath , the contributions computed above yield the mass matrix ( 18.29
).

## Chapter \thechapter The M-theory Gravitini Mass Matrix

In this appendix we derive the four-dimensional gravitini mass matrix
through dimensional reduction of the appropriate terms in the
eleven-dimensional action. We work in terms of the @xmath -structure
quantities as defined in section 7.1 . We begin by writing the
eleven-dimensional gravitino ansatz ( 22.21 ) in terms of the
four-dimensional chiral gravitini ( 22.21 ) and the complex internal
spinors ( 7.25 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now go through each term in ( 22 ) that contributes to the
four-dimensional mass matrix.
The kinetic term
We begin with the eleven-dimensional kinetic term which produces a mass
term in four dimensions for the particular index range choices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

To calculate this we use the relation for the covariant derivative
acting on the spinors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the contorsion on the internal manifold which is
anti-symmetric in its last two indices. Inserting ( F.67 ) into ( F.68 )
and using ( F.69 ) to evaluate the derivative on the spinors as well as
( 7.1.3 ) to replace the spinor bi-linears with the @xmath forms we
arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now using the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can see that actually the first terms in the third and fourth lines
cancel. This can be reasoned from the fact that the mass matrix should
be symmetric. Using ( 7.29 ) we eliminate the contorsion from ( A6.Ex29
) in favour of differential relations of the structure forms and thus
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.72)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This concludes the reduction of the kinetic term and we now move on to
the flux terms.
The flux terms
We begin be reducing the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

This term arises from the purely external Freud-Rubin flux which we
write as in ( 22.20 ). Substituting ( F.67 ) into ( F.73 ) and after
some gamma matrix algebra we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second flux term reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the term from the purely internal flux. Again the reduction is
simple and gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally we recall that the purely internal flux has a contribution from
the the background flux @xmath , and one which is due to the torsion of
the internal manifold @xmath , which combine into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

After performing the Weyl rescalings ( 22.13 ), under which @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , the contributions computed above yield the following
mass terms for the gravitini in four dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.79)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This action can be written in the form ( 22.4 ) using ( 22.25 ).

## Chapter \thechapter Coset Manifolds

In this appendix we briefly describe the procedure through which we can
derive explicit information on the coset such as the metric, the @xmath
-structure forms and the basis forms and their differential relations.

Consider a compact group @xmath with some subgroup @xmath then we can
decompose the Lie algebra as @xmath . So the Lie manifold @xmath is a
fibration of the Lie manifold @xmath over the base @xmath . The base
manifold @xmath is the coset manifold @xmath . We now follow the
discussion in [ 103 ] and construct a set of Lie valued one-forms from
elements on the fibre @xmath at a point @xmath on the coset manifold,
which we then expand in terms of the generators of the groups @xmath and
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices run over the number of generators of the subgroup. The
forms @xmath form the basis forms on the coset manifold and we take them
to be orthonormal so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of the coset. The expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives that the basis forms satisfy the differential relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.83)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath are the structure constants of the group @xmath . These
expressions allow us to calculate the differential relations on the
coset. The useful property of the coset is that requiring @xmath
-invariance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , we recover the transformation rules for a
basis forms on the coset

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now @xmath is the (inverse) adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath , so we
can consider the adjoint representation of @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then a general @xmath -tensor on the coset transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the elements @xmath in the generators, which in the adjoint
are the structure constants

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that for the tensor to remain invariant under the group action
it must satisfy the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

and should have constant co-efficients @xmath . This is the expression
that restricts the possible forms that respect the coset symmetries
which we can use to solve for the most general one, two or three-forms
on the coset and also the metric. Having quickly derived the relevant
expressions ( F.83 ) and ( F.89 ) we can move on to consider the
particular examples used in this paper. One immediate conclusion we can
draw is that scalar functions must be constant. This is the general
result that cosets can not support warping.

## Appendix G @xmath

This coset was first studied in [ 103 ] . The group @xmath is
represented in terms of the Gell-Mann matrices @xmath with @xmath which
satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It has two @xmath sub-groups generated by @xmath and @xmath . In terms
of the quantities of the previous section @xmath is spanned by @xmath
and @xmath is spanned by @xmath . Applying the constraint ( F.89 ) we
find that the most general symmetric two-tensor, which we interpret as
the metric, on the coset must take the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real parameters which are the
metric degrees of freedom or the geometrical moduli. Similarly the most
general two and three-forms read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where all the parameters are complex. There are no consistent one-forms
present. Imposing the six-dimensional @xmath -structure relations ( 7.8
), we arrive at the expressions ( 20.5 ) where the basis forms
explicitly read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The differential relations on these basis forms are derived from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These then give the differential relations ( 25 ).

## Appendix H @xmath

This coset was first studied in [ 120 ] . The group @xmath has two
commuting @xmath subgroups. Hence there are a number of ways to mod out
the @xmath and we consider the case where the subgroup @xmath is taken
to be a linear combination of the two @xmath s ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 For more details
on this process see [ 121 ] where the case we study is denoted @xmath .
. Then by calculating the structure constants and imposing ( F.89 ) we
find that the most general symmetric two tensor on the coset must take
the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (H.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where all the parameters are real. Similarly, the most general one, two
and three-forms are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where all the parameters can be complex. The structure forms @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath must fall within the restrictions of ( H ) and they
can be uniquely determined by imposing the algebraic @xmath -structure
relations on the forms in ( 7.28 ). This leads to equations relating the
complex parameters to the real metric moduli, if we identify @xmath with
@xmath , @xmath with @xmath , @xmath with @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Equations ( H ) give the form of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and we see
that the natural basis of forms on the manifold is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

in terms of which we can write the forms as given in equation ( 23.18 ).
The differential relations on the coset basis forms can be calculated
using ( F.83 ) and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (H.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From these expressions it is easy to calculate the basis form
differential relations ( 23.2 ).

## Appendix I @xmath

This coset was first studied in [ 117 ] . In this case we have @xmath .
Now @xmath so once we modded out by the @xmath we will be left with a
single @xmath that is in general a linear combination of the three
@xmath s in @xmath which we parameterise by three integers @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 The case where @xmath is the trivial
fibration case where the coset becomes @xmath . In that case this is the
same as compactifying type IIA supergravity on the manifold @xmath . .
We can repeat the analysis in the previous section and we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Imposing the @xmath relations we arrive at equation ( 25 ) where the
basis forms explicitly read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The differential relations on these basis forms are derived from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These then give the differential relations ( 25 ) where we have defined
the structure constants

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------