In two-party computation , two players want to collaborate in a secure
way in order to achieve a common goal, but, they do not trust each other
and do not want the other to learn more than necessary about their
inputs. Unfortunately, two-party computation is impossible to achieve
unconditionally securely, i.e., such that even an adversary with
infinite computing power has no chance in breaking the system. We do
have implementations in the computational setting, i.e., where we assume
that the computing power of the adversary is bounded, but the security
of these implementations are based on unproven assumptions such as the
assumption that factoring is hard.

However, if a very simple primitive called oblivious transfer is
available, then any two party computation can be implemented in an
unconditionally secure way. In this thesis we investigate what weaker
forms of oblivious transfer still allow for implementing oblivious
transfer, and hence any two-party computation.

First of all, we will show that oblivious transfer is equivalent to a
randomized form of oblivious transfer, and that this randomized
oblivious transfer is in fact symmetric . It follows that also oblivious
transfer is symmetric.

Then, we present a protocol that implements oblivious transfer from a
weakened oblivious transfer called universal oblivious transfer , where
one of the two players may get additional information. Our reduction is
about twice as efficient as previous results.

Weak oblivious transfer is an even weaker form of oblivious transfer,
where both players may obtain additional information about the other
player’s input, and where the output can contain errors. We give a new,
weaker definition of weak oblivious transfer, as well as new reductions
with a more detailed analysis.

Finally, we show that any protocol that implements oblivious transfer
from weak oblivious transfer can be used in the computational setting to
implement computationally secure oblivious transfer from computational
weak oblivious transfer , which is a computational version of weak
oblivious transfer, where the additional information both players may
obtain about the other player’s input is only computationally bounded.
