small subset of the more general @xmath -structure compactifications.
The connection between flux compactifications and @xmath -structure
compactifications lies in the spontaneous compactification constraint.
Recall that in order to perform a spontaneous compactification the
internal manifold should be a solution of the ten-dimensional equations
of motion. However when flux is present a CY manifold is no longer a
solution ¹³ ¹³ 13 In type IIB string theory the solution to the
equations of motion is a manifold that is conformally CY. [ 92 , 93 , 94
] . This can be viewed as the energy density of the flux back-reacting
on the geometry of the internal manifold so that it is no longer
Ricci-flat. Therefore the flux back-reaction implies that the
compactification manifold should not be a CY but rather a more general
manifold of @xmath -structure. The particular type of flux present
determines which torsion classes are non-vanishing and so which type of
@xmath -structure manifold forms the appropriate solution.

This chapter addresses flux compactifications of type IIA string theory
on general manifolds with @xmath -structure and their implications for
moduli stabilisation. We begin by reviewing the most general solution of
type IIA string theory with fluxes that preserves the minimum amount of
supersymmetry thereby quantifying the flux back-reaction on the
geometry. In section 18 we derive the effective @xmath four-dimensional
action following a compactification on a general @xmath -structure
manifold. In section 19 we restrict the study to a sub-class of @xmath
-structure manifolds and show that for those cases the theory exhibits
spontaneous partial supersymmetry breaking to @xmath . We go on to
derive the effective @xmath theory and discuss its potential for moduli
stabilisation. In section 20 we consider an example of an @xmath
-structure manifold that shows how the more general results of the
previous sections are explicitly realised. We summarise in section 21 .
