##### Abstract

Diese Arbeit untersucht im Rahmen der Gittereichtheorie verschiedene
Aspekte der QCD in der Landau-Eichung, insbesondere solche, die mit den
Gluon- und Geist-Propagatoren zusammenhängen. Die Eichgruppe ist die der
QCD, @xmath , und wir untersuchen die Propagatoren bei kleinen Impulsen.
Für unsere Untersuchungen der reinen Gluodynamik haben wir zahlreiche
Monte-Carlo Simulationen auf diversen Gittergrössen durchgeführt. Die
Gittergrössen variieren im Bereich von @xmath bis @xmath . Als inverse
Kopplungskonstanten haben wir die Werte @xmath , 6.0 und 6.2 gewählt.

Wir analysieren den Einfluss unterschiedlicher systematischer Effekte
auf das Niedrigimpulsverhalten der Gluon- und Geist-Propagatoren. Wir
zeigen, dass der Formfaktor des Geist-Propagators bei kleinen Impulsen
systematisch von der Wahl der Eichkopien (Gribov-Kopien) abhängt.
Hingegen können wir einen solchen Einfluss auf den Gluon-Propagator
nicht feststellen. Ebenfalls wird die Verteilung der kleinsten
Eigenwerte des Faddeev-Popov-Operators durch die Wahl der Gribov-Kopien
beeinflusst.

Wir zeigen außerdem, dass der Einfluss dynamischer Wilson-Fermionen auf
den Geist-Propagator für die untersuchten Impulse vernachlässigbar ist.
Dazu haben wir Eichkonfigurationen betrachtet, die mit einer @xmath
clover-verbesserten Wirkung erzeugt worden sind. Für den
Gluon-Propagator können wir jedoch einen deutlichen Einfluss für große
und mittlere Impulse feststellen, insbesondere in dem Impulsbereich, wo
der Gluon-Propagator im Vergleich zum freien Fall seine
charakteristische Erhöhung aufweist.

Zusätzlich wurden beide Propagatoren auf asymmetrischen Gittern
gemessen. Der Vergleich dieser Daten mit denen, die auf symmetrischen
Gittern gewonnen wurden, zeigt, dass die Asymmetrie deutliche
systematische Effekte im Bereich kleiner Impulse verursacht. Besonders
deutlich wird das für die Daten, die bei Impulsen in Richtung der
elongierten Gitterlänge gemessen worden sind.

Weiterhin vergleichen wir unsere Daten mit den Infrarot-Exponenten, die
in Studien von abgeschnittenen (truncated) Systemen von
Dyson-Schwinger-Gleichungen für den Gluon- und Geist-Propagator
vorhergesagt wurden. Im Rahmen unserer Messungen können wir weder die
Werte der Exponenten noch die vorhergesagte Beziehung zwischen beiden
bestätigen. In jedem Falle können wir aber zeigen, dass das in dieser
Arbeit gefundene Niedrigimpulsverhalten im Einklang mit verschiedenen
Kriterien für Confinement (Einschluss von Farbladungen) ist. Wir zeigen,
dass unsere Daten sowohl für den Geist-Propagator als auch für den
Kugo-Ojima-Confinement-Parameter das Kugo-Ojima-Confinement-Kriterium
erfüllen. Außerdem ist die Gribov-Zwanziger-Horizontbedingung für den
Geist-Propagator erfüllt. Der Gluon-Propagator scheint im Grenzfall
verschwindender Impulse zu Null zu streben. Dennoch können wir nicht
endgültig darüber urteilen, ob dies der Fall ist. Wir zeigen zusätzlich,
dass der transversale Gluon-Propagator explizit die
Reflektions-Positivität verletzt. Das gilt sowohl mit als auch ohne den
Einfluss dynamischer Fermionen.

Wir berechnen die laufende (effektive) Kopplung, die sich als eine
renormierungsgruppeninvariante Kombination der Gluon- und
Geist-Formfaktoren ergibt. Unsere Ergebnisse zeigen deutlich, dass im
Bereich kleiner Impulse die laufende Kopplung kleiner wird und so
vermutlich kein endlicher Infrarot-Fixpunkt im Grenzfall Impuls Null
angestrebt wird. Dieses Verhalten ist unabhängig vom Einfluss der
Gribov-Kopien oder von der Hinzunahme dynamischer Fermionen. Wir
präsentieren außerdem eine erste nichtstörungstheoretische Berechnung
der Renormierungskonstante des @xmath Ghost-Gluon-Vertex. Wir zeigen,
dass in dem untersuchten Renormierungsschema keine wesentliche
Abweichung von einem konstanten Verhalten gefunden wird.

Wir berichten außerdem über Untersuchungen zu spektralen Eigenschaften
des Faddeev-Popov-Operators bei @xmath and 6.2. Dazu haben wir eine
Reihe der kleinsten Eigenwerte und Eigenvektoren dieses Operators auf
den Gittergrößen @xmath , @xmath und @xmath berechnet. Wir sehen, dass
sich umso mehr Eigenwerte nahe Null konzentrieren, je größer das
physikalische Volumen ist. Anhand einer spektralen Entwicklung des
Geist-Propagators können wir zeigen, dass für unser kleinstes Gitter
ca. 200 Eigenwerte und Eigenvektoren genügen, um den Wert des
Geist-Propagators beim kleinsten Impuls zu reproduzieren.

Wir zeigen ferner, dass die selten auftretenden, exzeptionell großen
Messwerte, die für den Geist-Propagator im Verlauf der Monte-Carlo
Simulation bei größeren @xmath Werten gefunden werden, durch
außerordentlich starke Beiträge der niedrigsten Eigenmoden zu den
entsprechenden Fourierkomponenten hervorgerufen werden. Schlagwörter:
Gluon- und Geist-Propagatoren, Gitter-QCD, Landau-Eichung, Confinement

[]

#### Note added to the e-print version

This Ph.D. thesis has been submitted to the Humboldt-University Berlin
on May 3rd, 2006. It has been successfully defended on July 18th, 2006.
The accepted official version is available online from the ’Dokumenten-
und Publikationsserver’ ( http://edoc.hu-berlin.de ) of the
Humboldt-University Berlin. Part of chapter 4 has been published in Ref.
Sternbeck:2005tk and chapter 6 is based on Ref. Sternbeck:2005vs . All
results presented in this thesis represent the research status of May
2006.

5] \truncate 0.9 \truncate 0.9]5

###### Contents

-    Note added to the e-print version
-    Introduction
-    1 The various colors of QCD
    -    1.1 Quantization of QCD
        -    1.1.1 The classical QCD Lagrangian
        -    1.1.2 Functional-integral quantization of QCD
        -    1.1.3 The Faddeev-Popov method
        -    1.1.4 An effective Lagrangian density in covariant gauge
        -    1.1.5 The BRST formalism
    -    1.2 Regularization and renormalization
        -    1.2.1 Regularization
        -    1.2.2 Renormalization
        -    1.2.3 The scheme
    -    1.3 The renormalization group
        -    1.3.1 The renormalization group equation
        -    1.3.2 Perturbative expansion of the @xmath –function
        -    1.3.3 The running coupling constant
        -    1.3.4 The anomalous dimension
-    2 Infrared QCD and criteria for confinement
    -    2.1 Nonperturbative approaches to QCD
        -    2.1.1 Brief remarks on nonperturbative methods
        -    2.1.2 The problem of Gribov copies
        -    2.1.3 Nonperturbative quantization in Landau gauge
    -    2.2 The Dyson Schwinger equations of QCD
        -    2.2.1 Infrared behavior of ghost and gluon propagators in
            Landau gauge
        -    2.2.2 A nonperturbative running coupling constant
        -    2.2.3 The finiteness of the ghost-gluon vertex
    -    2.3 Criteria for confinement in linear covariant gauges
        -    2.3.1 The Kugo–Ojima confinement scenario
        -    2.3.2 The Gribov–Zwanziger horizon condition
        -    2.3.3 Violation of reflection positivity as a criterion for
            confinement
-    3 QCD Green’s functions in lattice Landau gauge
    -    3.1 Basics of lattice QCD
        -    3.1.1 The lattice and its fields
        -    3.1.2 The Wilson action with clover-improved fermions
        -    3.1.3 Vacuum expectation values from MC simulations
    -    3.2 The Landau gauge on the lattice
        -    3.2.1 The gauge functional
        -    3.2.2 The Faddeev-Popov operator
        -    3.2.3 Defining @xmath , @xmath and @xmath on the lattice
    -    3.3 Lattice definition of our observables
        -    3.3.1 The (inverse) FP operator in momentum space
        -    3.3.2 The gluon and ghost propagator
        -    3.3.3 The Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter
        -    3.3.4 Renormalization of propagators
        -    3.3.5 The ghost-gluon-vertex renormalization constant
-    4 Results for lattice QCD Green’s functions
    -    4.1 General prerequisites
        -    4.1.1 Specification of our lattice samples
        -    4.1.2 Gauge–fixing
        -    4.1.3 The fc - bc strategy
        -    4.1.4 Selection of momenta
        -    4.1.5 Mapping to physical units
    -    4.2 Systematic effects on gluon and ghost propagators at low
        momentum
        -    4.2.1 Finite volume and discretization effects
        -    4.2.2 Asymmetric lattices cause strong systematic errors
        -    4.2.3 Facing the problem of Gribov copies
    -    4.3 The infrared behavior of gluon and ghost propagator in the
        quenched and unquenched case
        -    4.3.1 The gluon propagator
        -    4.3.2 The ghost propagator
    -    4.4 The running coupling and the ghost-gluon vertex
        -    4.4.1 Results for the running coupling constant
        -    4.4.2 The vertex renormalization constant
-    5 Confinement criteria under the lattice microscope
    -    5.1 Is the Gribov-Zwanziger horizon condition satisfied?
    -    5.2 The Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter
        -    5.2.1 Expected infrared behavior
        -    5.2.2 Explicit lattice data for the function @xmath
    -    5.3 The gluon propagator explicitly violates reflection
        positivity
-    6 Spectral properties of the FP operator
    -    6.1 Specification of lattice samples
    -    6.2 The low-lying eigenvalue spectrum
        -    6.2.1 The lowest and second lowest eigenvalues
        -    6.2.2 An estimate for the density of low-lying eigenvalues
    -    6.3 Eigenmode expansion of the ghost propagator
    -    6.4 The problem of exceptional configurations
    -    6.5 Localization properties of low-lying eigenvectors
-    Conclusions and outlook
-    A Some details on algorithms and performance
    -    A.1 A note on the algorithms used
    -    A.2 Experience report on lattice Landau gauge fixing
        -    A.2.1 Over-relaxation versus Fourier–accelerated
            gauge-fixing
        -    A.2.2 A way to preselect best gauge copies
    -    A.3 Speeding up the inversion of the FP operator
-    Acknowledgments

## Introduction {window}

[0,l, A ,] t present we are reasonably confident that the physics of
strong interaction, i.e. the rich field of hadron physics, is completely
described by a quantized nonabelian gauge field theory which is based on
the gauge group of @xmath color symmetry. This theory is called Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). Its fundamental constituents are quarks and gluons
. Quarks are spin 1/2 fermion fields carrying fractional electric charge
and the gluons are nonabelian spin 1 gauge fields which interact with
the quarks as well as among themselves. Due to its nonabelian nature the
renormalization group tells us that QCD is asymptotically free at large
Euclidean momentum. In this regime perturbative QCD is relevant and
theoretical predictions have been successfully confronted with
experiments. The experimental successes of QCD and the partial progress
towards a full understanding of the theory form the basis for our
present belief that QCD is the right theory describing all strong
interaction physics.

Beyond perturbation theory, however, QCD is still not completely
understood, even though — as far as we know — it is not in conflict with
any existing phenomenology of the strong interaction. Note that in
contrast to QED the elementary fields in QCD, the quarks and gluons, do
not describe existing particles and thus a particle interpretation in
QCD has to be completely divorced from its elementary degrees of
freedom. According to QCD all strongly interacting particles, the
hadrons , are colorless bound states of quarks. This phenomenon is
called confinement , but the mechanism which confines quarks and gluons
has to be established yet from first principles. Moreover, due to the
complexity of QCD, a full description of hadronic states and processes
directly in terms of QCD presents an exciting challenge since many
years.

Many hadronic features have been investigated in the framework of
phenomenological models (see e.g. Vogl:1991qt ; Klevansky:1992qe ;
Ebert:1994mf ) which mimic the essential properties of QCD, namely
asymptotic freedom at short distance and confinement at large distances.
This approach represents a rather practical point of view and is
sufficient if one is just interested in the effective theory of hadrons
at low energies. But if QCD is the theory of strong interactions a
coherent description directly based on the dynamics of confined quarks
and gluons should be possible.

For such a description a complete picture for all propagators and vertex
functions of QCD should be available. These Green’s functions may then
serve as input into bound state calculations based on the Bethe-Salpeter
equations for mesons or the Faddeev equations for baryons. But also from
a purely theoretical point of view a consistent picture of all QCD
Green’s functions is interesting. In particular, their infrared momentum
behavior provides insight into the mechanism of quark and gluon
confinement Alkofer:2000wg . To give just one example: The realization
of the Kugo-Ojima confinement scenario Kugo:1979gm ; Kugo:1995km in QCD
in covariant gauges is encoded in the infrared behavior of the ghost
2-point function. Therefore, the investigation of QCD Green’s function
at low momentum is important for a coherent description of hadronic
states and processes and also for an understanding of confinement.

The infrared momentum region corresponds to strong coupling rather than
weak coupling and hence perturbation theory is of no avail in studying
QCD at low momentum. Genuinely nonperturbative approaches have to be
used to explore QCD in this area. The Euclidean space, discretized,
lattice gauge theory provides one possibility to study nonperturbative
aspects of QCD by using Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. Another approach
is given by solving truncated systems of the Dyson-Schwinger equations
(DSEs) of QCD. The DSEs are infinite towers of coupled nonlinear
integral equations relating different Green’s functions of QCD to each
other. They are directly derived from a generating functional whose
existence beyond perturbation theory still has to be assumed. In any
case, studying DSEs involves the introduction of a gauge condition which
is not necessary in the standard lattice approach to QCD.

DSE studies have been performed in recent years with growing intensity
(see Roberts:1994dr ; Roberts:2000aa ; Alkofer:2000wg ; Maris:2003vk for
an overview). In particular, for the case of Landau gauge it has been
shown vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu that contributions of ghost
fields are crucial for a consistent description of the infrared behavior
of Landau gauge gluodynamics. In former studies Mandelstam:1979xd ;
Atkinson:1981er ; Atkinson:1981ah ; Brown:1988bn , ghost fields have
always been neglected.

Different truncations have been employed since then to study the
infrared behavior of gluon, ghost and quark propagators and the
corresponding vertex functions. Truncations are essential to manage the
infinite towers of DSEs. The solutions presented first in
vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu and later in Atkinson:1998zc ;
Atkinson:1997tu ; Bloch:2001wz ; Bloch:2002eq and Fischer:2002eq ;
Fischer:2002hn ; Fischer:2003zc all favor the picture of an infrared
diverging ghost propagator being intimately connected with an infrared
vanishing gluon propagator. In fact, both propagators are proposed to
follow power laws at low momentum with intertwined infrared exponents
Lerche:2002ep ; Zwanziger:2001kw . Such an infrared behavior is in
agreement with the Gribov-Zwanziger horizon condition Gribov:1977wm ;
Zwanziger:1993dh ; Zwanziger:2001kw ; Zwanziger:2003cf as well as with
the Kugo-Ojima confinement criterion Kugo:1979gm ; Kugo:1995km . Note
that their satisfaction is crucial for the realization of confinement in
QCD in Landau gauge. Unquenching effects on the infrared behavior are
found to be small Fischer:2003rp . Moreover, dynamical chiral symmetry
breaking and gluon confinement have been confirmed from solutions of
truncated DSEs Alkofer:2000wg ; Fischer:2003rp ; Alkofer:2003jj .

Most of these DSE studies are done in Landau gauge. In this gauge, the
ghost-gluon vertex was shown to not suffer from ultraviolet divergences
at any order in perturbation theory Taylor:1971ff ; Marciano:1977su .
Assuming this to hold beyond perturbation theory, it allows for a
definition of a nonperturbative running coupling constant that is solely
given in terms of the gluon and ghost propagators and has a finite
infrared fixed point, provided the mentioned infrared power laws hold
vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu . In a recent DSE study
Alkofer:2004it of vertex functions, the infrared fixed point has been
confirmed, too. It has also been shown that this coupling constant
enters directly the kernels of the DSEs for the gluon, ghost and quark
propagators Bloch:2001wz ; Bloch:2002eq .

Even though Monte Carlo simulations of lattice QCD provide an
alternative possibility to study QCD at a nonperturbative level, at
present, they cannot compete with the DSE approach concerning the
accessible region of low momenta. However, lattice QCD is a first
principle approach to QCD that does not require us to “simplify” the
theory. Unlike truncations of DSEs, the approximations involved in
lattice QCD are systematically removable. This possibility of
controlling the systematic errors makes this approach invaluable
Bowman:2005zi . Therefore, lattice simulations may provide an
independent check whether the results obtained in the DSE approach are
realized in lattice QCD, at least in the region of momenta available at
present. Furthermore, lattice QCD enables us to study different models
for confinement (see e.g. Greensite:2003bk ) by mutilating the theory
such that confinement is explicitly lost. For example, removing vortices
changes the infrared behavior of the lattice ghost propagator in Landau
gauge such that it does not satisfy anymore aforementioned criteria for
confinement Gattnar:2004bf .

In recent years, different groups have investigated different aspects of
lattice Landau gauge QCD. Some have studied the gauge group @xmath ,
others @xmath . In particular, the Adelaide Group has provided an
impressive account on numerical data for the @xmath gluon
Leinweber:1998im ; Leinweber:1998uu ; Bonnet:2000kw ; Bonnet:2001uh and
quark propagators Skullerud:2000un ; Skullerud:2001aw ; Bonnet:2002ih ;
Bowman:2002bm ; Zhang:2003fa ; Zhang:2004gv ; Bowman:2005vx ;
Parappilly:2005ei and for the quark-gluon vertex Skullerud:2002ge ;
Skullerud:2003qu . Their data are based on quenched and unquenched
@xmath gauge configurations where the latter were generated with the
AsqTad quark action by the collaboration.

For the @xmath ghost propagator there were not so many data available
until a few years ago, even though this propagator is expected to be
related to the gluon propagator as mentioned above. The first lattice
study of the @xmath and @xmath ghost propagators in Landau gauge was
given in Suman:1995zg and there were several studies in Landau gauge
which have confirmed the anticipated behavior for the case of @xmath
Bloch:2003sk ; Langfeld:2001cz ; Gattnar:2004bf ; Bloch:2002we . Similar
investigations for the @xmath case at even lower momenta were not
available at that time.

During the last three years, we have tried to bridge this gap by
investigating the @xmath ghost and gluon propagators (and related
objects) on quenched and unquenched @xmath gauge configurations. Our set
of unquenched configurations were generated with clover-improved Wilson
fermions by the collaboration. We have found that for momenta lower than
used in the @xmath studies (see above) qualitative differences to the
anticipated infrared behavior of ghost and gluon propagators and of the
running coupling constant appear.

At the same time other groups have performed similar investigations
focussing on different interesting aspects. See, for example,
Furui:2003jr ; Furui:2004cx ; Furui:2005bu ; Furui:2005mp ; Furui:2006rx
for investigations of the gluon, ghost and quark propagators and of the
running coupling constant using quenched and unquenched configurations
(provided by the collaboration). Studies of the @xmath gluon propagator
at very low momentum can be found in Oliveira:2004gy ; Silva:2005hb ;
Oliveira:2005hg ; Silva:2005hd . There the infrared exponent has been
determined using lattices much elongated in time direction. A study of
the @xmath ghost propagator at large momentum can be found in
Boucaud:2005 .

Furthermore, recent DSE studies Fischer:2002eq ; Fischer:2002hn ;
Fischer:2005ui ; Fischer:2005nf show that the infrared behavior of the
gluon and ghost dressing functions and of the running coupling constant
is changed on a torus. In particular, the running coupling decreases at
low momenta. These findings agree with lattice data as shown in this
thesis, but they contradict results obtained from DSE studies in the
continuum. It is still unknown what is the reason for this disagreement.
Note that a solution to this problem has been proposed in Boucaud:2005ce
; Boucaud:2006if .

It is the intention of this thesis to give a summary of our results
obtained within the last three years. Some were already published,
others are just finished and being written up.

We have structured this thesis as follows: In the first chapter we
introduce the path integral formulation of QCD and discuss the special
problems related to the necessity of gauge fixing the action. A brief
introduction to the BRST formalism is given and the renormalization
program is recalled. In Chapt. 2 we discuss some aspects of
nonperturbative QCD and introduce criteria for confinement which are
available for QCD in Landau gauge. The lattice formulation of QCD in
this gauge and a definition of all observables analyzed in this thesis
is given in Chapt. 3 . We present our results for the ghost and gluon
propagators in Chapt. 4 . Different systematic effects are analyzed and
their influence on the infrared behavior of the gluon and ghost
propagators is discussed. After this, we show that our data for both
propagators satisfy necessary criteria for confinement. In Chapt. 6
spectral properties of the FP operator are analyzed. Finally, we draw
our conclusions and give an outlook. The appendix contains some notes on
algorithms and performance. In particular, we compare two popular
gauge-fixing algorithms and show that the final ranking of gauge
functional values is already visible at an intermediate iteration state.
We also demonstrate how the inversion of the FP operator can be
accelerated considerably.

[ ]

## Chapter 1 The various colors of QCD {window}

[0,l, T ,] his chapter briefly reviews the Euclidean formulation of QCD
in the continuum, mainly in order to fix notations used subsequently.
Starting with the classical Lagrangian density and its quantization, the
problems encountered by fixing to covariant gauges are discussed. A
short summary of the BRST formalism and renormalization is given.

### 1.1 Quantization of QCD

The success of quark-models in describing hadrons as bound states of
quarks, but also of quark-parton models in deep-inelastic lepton-hadron
scattering, to name but a few, suggests that the strong interaction
should be described by a theory where the color symmetry of each quark
flavor is a gauge symmetry and which is also asymptotically free at high
energy-momentum transfers or short distances. Since asymptotic freedom
is inherent in non-abelian gauge theories, and experiments like, for
instances, the pion-decay @xmath suggest the gauge group to be @xmath ,
we are reasonably confident at present that the strong interaction is
completely described by a quantized non-Abelian gauge field theory based
on the @xmath gauge group.

#### 1.1.1 The classical QCD Lagrangian

A common way to setup a quantum field theory is to define first a
Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

that is a functional of several fields @xmath and their derivatives
necessary to host (in a consistent way) all the features and symmetries
observed in experiments. This Lagrangian density or its space-time
integral, the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

is then used subsequently for a quantization of the theory choosing one
of the well-known quantization methods, namely the Canonical operator
formalism , the Stochastic formalism or the Functional-integral
formalism Muta:1998vi .

The most general form of the QCD Lagrangian density that not only
accommodates all those mentioned properties of QCD, but also is
renormalizable in any order of perturbation theory can be written (in
Euclidean space) as ¹ ¹ 1 Here and in the following, a sum over repeated
indices is understood if not otherwise stated. We will see later that
there is always the freedom to have multiplicative renormalization
constants or to add BRST-exact terms, like e.g. gauge-fixing and ghost
terms in covariant gauges to this density.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Conceived in general terms, this Lagrangian density describes the
interaction of the quark and antiquark fields, @xmath and @xmath , with
the self-interacting gluon or gauge fields @xmath . The latter are
hidden in both the definition of the field-strength tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

(here in the adjoint representation, i.e. @xmath ) and the covariant
derivative

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

given in the fundamental representation ( i.e. @xmath ) of the Lie group
@xmath with the eight hermitian generators @xmath . Beside being
hermitian, these generators satisfy @xmath and @xmath where @xmath are
the structure constants of the Lie algebra @xmath . The bare coupling
constant is labeled @xmath . For the sake of completeness, we also
remind on the covariant derivative in the adjoint representation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quark fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and antiquark fields @xmath , of flavor @xmath are anti-commuting spinor
fields that transform under the fundamental representation of the @xmath
color group, i.e. the color index runs over @xmath . The Dirac matrices
@xmath act upon the spinor indices @xmath of the quark fields. The bare
mass @xmath is a free parameter (for each flavor) of the theory as is
@xmath .

By definition, the Lagrangian density in Eq. ( 1.3 ) is invariant under
local @xmath gauge transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.7c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

of gluon, quark and antiquark fields. Here @xmath is an element of the
group @xmath . It can be parameterized by a set of real-valued functions
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In subsequent discussions we will frequently refer to the infinitesimal
form of those local transformations. What is usually meant by that
notion is the following. If the field @xmath transforms under a local
gauge transformation @xmath as given in Eq. ( 1.7 ) then the
corresponding infinitesimal transformation is defined by Collins:1984np
:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Eq. ( 1.8 ) the infinitesimal local gauge transformations of the
gluon and fermion fields take the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The invariance of the Lagrangian density @xmath under local gauge
transformations, causes some extra difficulties for the quantization
using either the functional-integral or the canonical formalism. For
example, the definition of a functional-integral over gauge fields in
the continuum requires a gauge condition to be introduced. As a
consequence additional terms are added to @xmath . In the resulting
Lagrangian density, @xmath , the gauge invariance is explicitly lost,
but its particular form — it is BRST invariant (see below) — guarantees
that expectation values of gauge-invariant observables are actually
independent of the gauge condition used.

We note in passing that on the lattice such a gauge condition is
superfluous, as long as gauge-invariant observables are studied.
Therefore, the gauge-invariant action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is sufficient for a lattice discretization. See Chapt. 3 for a
particular lattice discretization as used in this study.

#### 1.1.2 Functional-integral quantization of QCD

So far the theory is a classical field theory. To quantize it one
chooses one of the well-known quantization methods, namely the Canonical
operator formalism , the Stochastic formalism or the Functional-integral
formalism . Indeed, all three methods should lead to the same physical
predictions. However, the choice depends on the feasibility of the
method for a particular topic.

A quantum field theory is completely characterized by the infinite
hierarchy of @xmath -point functions or Green’s functions. These are
correlation functions of the fields @xmath and the three mentioned
formalisms differ in how Green’s functions are calculated. For example,
in the canonical approach the fields are regarded as operators for which
canonical commutation relations hold. The Green’s functions are
calculated as vacuum expectation values of time ordered products of
those operators. The stochastic formalism introduced by Parisi and Wu
Parisi:1980ys starts from the classical equation of motion. The fields
are regarded as stochastic variables. See Damgaard:1987rr for a
comprehensive account on that subject.

The Functional-integral approach was introduced by Feynman
Feynman:1948ur . There the fields are taken to be c-numbers and the
Lagrangian density takes its classical form. The Green’s functions are
given by functional integrations of products of fields over all of their
(weighted) possible functional forms. The present study focuses on the
lattice regularization of QCD in Euclidean space. Since this approach
relies on the functional integral formalism we demonstrate briefly the
general concept. ² ² 2 Note that due to the work of Kugo and Ojima
Kugo:1979gm a consistent quantization of non-abelian gauge fields is
also available in the covariant canonical operator formalism Muta:1998vi
. Some of their results, namely the Kugo-Ojima confinement scenario will
also be investigated in this study. For the covariant canonical operator
formalism see also the book by Nakanishi and Ojima Nakanishi:1990qm .

##### Functional-integral formalism: Illustration of the general concept

The functional-integral formalism introduces generating functionals
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath which generate, respectively, the full ,
connected and one-particle irreducible (1PI) Green’s functions. To get
acquainted with the general concept let us assume that for the generic
Lagrangian density (Eq. ( 1.1 )) of @xmath different fields @xmath the
generating functional

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the full Green’s functions can be defined, i.e. there exist a
well-defined measure @xmath . Then a full Green’s function @xmath is
given by functional derivatives with respect to the sources @xmath ,
i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with Eq. ( 1.11 ) and the generic action @xmath (Eq. ( 1.2 ))
this yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Gauge orbits and gauge conditions

For a quantization of QCD within the functional formalism it is
necessary to define the generating functional @xmath that generates all
the Green’s functions of the theory. In particular, the definition of a
path-integral over gluon fields needs special care, because it is
ill-defined if done naively.

In fact, choosing a particular gauge field @xmath there are infinitely
many others @xmath which are related to this by local gauge
transformations as defined in Eq. ( 1.7a ). The set of all those is
usually referred to as the gauge orbit of @xmath , because each element
@xmath in the orbit is obtained by acting upon @xmath with a local gauge
transformation @xmath . The Lagrangian @xmath is invariant under such a
transformation by definition and so all (infinite) elements of one
particular orbit give rise to the same value of @xmath . This spoils a
naive integration over all gluon fields, because an integral of kind

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is divergent. Here @xmath denotes the action in Eq. ( 1.10 ), but for
simplicity we have dropped fermionic fields. The integration over the
gluon fields must be defined such that it restricts to
gauge-inequivalent configurations, i.e. they must belong to different
gauge orbits.

This can be achieved by choosing a gauge condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

at each point @xmath in space-time. If this condition is satisfied for
only one representative on each gauge orbit, i.e. the solution @xmath is
unique, then it is called an ideal gauge condition Williams:2003du . The
set of those representatives is called the fundamental modular region
@xmath . It is a hypersurface defined by Eq. ( 1.12 ) in the space of
all gauge fields. If we can define an integration over this region, the
integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

does not suffer from local gauge invariance, as does a naive
integration.

If the gauge condition (Eq. ( 1.12 )) is ambiguous, it is termed
non-ideal and an integration beyond perturbation theory may become
ill-defined. The different solutions to a non-ideal gauge condition
belong to the same orbit and are called Gribov copies in honor of its
discoverer Gribov:1977wm . In the following, we assume the gauge
condition to be ideal. Note that even popular non-ideal gauge
conditions, like the Coulomb or Landau gauge, are sufficient within the
framework of perturbation theory. This is because in perturbation theory
only small fluctuations of @xmath around zero are necessary and with
respect to infinitesimal gauge transformations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

even non-ideal gauge conditions are unique. The problems of Gribov
copies and nonperturbative quantization will be discussed in Sec. 2.1 .
³ ³ 3 Gauge-fixing is also necessary in canonical quantization, but not
for stochastic quantization. Therefore the latter has the advantage to
do not suffer from Gribov copies. However, it is more complicated than
the other two methods. For the standard lattice approach to QCD
gauge-fixing is also not necessary. See also Chapt. 2 and 3 .

#### 1.1.3 The Faddeev-Popov method

From ordinary calculus of discrete @xmath -dimensional vectors it is
known that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the determinant in the last expression is the Jacobian determinant
that arise due to the substitution rule for integrals with multiple
variables. If @xmath is invertible near @xmath then its Jacobian
determinant at @xmath is non-zero (inverse function theorem).

If we assume in the following that Eq. ( 1.12 ) represents an ideal
gauge condition, the identity Eq. ( 1.13 ) may be generalized to an
identity for functional integrals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which was first proposed by Faddeev and Popov Faddeev:1967fc . In this
relation, the Jacobian determinant ⁴ ⁴ 4 In general the absolute value
of the FP determinant has to be considered. However, the assumption of
an ideal gauge condition guarantees the determinant to be nonzero. So it
cannot change sign which cancels anyway due to normalization. See also
the discussion in Sec. 2.1.2 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

is known as the Faddeev-Popov (FP) determinant Faddeev:1967fc of a
matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

that represents the change of @xmath under local gauge transformation at
@xmath . Inserting the identity in Eq. ( 1.14 ) now in the naive
integration over gluon fields we end up with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This represents an integration over the fundamental modular region, but
if and only if the gauge condition Eq. ( 1.12 ) is unique.

#### 1.1.4 An effective Lagrangian density in covariant gauge

A popular gauge condition for practical calculations is given by the
family of covariant gauges specified by the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is an arbitrary function ⁵ ⁵ 5 In Minkowski space @xmath
would transform as a Lorentz scalar. . Since the work of Gribov
Gribov:1977wm it is well-known that local gauge conditions of this type
are ambiguous with respect to finite gauge transformations (see also
Singer:1978dk ; Williams:2003du ), and so, in our notation, belongs to
the class of non-ideal gauge conditions. With respect to infinitesimal
gauge transformations, however, they are unique and may be treated as
ideal ones.

The family of covariant gauges turns out to be useful in perturbative
expansions in many applications. It also allows us to represent the
delta function in the functional integral Eq. ( 1.17 ) as a (functional)
integral over the fields @xmath . Since these fields are arbitrary we
can use a Gaussian weight of width @xmath to integrate over, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is defined as the (Euclidean) space-time integral of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is known as the gauge-fixing term which is added to the invariant
Lagrangian density @xmath . It serves as a substitute for the
delta-function that specifies the hypersurface in the functional
integral Eq. ( 1.17 ). The parameter @xmath is the gauge parameter that
specifies the particular gauge condition in the family of covariant
gauges. The special case of @xmath is known as the Landau or Lorentz
gauge and @xmath as the Feynman gauge .

##### Never call a ghost stupid — A few good ghosts can help

[]

Although the FP determinant (Eq. ( 1.15 )) is not a local function of
the gauge fields, the functional integration in Eq. ( 1.17 ) can be
extended such that the FP determinant is expressed by an additional
(local) term, @xmath , added to @xmath , too. This is done by the
familiar device of integrating ⁶ ⁶ 6 For any finite @xmath it holds that
the determinant of a matrix @xmath can be expressed as a functional
integral over anti-commuting Grassmann numbers, i.e.

@xmath

over ghost and anti-ghost fields @xmath and @xmath which are independent
Grassmann valued fields. With the definition of the FP matrix @xmath
(Eq. ( 1.16 )) we obtain in covariant gauge

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath denotes the covariant derivative in the adjoint
representation. Using this, the term @xmath , known as the ghost term ,
takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Generating functional for QCD in covariant gauge

In summary, we arrive at an effective Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the individual terms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined in
Eq. ( 1.3 ), ( 1.19 ) and ( 1.21 ), respectively. @xmath can be used to
define the (Euclidean) generating functional (see e.g. Alkofer:2000wg )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath refer to the Grassmannian
sources, respectively, for the quark, anti-quark, ghost and anti-ghost
fields as introduced above. In covariant perturbation theory this
generating functional is used for the calculation of Euclidean Green’s
functions as power series expansions of the interaction terms in @xmath
. Actually, for this the renormalized effective Lagrangian density
@xmath given in Eq. ( 1.27 ) must be used instead. Otherwise
perturbative expansions beyond tree level would be rendered meaningless
by divergent mathematical expressions. We have indicate this already in
Eq. ( 1.1.4 ) by giving the suffix @xmath to @xmath . The explicit form
of @xmath and the renormalization program is discussed in Sec. 1.2 .

Note also that the existence of the generating functional beyond
perturbation theory rather has the status of being postulated than
confirmed. So far only the continuum limit of a lattice formulation of
quantum field theory provides a safe definition of the measure in the
Euclidean generating functional, and thus the Euclidean Green’s
functions as its moments Alkofer:2000wg .

Under the assumption of its existence, vacuum expectation values of
observables are obtained from the generating functional as functional
derivatives. For a general observable denoted as @xmath this yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the effective action, i.e. the space-time integral
of the effective Lagrangian density. Note that this density also depends
on the gauge parameter @xmath .

##### Gauge independence and gauge invariance

For gauge-invariant observables it can be shown (see e.g.
Weinberg:1996jk ) that functional integrals of type as given in Eq. (
1.24 ) are independent (within broad limits) of the gauge-fixing
functional @xmath , i.e. of the gauge condition. The different types
only result in irrelevant constant factors which are normalized away in
the ratio of functional integrals. On the contrary, vacuum expectation
values for gauge-variant observables dependent on the gauge condition.
We found it worth to quote in this context a note from Collins’s book
Collins:1984np :

  It is important to distinguish the concepts of gauge invariance and
  gauge independence. Gauge invariance is a property of a classical
  quantity and is invariance under gauge transformations. Gauge
  independence is a property of a quantum quantity when quantization is
  done by fixing the gauge. It is independence of the method of gauge
  fixing. Gauge invariance implies gauge independence, but only if the
  gauge fixing is done properly [ Collins:1984np , , p.31f] .

#### 1.1.5 The BRST formalism

In the last section we ended up with an effective Lagrangian density
Eq. ( 1.22 ) that is no longer local gauge invariant. Local gauge
invariance spoils a naive integration over gauge fields and thus a gauge
has to be fixed before the functional-integral formalism is applicable
for quantization. However, it is a fundamental physical requirement that
gauge-fixing is done in such a way that matrix elements between physical
states are independent of the actual choice of gauge condition. The
class of effective Lagrangians @xmath generated by the FP formalism
above, can be shown to fulfill this requirement. They all yield the same
unitary @xmath -matrix ⁷ ⁷ 7 See e.g. Weinberg:1996jk for a more details
.

If phrased in a modern language of quantum field theory, namely the BRST
formalism , the effective Lagrangian must be BRST invariant in order to
have a renormalizable theory yielding a unitary @xmath -matrix. This
formalism takes BRST invariance as a first principle and can be even
used as a substitute for the FP method, in particular there where the FP
method fails. ⁸ ⁸ 8 For example, the BRST symmetry is a basis for
developing the canonical operator formalism. See the book by Nakanishi
and Ojima Nakanishi:1990qm for a comprehensive account on that.

The BRST formalism goes back to the discovery of Becchi, Rouet and Stora
Becchi:1975nq ; Becchi:1976nq who first noted (independent also Tyutin
Tyutin:1975je ; Iofa:1976je ), that even if @xmath is no longer locally
gauge-invariant, it is invariant under a special type of global symmetry
transformation. This symmetry is a supersymmetry that involves ghost
fields @xmath in an essential way. Remember, in the FP approach ghost
fields are merely a technical device to express the FP determinant in
terms of a path integral. In the BRST formalism, however, they serve as
parameters @xmath of infinitesimal local gauge transformations of gauge
and fermion fields. Here @xmath is an (infinitesimal) @xmath
-independent Grassmann number. In fact, a BRST transformation is
isomorphic to an infinitesimal gauge transformation (Eq. ( 1.9 )). They
are written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the BRST operator that acts upon the gauge and
fermion fields according to

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                  @xmath   @xmath      (1.25a)
                                                                                                                                                  @xmath   @xmath      (1.25b)
  Upon the ghost field @xmath the BRST operator @xmath is defined to act as                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                  @xmath               (1.25c)
  This and the Jacobi identity for the structure constants @xmath suffice to show that the BRST operator @xmath is nilpotent Kugo:1981hm , i.e.                        
                                                                                                                                                  @xmath               
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In addition to the ghost fields, the BRST formalism introduces antighost
@xmath and Nakanishi-Lautrup auxiliary fields @xmath Nakishi:1966di that
transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.25d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.25e)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The introduction of the auxiliary fields @xmath linearizes the BRST
transformations and renders the operator @xmath to be nilpotent also
off-shell.

##### The BRST charge

Since the BRST symmetry is a global symmetry ⁹ ⁹ 9 Note that the
invariance of @xmath is a trivial consequence of its gauge invariance.
After renormalization (see Sec. 1.2 ) the BRST symmetry is still a
global symmetry of @xmath (Eq. ( 1.27 )) supposed the BRST
transformations are substituted by the renormalized ones given in Eq. (
1.30 ) and ( 1.31 ). of @xmath there exists a corresponding Noether
current @xmath that is conserved, i.e. @xmath . Its explicit form (see
e.g. Nakanishi:1990qm ) is not of interest for the following
discussions. But the existence of a corresponding unbroken charge @xmath
is important (see below and the discussion concerning the Kugo-Ojima
confinement criterion in Sec. 2.3.1 ).

In general, the charge @xmath corresponding to a current @xmath is
defined as the spatial integral of @xmath . It is a generator of the
global symmetry, even if the integral is not convergent. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 If the
integral is not convergent, the charge @xmath is an ill-defined
operator, and hence neither eigenstates nor expectation values of @xmath
can be considered. However, for any local quantity @xmath the
(anti-)commutator

@xmath

can be considered, because the integrand vanishes for sufficiently large
@xmath . It follows that @xmath is an generator of infinitesimal
symmetry transformations. See [ Nakanishi:1990qm , , p13f.] for details.
If this is the case, however, then the charge is ill-defined and is a
generator of a spontaneously broken global symmetry.

It has been argued by Kugo and Ojima Kugo:1979gm that the BRST charge
@xmath is an unbroken charge and so we can consider its eigenstates. In
particular, states @xmath belonging to the physical state space @xmath
are assumed to be BRST singlet states of @xmath , i.e. they are
annihilated by @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This assumption plays an important role in the Kugo-Ojima confinement
scenario to be introduced in Sec. 2.3.1 . It is also related to the
requirement of gauge-independence for physical matrix elements as we
discuss now.

##### Gauge-fixing and the BRST formalism

Within the BRST formalism gauge-fixing is neatly performed by
considering the BRST invariance as a first principle, i.e. a Lagrangian
density has to be BRST invariant to have a renormalizable theory that
yields a unitary @xmath -matrix. Since the BRST operator @xmath is
nilpotent, BRST–exact (or BRST–coboundary) terms — those are of the form
@xmath — can freely be added to the gauge invariant Lagrangian density
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This will not change physics in any order of perturbation theory, but it
can be used to represent the sum @xmath of the gauge-fixing and
compensating ghost terms Kugo:1981hm . In fact, one can show that @xmath
is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath was defined for covariant gauges in Eq. ( 1.18 ).

Any change @xmath in the functional @xmath , for example in @xmath ,
must not change any matrix element @xmath of physical states
Weinberg:1996jk , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

With @xmath being a generator of the BRST symmetry

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain that Eq. ( 1.26 ) can only hold for arbitrary changes in
@xmath if physical states are in the kernel of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the BRST symmetry of the full quantum Lagrangian is a basis
for developing the canonical operator formalism. It also is very useful
for deriving the Slavnov-Taylor-identities (STI). These are used for the
proof of renormalizability of QCD.

### 1.2 Regularization and renormalization

The quantum field theory of the strong interaction introduced so far is
still incomplete, because perturbative expansions of Green’s functions
beyond tree level would be rendered meaningless by divergent
mathematical expressions. In particular, loop integrals produce
ultraviolet divergences when the cutoff for the internal momentum
integral is send to infinity. This is known since the early days of QED
(see e.g. Oppenheimer:1930fh ).

Fortunately, QCD is a renormalizable theory to any finite order in
perturbation theory. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The first proof for non-abelian gauge
theories to be renormalizable was given by ’t Hooft and Veltman
'tHooft:1971fh ; 'tHooft:1971rn using Slavnov-Taylor identities (STI)
Slavnov:1972fg ; Taylor:1971ff . Modern proofs take advantage of the
BRST formalism. That is, all divergences may be absorbed into a change
of the normalization of the Green’s functions and a suitable
redefinition of all parameters appearing in the Lagrangian. The
renormalized theory then yields only finite expressions at any order of
perturbation theory.

#### 1.2.1 Regularization

For this to work, QCD needs to be regularized prior to renormalization,
using, for example, the Pauli–Villar , the dimensional or the lattice
regularization . Actually, the latter is the only known nonperturbative
regularization of QCD. In this regularization, the lattice spacing
@xmath serves as a regularization parameter that renders all momentum
loop integrations finite via a gauge invariant ultraviolet cutoff @xmath
. Consequently, arbitrary @xmath -point functions calculated within the
lattice approach due not suffer from ultraviolet divergences as long as
@xmath . We shall briefly introduce the lattice regularization of QCD in
Sec. 3.1 . A list of references for detailed information can also be
found there.

#### 1.2.2 Renormalization

After a suitable regularization has been carried out, for example by
setting a cutoff @xmath , the renormalization program introduces so
called @xmath -factors which absorb the finite (because of the cutoff),
but potentially divergent part in each of the fundamental two and
three-point functions, i.e. those with tree-level counterpart in the
Lagrangian density Alkofer:2000wg . These are the inverse gluon, ghost
and quark propagators as well as the three-gluon, four-gluon,
ghost-gluon and quark-gluon vertices. The corresponding @xmath -factors
are denoted by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath respectively, and are formally introduced by writing the
renormalized Lagrangian density as (see e.g. Alkofer:2000wg )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.27)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

An additional factor, @xmath , is necessary to adjust the mass of the
quark propagator to the pole mass and @xmath refers to the renormalized
coupling constant. The latter is related to the bare parameter @xmath by
considering, for example, the ghost-gluon vertex. Using this,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of course, any other vertex function could be used instead to define
@xmath . If all renormalization constants were independent then each
vertex would define its own renormalized coupling constant. For example,
using the three-gluon or the quark-gluon vertex this is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But in order to guarantee that they all define the same coupling
constant, i.e. @xmath , the @xmath -factors are constrained by the
Slavnov-Taylor identities (STI) Slavnov:1972fg ; Taylor:1971ff giving:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the renormalized coupling constant @xmath is universal and can be
related to the bare coupling constant @xmath by @xmath where @xmath is
defined in Eq. ( 1.29 ). Obviously, the renormalization constants are
not independent of each other and the STIs allow us to express the
constants for the vertices by the field renormalization constants @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and an independent one @xmath .

Comparing Eq. ( 1.27 ) and ( 1.22 ), we see that the renormalized
Lagrangian (Eq. ( 1.27 )) is related to its bare expression (Eq. ( 1.22
)) by rescaling the fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by redefining the parameters appearing in the Lagrangian:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In an analogous manner, this translates to the BRST transformations
introduced in Sec. 1.1.5 . To be specific, the renormalized Lagrangian
density @xmath is BRST invariant and all considerations made previously
remain valid if the (infinitesimal) parameter of the BRST transformation
is replaced by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the renormalized fields transform as (see e.g. Alkofer:2000wg )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.31a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.31b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.31c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.31d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 1.2.3 The scheme

After this rather formal rescaling and renaming of fields and
parameters, any unrenormalized, but regularized @xmath -point or Green’s
function @xmath is related to their renormalized one (in momentum space)
through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath refers to the corresponding product of @xmath -factors that
appear in the Green’s function. To give two simple examples: for the
gluon two-point function in momentum space @xmath this is @xmath ,
whereas for the ghost-gluon vertex @xmath is given by @xmath .

The @xmath -factors have to be determined such that the renormalized
expression on the left hand side of Eq. ( 1.32 ) is finite. The way this
is done is defined by the renormalization scheme . There are different
renormalization schemes. In each scheme the divergent part is absorbed
into the @xmath -factors, but they differ in how much of the finite part
is absorbed, too Muta:1998vi . Common renormalization schemes are the
subtraction schemes , @xmath or . The latter type is considered in this
thesis, even though there are infinite many different schemes.

A scheme defines the @xmath -factors such that the fundamental two-point
and three-point functions equal their corresponding tree-level
expressions at some momentum @xmath , the renormalization point.

The two-point functions that are relevant in this thesis are the gluon
propagator @xmath and the ghost propagator @xmath in Landau gauge.
Actually, we are interested in the Fourier transform of these two
expressions. In momentum space the gluon propagator in Landau gauge has
the following tensor structure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the form factor or the dressing function of the
gluon propagator. It expresses the deviation of @xmath from its
tree-level form ( @xmath ). For the ghost propagator the corresponding
tensor structure is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes the dressing function of the ghost propagator.

In a scheme the renormalization constants, for instance of the gluon and
ghost fields @xmath and @xmath , are defined by requiring the
renormalized expressions to equal their tree-level form at some (large)
momentum @xmath . That is, @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the unrenormalized gluon propagator. @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, a renormalization constant can be determined by calculating
the corresponding unrenormalized (regularized) Green’s function. Its
value depends on the renormalization point @xmath and also on the bare
parameters of the regularized theory. For example: In our lattice
simulations we have calculated the bare (quenched) gluon propagator
using the bare parameters: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Requiring Eq. (
1.35 ) to hold at some momentum @xmath , we have fixed @xmath . The
renormalized gluon propagator (at @xmath ) is then obtained via
multiplicative renormalization according to Eq. ( 1.32 ).

### 1.3 The renormalization group

Obviously, a renormalized Green’s function depends on the subtraction
point @xmath whose choice is not unique. Also the renormalized
parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath depend (via the corresponding
@xmath -factors) on @xmath . Keeping @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
fixed, we could, of course, had chosen another point, say @xmath . This
would yield a new renormalized Green’s function with the new values
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Even though both renormalized Green’s
functions are different, they are related by a finite multiplicative
renormalization, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a finite number depending on @xmath and @xmath . The
finite renormalization of Green’s functions forms an Abelian group
called the renormalization group (RG). Physically measurable quantities
are invariant under renormalization group transformations, i.e. they are
independent of the subtraction point @xmath . Green’s functions, are
generally not renormalization-group invariant. An analytic expression of
this property is given by the renormalization group equation Muta:1998vi
.

#### 1.3.1 The renormalization group equation

The renormalization group equation is best derived by noting that the
unrenormalized Green’s function does not depend on the renormalization
point @xmath if all bare parameters ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ) are fixed, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the contrary, the renormalized Green’s function depends on @xmath not
only explicitly, but also implicitly due to the renormalized parameters.
By using the chain rule for differentiation, Eq. ( 1.38 ) yields for the
renormalized Green’s function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here a sum over the different fermion flavors is implied and the
(dimensionless) RG functions are defined as (see e.g. Muta:1998vi )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.40a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.40b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.40c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.40d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The RG equation expresses how the renormalized Green’s function, in
particular their parameters, change under a variation of the
renormalization point @xmath . In the following we shall assume that
@xmath always holds. Thus approximately, the RG functions do not depend
on @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12 Such an approximation corresponds to using a
mass-independent renormalization scheme, like for example the @xmath
scheme. The @xmath -function has also been proven to be gauge
independent Marciano:1977su , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To get rid of the gauge dependence of the other RG functions, we shall
restrict ourselves in the following to the Landau gauge, because the
Landau gauge is a fixed point under the renormalization group. To see
this note that in general covariant gauge we obtain for the RG function
@xmath (Eq. ( 1.40d )) depending on the gauge parameter ( @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, given the initial condition @xmath the function @xmath
vanishes completely in Landau gauge.

We are left with the three RG equations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see
Eq. ( 1.40a ), ( 1.40b ) and ( 1.40c )) which in our approximation only
depend on the renormalized coupling constant @xmath . They express how
the renormalized parameters @xmath , @xmath and the renormalized Green’s
function change under a variation of @xmath . In fact, given the initial
values @xmath and @xmath at a renormalization point @xmath , the values
@xmath and @xmath at @xmath , are determined by the solution of the
differential equations ( 1.40a ) and ( 1.40b ), respectively. That is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Similarly, the change of the renormalized Green’s function under the RG
transformation @xmath is obtained. To see this, consider Eq. ( 1.37 ).
The RG equation ( 1.39 ) tells us that Collins:1984np

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function @xmath is known as the anomalous dimension for reasons that
become clear in Sec. 1.3.4 . A full solution to this RG equation is
given by Eq. ( 1.37 ) where Collins:1984np

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The values of @xmath and @xmath are given in Eq. ( 1.41 ) and ( 1.42 ),
respectively.

Of course, the explicit form of the RG functions are generally unknown,
but approximations can be made by taking a finite number of terms in the
perturbation series for the RG functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Since this is an expansion in @xmath it is only valid at sufficiently
small @xmath . We shall see in Sec. 1.3.3 that for QCD this is realized
in the asymptotic region of large Euclidean momenta.

Therefore, the most important application of the RG equation in QCD is
to study the asymptotic behavior of Green’s functions at large Euclidean
momentum Collins:1984np .

#### 1.3.2 Perturbative expansion of the @xmath–function

For the @xmath -function ( 1.40a ) a power expansion in the coupling
constant @xmath can be calculated by choosing one of the four vertex
functions which define @xmath . Taking, for example, the three-gluon
vertex the renormalized coupling constant @xmath is related to the bare
coupling as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The renormalization constants, @xmath and @xmath , are defined at a
subtraction point @xmath in terms of the bare (transverse) gluon
propagator and the bare three-point vertex, respectively. Extracting
both @xmath -factors to two-loop order, the solutions can be plugged
into the RG equation Eq. ( 1.40a ) for @xmath . After some algebra this
gives an expansion for the @xmath –function (see e.g. Weinberg:1996jk )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

that holds at small @xmath . The first two coefficients are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.45a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.45b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is the number of quark flavors with masses below the
energies of interest. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Note that in each energy range between
any two successive quark masses we have a different value of @xmath ,
and also a different @xmath (see Sec. 1.3.3 ), chosen to make @xmath
continuous at each quark mass. [ Weinberg:1996jk , , p.157]

Since the determination of the @xmath -factors generally depends on the
renormalization scheme used, the explicit form of @xmath depends on the
gauge and on how the running coupling is precisely defined. However, it
can be shown that the first two coefficients, @xmath and @xmath , are
renormalization-scheme independent, whereas those of higher
loop-expansions are scheme-depended.

#### 1.3.3 The running coupling constant

Using the expansion of the @xmath function we can solve the RG equation
Eq. ( 1.40a ) for the coupling constant @xmath to the given order. The
general solution to Eq. ( 1.40a ) takes the form given in Eq. ( 1.41 ).
As mentioned above, it describes the variation of @xmath under the
change @xmath keeping the bare parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
fixed. This is usually termed as the running of the coupling constant
@xmath changing the energy or the momentum scale @xmath .

It is common practice to parameterize the running coupling constant ¹⁴
¹⁴ 14 In the literature sometimes the notation @xmath is used for the
running coupling constant Gross:1973ju ; Gross:1973id ; Politzer:1973fx
. It is the same as @xmath , because @xmath is defined to be the value
of the coupling constant renormalized at @xmath (what we call @xmath )
if it is known to have the value @xmath at @xmath Celmaster:1979km .
@xmath by introducing a RG-invariant mass parameter @xmath being the
integration constant of a solution to the differential equation in Eq. (
1.40a ). It is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are nothing but the first two coefficients of the
@xmath -function given in Eq. ( 1.44 ), i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Specifying @xmath at one value of @xmath is exactly equivalent to fixing
@xmath Collins:1984np . Thus if the @xmath -function were known we could
calculate @xmath from the knowledge of @xmath at one value @xmath and
vice versa. Note that renormalization has introduced a new parameter
@xmath of dimension mass into the theory that is not present in the bare
Lagrangian density. This is called dimensional transmutation . The
parameter should be determined by comparing experimental data with QCD
predictions.

The definition of @xmath in Eq. ( 1.46 ) is scheme dependent, since the
coupling constant @xmath may have even different meanings in different
renormalization schemes. For example, on the lattice a scale is given by
the lattice spacing @xmath and the coupling is given by the bare
coupling constant @xmath depending on @xmath . The scheme dependent
parameter @xmath on the lattice is called @xmath . In the @xmath scheme
the @xmath -parameter is usually called @xmath , whereas in scheme it is
called @xmath . The knowledge of the ratio allows to relate results
obtained in different renormalization schemes. For example the ratio of
@xmath and @xmath is given by (see e.g. Celmaster:1979km ; Montvay94 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Up to two-loop order the coefficients of the @xmath -function are scheme
independent. Using these coefficients an expression for the running
coupling constant can be given that is valid in any renormalization
scheme as long as @xmath is fulfilled in that scheme. Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

the solution for the running coupling constant @xmath in two-loop order
is (see e.g. Collins:1984np ; Eidelman:2004wy )

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.49)
  -- -- -- --------

This two-loop result for @xmath will be used in Sec. 4.4.1 .

We note in passing that a similar expression can be derived for the
running mass , but since this will not be a subject of this thesis we
refer to standard textbooks for it.

#### 1.3.4 The anomalous dimension

It is interesting to have a look once more at Eq. ( 1.37 ) and ( 1.43 ).
Assuming a renormalized Green’s function @xmath has been computed at the
momentum @xmath using a large value for the scale factor @xmath .
Setting @xmath , from Eq. ( 1.37 ) one knows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under the assumption @xmath does not get large and using dimensional
analysis ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 If one scales the momenta @xmath then using
dimensional arguments, a Green’s function behaves as:

@xmath

where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath and @xmath is dimensionless.
This is because @xmath is Lorentz invariant, and hence can only be a
function of the various dot products @xmath Kaku:1993ym . Hence

@xmath

one obtains Collins:1984np

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath . This makes it evident that the
relevant coupling constant is the effective coupling at the scale of the
momenta involved. A change in all external momenta using a common scale
factor @xmath is equivalent to changing the coupling constant. We see
further from Eq. ( 1.50 ) that the overall scale factor is not just
@xmath , as one might expect from naive dimensional analysis ( i.e.
@xmath ), but that it includes an extra factor @xmath defined in Eq. (
1.43 ). This is the reason why @xmath is called the anomalous dimension
. Note that this dimension arises from the fact that a scale changes the
renormalization point, and @xmath is not necessarily invariant under
this operation.

To lowest order in perturbation theory the anomalous dimension @xmath is
given by the expansion @xmath Collins:1984np where @xmath is the
zeroth-order coefficient of the anomalous dimension. Using @xmath and
the corresponding coefficient @xmath (Eq. ( 1.47 )) of the @xmath
-function, we obtain from the definition of @xmath (Eq. ( 1.43 )) to
lowest order in perturbation theory Collins:1984np

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.51)
              @xmath      (1.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For the gluon and ghost propagators in the quenched case
( @xmath ) these exponents are @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Therefore, the corresponding dressing functions, @xmath and @xmath ,
behave in the far ultraviolet momentum region like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 2 Infrared QCD and criteria for confinement {window}

[0,l, W ,] e discuss briefly some problems and recent developments
concerning nonperturbative quantization with a particular focus on the
infrared region of QCD. We give a summary of results obtained by using
the Dyson-Schwinger (DS) approach. Thereby we restrict ourselves to
those results which are of relevance for the discussion of our lattice
results presented in subsequent sections. In the second part of this
chapter we introduce different criteria for confinement that can be
formulated for QCD in covariant gauges. Note that in Chapt. 5 we shall
try to confirm these criteria for lattice QCD in Landau gauge.

### 2.1 Nonperturbative approaches to QCD

It should be clear from the discussion of the renormalization group that
it is possible to define an effective (running) coupling constant @xmath
which is a function of the momentum. This functional dependence is
intimately related to the momentum dependence of the vertex functions of
QCD. For sufficiently large Euclidean momenta @xmath , the coupling
constant becomes small and thus perturbation theory seems an appropriate
calculation tool in this asymptotic regime. On the other hand, @xmath
grows large with decreasing Euclidean momentum and diverges at a certain
momentum, the so called Landau pole . Its position signals the breakdown
of perturbation theory. Even though significant progress has been
achieved in recent years in the perturbative calculation of higher order
corrections to renormalization group functions, like, for example, for
the @xmath function or the anomalous dimension ¹ ¹ 1 For details on the
progress made and also for recent results see, for example, the work by
Chetyrkin Chetyrkin:1999pq ; Chetyrkin:1997dh ; Chetyrkin:2004mf and
references therein. , perturbation theory only applies to the region of
large Euclidean momenta. Note that there is no unique definition of the
running coupling constant, since its definition depends on the
renormalization scheme employed Celmaster:1979km .

#### 2.1.1 Brief remarks on nonperturbative methods

In any case, the infrared region corresponds to strong coupling rather
than weak coupling, and hence is of interest for studying confinement of
QCD. Since perturbation theory is of no avail in studying QCD at low
momentum, this region can be explored only in genuinely nonperturbative
approaches. One such approach is the vast field of Monte Carlo
simulations of lattice QCD. It is a first principle approach that
contains the full nonperturbative structure of QCD and has the striking
feature of being manifestly gauge invariant. (For some details and a
list of references see Chapt. 3 ).

However, lattice simulations are limited by the enormous computational
effort they require and thus its application to a wider range of
unresolved problems connected with QCD can only be extended when
computer technology continues to improve. Moreover, lattice calculations
are always afflicted with uncertainties in extrapolating to the infinite
volume and continuum limit which is necessary to connect with the
physical world. Therefore, it is worthwhile to pursue other approaches
that preserve features of QCD that the lattice formulation lacks. For
example, lattice simulations cannot made definite statements about the
far infrared region of QCD due to finite lattice volumes. Although, we
did our best in this thesis to do so.

In this context another complementary nonperturbative approach based on
the infinite tower of Dyson-Schwinger equations (DSE) has gained much
attention in recent years. In Sec. 2.2 we give a brief overview about
the recent developments that are relevant for this thesis, but before we
would like to stress a particularly important point concerning the
problem of Gribov copies in the nonperturbative regime.

#### 2.1.2 The problem of Gribov copies

The Dyson-Schwinger equations of QCD are derived from a generating
functional. In the continuum, this requires gauge-fixing for the
definition of an integration measure. For several reasons the gauge
condition is mostly chosen within the family of covariant gauges which
are known to be not unique beyond perturbation theory due to the
existence of Gribov copies. Remember that in the asymptotic regime,
where perturbative QCD is relevant, the problem of Gribov copies could
be safely ignored. This is because all Gribov copies @xmath of a
particular (gauge-fixed) gluon field @xmath carry an additional @xmath
dependence — they are related by a particular local gauge transformation
(Eq. ( 1.7 )) — and hence can be neglected within the framework of
perturbation theory. Therefore, we can use the FP method or, even more
elegantly, the BRST formalism for the class of covariant gauges to
obtain a quantized gauge theory which is manifestly Lorentz covariant
and for gauge-invariant observables gauge-independent. Moreover, there
are elegant BRST proofs of multiplicative renormalizability and
unitarity to any order of perturbation theory Baulieu:1983tg .

Beyond perturbation theory we have to face the problem of Gribov copies.
Actually, it represents the main impediment to nonperturbative
gauge-fixing. As pointed out in Williams:2003du , there is no known
Gribov-copy-free gauge fixing which is a local function of gluon fields
@xmath . Therefore, one has to adopt either a nonlocal Gribov-copy free
gauge or attempt to maintain local BRST invariance at the expense of
admitting Gribov copies Williams:2003du . Concerning the latter point,
there is, however, the well-known Neuberger problem of pairs of Gribov
copies with opposite sign giving expectation values @xmath
Neuberger:1986xz ; Testa:1998az . It is still unknown whether local BRST
invariance for QCD can be maintained in the nonperturbative regime
Williams:2003du .

Of course, it is desirable to overcome the Neuberger problem and elevate
the BRST formalism to the nonperturbative level. A first successful step
in that direction was done recently for the massive Curci-Ferrari model
Kalloniatis:2005if . Also in a recent work Ghiotti:2005ih , a
generalization of the FP method was given that is valid beyond
perturbation theory and, most notably, circumvents the Neuberger
problem. In fact, in Ghiotti:2005ih a path integral representation of
the absolute value of the FP determinant in terms of auxiliary bosonic
and Grassmann fields has been presented. Remember that usually the
absolute value of the FP determinant is dropped, but this cannot be done
beyond perturbation theory using a gauge condition that suffers from the
Gribov ambiguity. The resulting gauge-fixing Lagrangian density is local
and enjoys a larger extended BRST and anti-BRST symmetry, though it
cannot be represented as a BRST exact object Ghiotti:2005ih .

#### 2.1.3 Nonperturbative quantization in Landau gauge

Moreover, progress has been made concerning the nonperturbative
quantization in Landau gauge. It fact, it has been argued by Zwanziger
that an exact nonperturbative quantization of continuum gauge theory is
provided by the FP method in the Landau gauge if the integration is
restricted to the Gribov region @xmath Zwanziger:2003cf . That is, the
vacuum expectation value of a gluonic observable @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we have indicated the restriction to the Gribov region by giving a
suffix @xmath to the expectation value.

To remind the reader, the Gribov region @xmath is defined as the region
in the space of transverse gluon fields where the FP operator, @xmath ,
is positive, i.e. all its (nontrivial) eigenvalues are positive.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be shown that the Gribov region is convex, it is bounded in every
direction and it contains the origin @xmath (see e.g. Zwanziger:2003cf
). The boundary @xmath of the Gribov region is called the Gribov horizon
. It consists of transverse gluon fields for which the lowest nontrivial
eigenvalue of the FP operator vanishes. Thus the FP determinant, being
the product of all eigenvalues @xmath , is positive inside the Gribov
horizon and vanishes on it.

Due to the fact that the Gribov region is not free of Gribov copies [
Zwanziger:2003cf , , and references therein] , Eq. ( 2.1 ) was generally
abandoned to be used for an exact quantization in favor of an
integration over the fundamental modular region @xmath Zwanziger:1993dh

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

(See Ref. Zwanziger:2003cf for a discussion). The fundamental modular
region is the set of unique representatives of every gauge orbit, i.e.
its interior is free of Gribov copies. The boundary of the fundamental
modular region, @xmath , contains different points that are Gribov
copies of each other, but which have to be identified topologically
vanBaal:1991zw . Like @xmath , the fundamental modular region is convex,
bounded in every direction and included in the Gribov region
Zwanziger:1982na ; Zwanziger:1991ac . The boundary of the Gribov region,
i.e. the Gribov horizon @xmath , touches @xmath at so called singular
boundary points .

It is difficult to give an explicit description how to restrict the
functional integration to the fundamental modular region. One usually
introduces the gauge functional

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

to characterize the different regions. Here @xmath denotes a gluon field
@xmath locally gauge-transformed by @xmath (see Eq. ( 1.7a )). The gauge
transformation is parameterized by @xmath as given in Eq. ( 1.8 ). The
Gribov region @xmath corresponds to the set of all relative minima of
@xmath with respect to local gauge transformations @xmath . Those minima
which are absolute characterize the fundamental modular region
Zwanziger:2003cf .

Returning to Eq. ( 2.1 ) and ( 2.2 ), it is of advantage if the
integration needs not to be restricted to the fundamental modular
region. That this could be the case, has been argued recently by
Zwanziger in Zwanziger:2003cf . In fact, in this reference it is stated
that functional integrals are dominated by the common boundary of @xmath
and @xmath . Thus, in the continuum, expectation values of correlation
functions over the fundamental modular region @xmath are equal to those
over the Gribov region @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

even though the Gribov region is not free of Gribov copies. The Gribov
copies inside @xmath are argued to not affect expectation values in the
continuum.

This is fortunate for many reasons. For example, in Monte Carlo
simulations of lattice QCD gauge-fixing is usually implemented by an
iterative maximization (or minimization depending on conventions) of a
lattice analogue to the gauge functional ² ² 2 See Eq. ( 3.14 ) for a
definition of the lattice gauge functional as used in this study. in
Eq. ( 2.3 ). Therefore, lattice gauge-fixing automatically restricts to
the Gribov region. Note, however, that it has also been pointed out in
Zwanziger:2003cf that on a finite lattice the distinction between the
fundamental modular region and the Gribov region cannot be ignored, but
hopefully in the thermodynamic limit the relation Eq. ( 2.4 ) holds. We
have found indications in our data Sternbeck:2005tk that support this
assumption to be true. See Sec. 4.2.3 for more details.

For our discussion in the next section it is worthwhile to mention that
if the functional integral is cut off at the (first) Gribov horizon,
both the (Euclidean) gluon and propagators have to be positive
Zwanziger:2002ia . This is fulfilled by the solutions obtained for
truncated systems of Dyson-Schwinger equations for the gluon and ghost
propagators summarized in the next section. Therefore, they
automatically restrict to the Gribov region, even though no direct
restriction to @xmath has been done Zwanziger:2003cf .

### 2.2 The Dyson Schwinger equations of QCD

Before we start to introduce the lattice approach to QCD (Chapt. 3 ) and
report on the results we have obtained in studying some infrared
properties of Landau gauge gluodynamics (Chapt. 4 – 6 ), we summarize
results achieved in recent years within the DSE approach to QCD. Those
results presented here will then be compared to our lattice data in
subsequent chapters.

The Dyson-Schwinger equations (DSEs) of QCD are infinite towers of
coupled nonlinear integral equations relating different Green’s
functions of QCD to each other (see below for two examples). Generally
speaking, the DSEs follow from the observation that an integral of a
total derivate vanishes. The DSEs can be directly derived using the
generating functional given in Eq. ( 1.1.4 ) where the existence of a
well-defined integration measure is assumed.

The relevant DSEs for the subsequent discussion are those for the ghost
and gluon propagators. Therefore, these are briefly recalled, but for an
explicit derivation of all of the DSEs of QCD we refer to Ref.
Alkofer:2000wg (see also Roberts:1994dr ). Following Alkofer:2000wg ,
the DSE of the (inverse) ghost propagator takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in momentum space. @xmath denotes the full ghost propagator, @xmath the
full gluon propagator and @xmath the full ghost-gluon vertex. For other
notations used herein we refer to Chapt. 1 . In Fig. 2.1 we also give a
pictorial representation of the ghost DSE. This DSE contains the inverse
of the tree-level propagator (dashed line), the tree-level ghost-gluon
vertex (small filled circle) and the full ghost-gluon vertex (open
circle). The latter is coupled to a fully dressed ghost and gluon
propagator (dashed and wiggled lines carrying a filled circle,
respectively).

The gluon DSE is obtained in a similar manner as the ghost DSE, but in
comparison to that, it is much more complex. Therefore, we only give a
pictorial representation of the gluon DSE in Fig. 2.2 . Please refer
again to Ref. Alkofer:2000wg for an explicit expression.

As in Fig. 2.1 , wiggled lines refer to the gluon propagator in Fig. 2.2
, whereas a line and a dashed line refer to the quark and ghost
propagator, respectively. Lines carrying a full circle correspond to
fully dressed propagators. Open circles denote full vertex functions.

For the DSE of the quark propagator a similar diagram as for the ghost
DSE can be given. See Ref. Alkofer:2000wg for both an explicit and a
pictorial representation.

#### 2.2.1 Infrared behavior of ghost and gluon propagators in Landau
gauge

If the full solution of QCD’s Dyson-Schwinger equations were available
it would provide us with a solution to QCD. However, this has not been
obtained so far. The main impediment is that the infinite tower of
coupled nonlinear integral DSEs has to be truncated in order to be
manageable. Thereby, the challenge is to use suitable truncations that
respect as much as possible the symmetries of the theory. Doing so,
solutions of the truncated systems might provide deep insights into many
phenomena in hadron physics, because they may serve as input into bound
state calculations based on the Bethe-Salpeter equations for mesons or
the Faddeev equations for baryons.

Studying DSEs has become a subject of growing interest in recent years.
See Refs. Roberts:1994dr ; Roberts:2000aa ; Alkofer:2000wg ;
Maris:2003vk for a comprehensive overview. In particular, in Landau
gauge or general covariant gauges considerable progress has been made in
studying the low-momentum region for the coupled system of quark, gluon
and ghost propagators. In contrast to earlier attempts Mandelstam:1979xd
; Atkinson:1981er ; Atkinson:1981ah ; Brown:1988bn where contributions
of ghost fields were neglected, the more recent attempts, initiated by
von Smekal et al. vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu , have shown that
the inclusion of ghost fields is important for the generation of a
consistent infrared behavior of QCD Bloch:2001wz . In fact, it has been
shown in vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu that in the infrared
momentum region a diverging ghost propagator is intimately related to a
vanishing gluon propagator, both following a power law at low momentum.

We have given explicit expressions for the gluon and ghost propagators
in Eq. ( 1.33 ) and ( 1.34 ), respectively. The corresponding
renormalized dressing functions have been denoted by @xmath and @xmath .
According to vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu these dressing
functions are predicted to follow the power laws

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in the limit @xmath with infrared exponents, @xmath and @xmath ,
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This has been confirmed later by Atkinson and Bloch Atkinson:1997tu ;
Atkinson:1998zc at the level in which the vertices in the DSEs are taken
to be bare. Also investigations of the DSEs in flat Euclidean space-time
performed by Fischer et al. Fischer:2002eq ; Fischer:2003zc ;
Fischer:2002hn without angular approximations , as used in the former
studies, support such an infrared behavior. The value of @xmath depends
on the truncation used, but in Landau gauge it has been argued that
@xmath should be expected Lerche:2002ep ; Zwanziger:2001kw . Thus the
ghost propagator is supposed to diverge stronger than @xmath and the
gluon propagator to be vanishing in the infrared regime.

These findings are, as we shall see in Sec. 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 , in
agreement with the Kugo-Ojima confinement criterion Kugo:1979gm as well
as with the Zwanziger-Gribov horizon condition Zwanziger:2003cf ;
Zwanziger:1993dh ; Gribov:1977wm . According to the latter condition, a
diverging ghost and a vanishing gluon propagator result from restricting
the gluon fields to the Gribov region @xmath Zwanziger:2003cf .

Note, however, that quite recently Fischer et al. have investigated DSEs
on a torus. They have found quantitative differences with the infinite
volume results at small momenta Fischer:2005ui ; Fischer:2005nf .
Moreover, Bloch has developed truncation schemes for the DSEs of the
ghost, gluon and quark propagators Bloch:2001wz ; Bloch:2002eq which
preserve multiplicative renormalizability, in contrast to those schemes
used in the references cited above. Furthermore, Bloch has demonstrated
that a definite conclusion about the existence of infrared power-behaved
gluon and ghost propagators cannot be reached yet.

We shall show in Sec. 4.3 that our lattice data and also those by others
do not confirm Eq. ( 2.6 ), at least for the lattice momenta available
at present. The values of the infrared exponents have been found to be
different. Therefore, we think it is still an open question whether the
infrared behavior as favored by current DSE studies is realized for
lattice QCD in Landau gauge. However, if it is realized then it has
interesting consequences for the running coupling constant discussed
next.

#### 2.2.2 A nonperturbative running coupling constant

From the renormalization of the ghost-gluon vertex, the renormalized
coupling constant at the renormalization point @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath denotes the bare coupling constant that depends on the
ultraviolet cutoff @xmath and the multiplicative constants, @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , refer to the renormalization constants of the gluon
and ghost propagators and of the ghost-gluon vertex, respectively. Long
time ago, it has been shown by Taylor Taylor:1971ff that to any order in
perturbation theory the ghost-gluon vertex in Landau gauge is finite
(see Sec. 2.2.3 for some discussions). Therefore, one may chose

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Based on this and by using the relation between the bare and
renormalized ghost and gluon dressing functions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , one can show that the product vonSmekal:1997is ;
vonSmekal:1998yu

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is renormalization group invariant and defines a running coupling
constant within the context of DSEs Alkofer:2000wg ; Alkofer:2004it . In
fact, with Eq. ( 2.7 ), ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.9 ) it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously, the right hand side does not depend on the renormalization
point @xmath and thus the combination of (renormalized) ghost and gluon
dressing functions on the left hand side is
renormalization-group-invariant. Evaluating the left hand side once at
an arbitrarily chosen @xmath and once at @xmath one obtains the product
given in Eq. ( 2.10 ) Alkofer:2004it .

The definition of a running coupling constant by Eq. ( 2.10 ) has been
first derived in vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu . Later it has been
shown by Bloch Bloch:2001wz ; Bloch:2002eq that after a reformulation of
the DSEs for the ghost, gluon and quark propagators this coupling
constant enters directly the kernel of the DSEs.

Assuming multiplicative renormalizability to hold beyond perturbation
theory, and assuming also the power laws (Eq. ( 2.5 )) for the dressing
function being realized at infrared momenta according to the relation (
2.6 ), then @xmath has a finite infrared fixed point vonSmekal:1997is ;
vonSmekal:1998yu . The precise value of @xmath depends on @xmath , but
under certain assumption it has been shown to be Lerche:2002ep

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, we would like to stress already here that our lattice data for
@xmath do not indicate the existence of a finite value at zero momenta
(see Sec. 4.4.1 ). We have also found no indications for deviations from
@xmath being constant (Sec. 4.4.2 ). Our lattice data presented in this
thesis are in agreement with other lattice studies and, most notably,
also agree qualitatively with recent investigation of DSEs on a torus
Fischer:2005ui ; Fischer:2005nf . This, once more, puts the proposed
form for infrared power laws into question.

#### 2.2.3 The finiteness of the ghost-gluon vertex

Arguments were given first by Taylor Taylor:1971ff that in Landau gauge
the renormalization constant of the ghost-gluon vertex @xmath . He
showed that in this gauge the ghost-gluon vertex is finite in the
ultraviolet momentum region and stays bare for a vanishing incoming
ghost momentum. To motivate this we recall arguments given in Refs.
Marciano:1977su ; Alkofer:2004it using the DSE for the full ghost-gluon
vertex. A pictorial representation of this DSE is shown in Fig. 2.3 .

Considering this figure, the argument goes at follows Marciano:1977su ;
Alkofer:2004it : The bare ghost-gluon vertex in the interaction diagram
(rightmost diagram) is proportional to the internal loop momentum @xmath
. Since in Landau gauge the gluon propagator @xmath is transverse, it
holds that @xmath and thus the interaction diagram vanishes in the limit
@xmath Alkofer:2004it . This implies (see Fig. 2.3 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath vanishes Marciano:1977su .
Therefore, the full vertex equals the bare vertex at the subtraction
point @xmath and there is no renormalization. This, however, is not true
if one renormalizes at another point @xmath , even though it remains
true to lowest order in perturbation theory Marciano:1977su . Note also
that this argument would be invalidated if the two-ghost–two-gluon
scattering kernel @xmath had an infrared divergence Alkofer:2004it .

We shall show in Sec. 4.4.2 that our lattice results for the
renormalization constant @xmath do not support the existence of such a
divergence in the particular scheme @xmath and @xmath . This was also
seen by others Cucchieri:2004sq in a similar lattice study of quenched
@xmath gauge theory. Furthermore, semiperturbative calculations of
@xmath using either @xmath or @xmath show that such a divergence is
absent. The analytical study presented in Alkofer:2004it also shows that
the dressing of the ghost-gluon vertex remains finite if all external
momenta vanish.

We also refer to the recent study Boucaud:2005ce where arguments in
favor of a singular infrared behavior of the ghost-gluon vertex function
is given.

### 2.3 Criteria for confinement in linear covariant gauges

Despite the success of QCD in describing strong interaction processes at
high energies, there is still the unsolved and theoretically demanding
problem what kind of mechanism confines QCD degrees of freedom, the
quark and gluon states, and keeps them from being observed in the
physical particle spectrum. In contrast to QED, where a one-to-one
correspondence between basic fields and stable particles can be assumed,
in QCD it cannot. Only hadronic amplitudes are physical and only color
singlets can contribute to the physical state space of QCD.

For QCD in covariant gauges there is the additional subtlety that it
requires a state space with indefinite metric. In order to allow for a
quantum mechanical interpretation there has to be some mechanism which
generates a subspace of (colorless) physical states that has a positive
semi-definite metric.

In the following three criteria for confinement are briefly introduced,
namely the Kugo–Ojima confinement scenario , the Gribov–Zwanziger
horizon condition and the violation of reflection positivity of
propagators corresponding to confined particles. These criteria are
proposed to be sufficient to indicate confinement; and we will see in
succeeding chapters that our lattice simulations show evidence for those
criteria to be satisfied in lattice QCD in Landau gauge.

#### 2.3.1 The Kugo–Ojima confinement scenario

In this section we temporarily switch from the functional formalism to
the covariant operator formalism which is more suitable in the present
context. This formalism takes fields as operators, rather than as
c-numbers, and they satisfy (anti-) commutation relations. Also the
notion of BRST symmetry is important for a formulation of a covariant
operator formalism. For a comprehensive account of this subject we refer
to the book Nakanishi:1990qm by Nakanishi and Ojima where most of the
material summarized below is exhaustively discussed.

##### Requirements for a physical S-matrix to exist

Covariant quantum gauge theories require state spaces @xmath with
indefinite metric. If one can show, however, that (a) the Hamiltonian
operator of a theory is hermitian so that a @xmath -matrix @xmath exists
in @xmath satisfying @xmath and (b) there is a subspace @xmath which not
only is invariant under time evolution, but also (c) has a positive
semi-definite inner product @xmath , then a physical @xmath -matrix
@xmath can be defined in the completed quotient space ³ ³ 3 The overline
denotes the completion of this space, i.e. all the limiting states of
Cauchy sequences are incorporated in this, too. For a proof and further
details see [ Nakanishi:1990qm , , A.2] .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath denotes a Hilbert space with positive definite inner product, and
@xmath is unitary with respect to this Hilbert space structure. The
subspace @xmath contains the zero-norm states of the positive
semi-definite subspace @xmath and is orthogonal to it, i.e. @xmath [
Nakanishi:1990qm , , A.2] .

It can be shown that the first two requirements, (a) and (b), are
satisfied automatically for QCD in covariant gauges if the Lagrangian
density @xmath (Eq. ( 1.27 )) is hermitian ⁴ ⁴ 4 For this the ghost
fields must satisfy @xmath and @xmath Nakanishi:1990qm . and the
physical subspace @xmath is defined as the kernel of the BRST–charge
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is assumed to be an unbroken generator of BRST symmetry.

The proof of condition (c), the positive semi-definiteness of the inner
product in @xmath , however, is a nontrivial problem and requires a
detailed analysis of the inner product structure of both the total state
space @xmath and the physical subspace @xmath Nakanishi:1990qm .

##### Representations of the BRST algebra

Such an analysis has been done by Kugo and Ojima Kugo:1979gm long ago
from the viewpoint of the BRST–algebra given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the FP--ghost charge which is assumed to be unbroken
⁵ ⁵ 5 See also our discussion concerning the BRST–charge in Sec. 1.1.5 .
as it is assumed for @xmath .

The BRST–algebra has two types of irreducible representations, namely
singlet and doublet representations. While a doublet consists of a
so-called parent state @xmath and a daughter state @xmath ( i.e. the
BRST transform of @xmath ), a BRST–singlet is a state that is
annihilated by @xmath without having a corresponding parent state in
@xmath .

Kugo and Ojima have shown that to each BRST–doublet there exists always
another being FP-conjugate to it, i.e. with opposite eigenvalues of
@xmath . This FP-conjugate pair of BRST–doublets is called a
BRST–quartet . Any state in @xmath can be classified to be either a
BRST–singlet or to belong to a BRST–quartet and it can be shown that
this exhausts all possible representations of the BRST–algebra in spaces
with indefinite inner product. We will see below that this
classification is important, in that under certain conditions, colorless
asymptotic states are BRST–singlets which then can be identified with
physical particle states. On the other hand colored asymptotic states
are members of a BRST–quartet and, therefore, do not appear in @xmath
-matrix elements.

To see this note first that daughter states @xmath and BRST–singlet
states (with no parents) belong to the physical space @xmath as defined
in Eq. ( 2.11 ). However, daughter states are orthogonal to all states
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so cannot contribute to any element of the physical @xmath -matrix
@xmath . All the physical content is contained in the physical Hilbert
space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is isomorphic to the space @xmath of BRST–singlet states. Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the set of all zero-norm (daughter) states.

##### Confinement of colored asymptotic fields

Under the assumption of @xmath and @xmath to be unbroken, the
classification of representations of the BRST–algebra can be translated
into the properties of creation and annihilation operators of asymptotic
fields . Intuitively, these are understood to create asymptotic particle
states which are observable in scattering experiments long before and
long after collisions.

Asymptotic states constitute two Fock spaces, @xmath and @xmath . By the
postulate of asymptotic completeness they are equal to the whole Hilbert
space @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is an important postulate and in particular it guarantees that any
operator is expressible in terms of asymptotic fields Nakanishi:1990qm .
For any two states @xmath an asymptotic field @xmath is defined as the
weak limit

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the corresponding renormalized operator @xmath .

Due to confinement there must be some mechanism that causes colored
asymptotic fields, if any, not to contribute to any physical @xmath
-matrix element. Such a mechanism, the quartet mechanism , has been
proposed by Kugo and Ojima Kugo:1979gm for covariant gauge theories.

They have analyzed the total state space @xmath as the Fock space of
asymptotic fields and showed that any asymptotic field is either a
BRST–singlet or a quartet member, because no other irreducible
representation exists as they have shown (see above). If combined with
the fact that under certain conditions (specified below) the charge
@xmath of global gauge transformation is BRST--exact ⁶ ⁶ 6 An BRST-exact
operator @xmath is a BRST variation @xmath of another operator @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath is of the form: @xmath . and can be written as (see next
subsection)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

then for any physical states @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The charge @xmath vanishes in the physical Hilbert space @xmath defined
in Eq. ( 2.12 ). Consequently, if there were colored asymptotic fields,
they would belong to the BRST–quartet representations. BRST–singlets, on
the other hand, are necessarily colorless and thus can be identified
with physical particles. This is known as confinement by the quartet
mechanism.

One example is the so called elementary quartet that can be easily
deduced from the BRST transformation of @xmath and @xmath (Eq. ( 1.25 )
or ( 1.31 )). Obviously, it consists of the parent states @xmath and
@xmath and of the daughter states @xmath and @xmath . As shown in
Kugo:1995km the corresponding (massless) asymptotic states — they
describe longitudinally polarized gluons, ghost and antighosts — also
form a BRST–quartet representation and are therefore not observable in
the physical spectrum.

It is also expected that the quartet mechanism applies to transverse
gluon and quark states, as far as they exist asymptotically. A violation
of (reflection) positivity (see Sec. 2.3.3 ) for such states entails
these are not observable either Nakanishi:1990qm ; Alkofer:2000wg . In
Sec. 5.3 it is shown that the lattice gluon propagator in Landau gauge
violates reflection positivity explicitly which thus supports this
expectation.

##### The Kugo-Ojima confinement criteria

Color confinement by the quartet mechanism can only take place if there
is an unbroken and BRST–exact color charge @xmath .

In general, @xmath is a generator of the global gauge symmetry that, in
addition to the BRST symmetry, is left in the gauge-fixed effective
Lagrangian density @xmath . The corresponding symmetry transformations
are given in Eq. ( 1.7 ) if there the parameters @xmath are taken to be
space-time independent parameters. Being a global symmetry there exist
Noether currents @xmath which are conserved , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As pointed out first by Ojima Ojima:1978hy , these currents enter the
equation of motion for the gauge fields in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is usually referred to as the quantum Maxwell equation in
the non-abelian case, because for any physical states @xmath the
classical Maxwell-type equation @xmath holds.

Since the conservation law in Eq. ( 2.14 ) allows adding arbitrary terms
of the form @xmath to @xmath with @xmath being a local antisymmetric
tensor, one could be tempted to define the global charge operators
@xmath as the spatial integral of the current

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the BRST–exact expression in Eq. ( 2.13 ) is retrieved. But
this naive definition of @xmath is ill-defined due to massless
one-particle contributions to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath which cause the
integral to not converge Kugo:1995km .

If however these contributions are consistently incorporated in the
definition of @xmath , a well-defined expression is obtained (see
Kugo:1995km for details). This is important, since with the Goldstone
theorem ⁷ ⁷ 7 In Ref. Kugo:1979gm various versions of the Goldstone
theorem are given which altogether state that the following conditions
concerning a conserved current @xmath and its global charge @xmath are
equivalent: (1) @xmath is a well-defined charge; (2) @xmath does not
suffer from spontaneous symmetry breaking; (3) @xmath contains no
discrete massless spectrum: @xmath . this automatically implies that
condition (B) formulated in the original work Kugo:1979gm of Kugo and
Ojima, namely

  (B) @xmath is not spontaneously broken ,

is satisfied in the indefinite metric space @xmath . If furthermore a
certain parameter @xmath , the Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter , turns
out to satisfy condition

  (A) @xmath ,

then the color charge @xmath takes the BRST–exact form as given in Eq. (
2.13 ) and color confinement by the quartet mechanism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

takes place. But this holds only if condition (A) is fulfilled.
Otherwise we cannot identify BRST–singlet states in the physical Hilbert
space @xmath with color singlets.

To investigate whether condition (A) is realized, the Kugo-Ojima
confinement parameter @xmath can be obtained as the zero–momentum limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

of a function @xmath which itself may be defined through the correlation
function (see, for instance, Kugo:1995km or Alkofer:2000wg )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

To our knowledge a direct determination of @xmath in terms of a lattice
calculation of @xmath has never been done. There are a few explorative
lattice studies Nakajima:1999dq ; Nakajima:2000mp ; Furui:2003jr ;
Furui:2004cx , but these are based on data of the ghost renormalization
function @xmath (see below for the relation between @xmath and .). The
major problem is that in a lattice simulation @xmath can be calculated
only at finite momenta @xmath and the data then have to be extrapolated
to @xmath for which a suitable ansatz has to be chosen.

##### The ghost propagator in the infrared is related to @xmath

In Landau gauge the calculation of the correlation function in Eq. (
2.17 ) can be even circumvented, because it has been shown Kugo:1995km
that in this gauge the ghost dressing function @xmath is related to
@xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is an arbitrary function (see Kugo:1995km for a definition).
In the zero-momentum limit this yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, if condition (A) is realized in QCD then the ghost dressing
function in Landau gauge should diverge for vanishing momenta. Turning
the argument around, if the ghost propagator is found to be more
singular than a simple pole this may serve as a sufficient criterion for
the Kugo-Ojima confinement scenario to be realized.

Based on this arguments the infrared behavior of the ghost propagator as
extracted from the corresponding truncated systems of DSE, has been
stated to realize the Kugo-Ojima confinement scenario for QCD in Landau
gauge. In support of this, in Sec. 4.3 we will show that also the ghost
propagator as calculated in lattice simulations diverges stronger than a
simple pole, albeit with different exponent compared to the one found in
DSE studies.

More importantly, however, in Sec. 5.2 we present data for the
Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter @xmath at finite momentum @xmath and
compare these data to those of the ghost propagator. The data indicate
@xmath to become proportional to @xmath in the limit of vanishing
momenta. So the Kugo–Ojima confinement scenario seems to be realized for
QCD in Landau gauge.

#### 2.3.2 The Gribov–Zwanziger horizon condition

In the previous section we have seen that the infrared behavior of the
ghost propagator is intimately connected to one condition of the
Kugo–Ojima confinement criteria. In fact, if condition (A) is fullfilled
then the ghost dressing function must be infrared divergent.

In coincidence with this, there is another condition, namely the
Gribov–Zwanziger horizon condition Gribov:1977wm ; Zwanziger:1992qr ,
that also requires the ghost dressing function to diverge at vanishing
momentum. In fact, the horizon condition states that the ghost
propagator @xmath in Landau gauge diverges stronger than @xmath in the
zero-momentum limit ⁸ ⁸ 8 But only, if the restriction to the Gribov
region is done properly. , i.e. Zwanziger:2001kw

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Basically, this limit is a consequence of the expectation that the
infrared modes of the gauge fields are very close to the Gribov horizon
⁹ ⁹ 9 By definition, the Gribov horizon occurs where the lowest
nontrivial eigenvalue of the FP operator vanishes. For typical
configurations on large Euclidean volumes this operator is expected to
have a high density of eigenvalues near zero Zwanziger:2003cf . @xmath
and hence give rise to an accumulation of small non-zero eigenvalues of
the FP operator Zwanziger:1993dh ; Zwanziger:1992qr ; Zwanziger:1991gz .
Since the ghost propagator, essentially, is the inverse of this
operator, it must diverge in the infrared.

Remarkably, the horizon condition as given in Eq. ( 2.20 ) allows us to
renormalize the ghost propagator at @xmath in the form of a
nonperturbative formula for the corresponding renormalization constant
@xmath (see Zwanziger:2003cf for details). This formula disagrees with
the usual perturbative expression for @xmath , but it satisfies the
perturbative renormalization-group flow equation. If used together with
the DSE for the ghost propagator it even yields an infrared anomalous
dimension @xmath for it, such that it behaves like Zwanziger:2003cf

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the infrared. This is in agreement with the infrared behavior of the
ghost and gluon propagators extracted from their Dyson-Schwinger
equations vonSmekal:1997is ; Alkofer:2000wg ; Lerche:2002ep .

Furthermore, it has been argued by Zwanziger Zwanziger:1991gz ;
Zwanziger:1991ac that the gluon propagator in Landau gauge vanishes in
the infrared, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because the infrared components @xmath of the gluon field are suppressed
by the proximity of the Gribov horizon in infrared directions
Zwanziger:2001kw .

In our study we will not only check for the infrared limits of both the
gluon and ghost propagators as given above, but we will also show that
the accumulation of near-to-zero eigenvalues of the FP operator
increases with enlarging the physical volume (see Sec. 5.1 , Sec. 5.2
and Sec. 6.2 ). Therefore, gauge configurations at the Gribov horizon
seem to dominate the infrared properties of lattice Landau gauge theory
in the thermodynamic limit.

#### 2.3.3 Violation of reflection positivity as a criterion for
confinement

The mechanism for confinement by Kugo and Ojima introduced in Sec. 2.3.1
relies on the existence of an unbroken BRST symmetry beyond perturbation
theory. This, however, has not been proven yet and thus the Kugo-Ojima
scenario should not necessarily apply to QCD. Nevertheless, the
numerical results that we will discuss in Sec. 5.2 , but also recent
studies of truncated systems of Dyson-Schwinger equations for the ghost
and gluon propagators (see next section) favor the Kugo-Ojima
confinement scenario to be realized for QCD in Landau gauge.

In any case, there is another particular criterion for confinement that
has been proposed in recent years (see e.g. Alkofer:2000wg ;
Alkofer:2003jj ) and is focused on in this study too, namely the
violation of reflection positivity . In fact, reflection positivity is
an essential part of the famous Osterwalder-Schrader axioms
Osterwalder:1973dx ; Osterwalder:1974tc for Euclidean quantum field
theory ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Reflection positivity of lattice gauge theory assures
that gauge-invariant excitations have a physical spectrum
Zwanziger:1991ac . . Arbitrary partial sums of Euclidean @xmath -point
functions have to fulfill those axioms to ensure their analytic
continuation to the physically interesting functions in Minkowski space.
They thus guarantee the reconstruction of a Gårding-Wightman
relativistic quantum field theory. This is important in order to arrive
at a physical interpretation.

For the purpose of our study there is no need to go into detail about
all the Osterwalder-Schrader axioms ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The justification of this
axioms is far from being trivial. For a comprehensive account on this
the reader is referred to the books by Haag Haag:1992hx or Glimm and
Jaffe Glimm:1987ng . We will rather focus on the notion of reflection
positivity which states that an Euclidean Green’s function (Schwinger
function) @xmath has to satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath refers to a complex valued test function ¹² ¹² 12 Those
functions belong to the Laurent Schwartz space of infinitely often
differentiable functions, decreasing together with their derivatives
faster than any power as @xmath moves to infinity in any direction
Haag:1992hx . with support for positive (Euclidean) times, i.e. @xmath
for any @xmath ; and @xmath is the reflection operator that acts on
@xmath according to: @xmath .

In particular for a generic (Euclidean) 2-point function @xmath ,
reflection positivity is a necessary and sufficient condition (see
Alkofer:2000wg ) for the existence of a Källen-Lehmann representation
Kaellen:1955cy ; Lehmann:1954xi . This is a spectral representation of
2-point functions ¹³ ¹³ 13 This representation is very helpful for
describing the analytic structure of propagators. Combined with the
positivity requirements it yields bounds on their asymptotic behavior
and the magnitude of renormalization constants. See e.g. Weinberg:1995mt
; Peskin:1995ev for more details. with positive, but generally unknown,
spectral density @xmath which in momentum space takes the form
Alkofer:2000wg ; Aiso:1997au ; Cucchieri:2004mf

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The absence of a Källen-Lehmann representation for a particular 2-point
function is a sufficient condition for confinement of the corresponding
particle, because then it cannot be interpreted in terms of stable
particle states.

Considering the temporal correlator @xmath , the absence of such a
representation can be even formulated more straightforward. In fact,
@xmath is the Fourier transform of Eq. ( 2.22 ) and takes the form ¹⁴ ¹⁴
14 Note, @xmath is an even function of @xmath which simplifies the
Fourier transform. Alkofer:2000wg

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . After substitution this gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

One clearly sees that if the spectral density @xmath is a positive
function then the temporal correlator @xmath is positive as well, but it
does not hold in general the other way. If on the contrary @xmath is
found to be negative for a certain range in @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

there cannot be a positive spectral density and thus reflection
positivity is violated. This is an indication for confinement
Alkofer:2000wg ; Cucchieri:2004mf .

For the gluon two-point function reflection-positivity violation, of
course, is expected to happen. However, it has never be shown explicitly
in lattice simulations for the case of @xmath . In three-dimensional
pure @xmath gauge theory numerical evidence for reflection-positivity
violation of the lattice Landau gluon propagators has been given
Cucchieri:2004mf . This study shows that also the @xmath gluon
propagator in Landau gauge violates reflection positivity for the
quenched and unquenched case.

We note in passing, that if the gluon propagator @xmath in momentum
space would be infrared vanishing, as expected from the proximity of the
Gribov horizon (see the previous section), then it would violate
reflection positivity maximally . This can be seen from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can only happen if the gluon propagator in coordinate space, @xmath
, contains positive as well as negative contributions of equal
integrated strength Alkofer:2003jj .

The ghost propagator violates reflection positivity trivially which can
be deduced already from its bare expression. Hence ghosts are explicitly
unphysical indeed. The unphysical spin–statistic relation of ghost
fields already suggests this.

## Chapter 3 QCD Green’s functions in lattice Landau gauge {window}

[0,l, T ,] his chapter very briefly introduces the lattice
regularization of QCD. We concentrate on the Wilson formulation of QCD
with and without clover improved Wilson fermions as employed for this
study. After specifying some general aspects we focus on lattice QCD in
Landau gauge and define all relevant gauge-variant observables which are
analyzed in the following chapters.

### 3.1 Basics of lattice QCD

We know that the very definition of a quantum field theory, as QCD,
requires a regularization which often breaks some of the underlying
symmetries of the classical theory and introduces a new scale into the
theory Hasenfratz:1998bb . At present the only known regularization of
QCD beyond perturbation theory is the lattice regularization which
discretizes Euclidean space-time into a lattice of points. Thereby, the
lattice spacing @xmath serves as a regulator of the theory that renders
all ultraviolet divergences, usually encountered in QCD, finite. Unlike
field theory with a naive ultraviolet cutoff, the lattice formulation
maintains exact gauge invariance Muta:1998vi ; Bowman:2005zi .
Furthermore, the lattice regularization offers the possibility to
investigate nonperturbative aspects of QCD in terms of numerical Monte
Carlo (MC) simulations. Therefore, it is a valuable tool for
cross-checking results obtained using other nonperturbative methods, for
example the DS approach to QCD.

It is beyond the scope of this thesis to adequately describe all aspects
of lattice QCD. Therefore, we shall recall only some basic points
important for the following. For a comprehensive introduction on the
subject we refer to standard textbooks Creutz:1984mg ; Montvay94 ;
Rothe:1997kp ; Smit2002ug as well as to the lectures Kogut:1982ds ;
Lepage:1998dt ; Gupta:1997nd ; Davies:2002cx ; Luscher:2002pz ;
Davies:2005as , to name but a few. Most of the material summarized below
can be found there. To find out about the most recent developments in
the field the proceedings Lat2003 ; Lat2004 ; Lat2005 of the yearly
Lattice Conferences provide a good starting point.

#### 3.1.1 The lattice and its fields

Very briefly, lattice QCD is a discretization of QCD in Euclidean space.
It replaces the four-dimensional space-time continuum through a
hypercubic lattice and restricts fermion and antifermion fields, @xmath
and @xmath respectively, to dwell on the lattice sites @xmath . Rather
than specifying the gauge fields by gluon fields @xmath , on the lattice
gauge fields are associated with links joining adjacent lattice sites,
@xmath and @xmath . Here and in the following @xmath is a unit vector in
the @xmath direction of space-time. The lattice spacing @xmath is the
distance between adjacent lattice sites. The gauge fields — also known
as link variables or even just as links — are usually denoted by @xmath
and take values in a compact Lie group, here @xmath . They are the
lattice version of the parallel transport matrix between adjacent sites
and therefore are related to the continuum gluon fields @xmath by the
line integral (see e.g. Leinweber:1998uu )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here denotes path ordering of the gluon fields along the integration
path such that gluon fields @xmath with larger @xmath stand to the left
of those with smaller @xmath . The gauge fields @xmath are taken in
place of the gluon fields for the purpose of maintaining explicit gauge
invariance on the finite lattice Bowman:2005zi . A gauge invariant
formulation of lattice QCD directly in terms of the gluon fields is not
possible Lepage:1998dt .

Quantization of lattice QCD is done in the functional integral
formalism, i.e. expectation values of different observables are given in
terms of path integrals over the gauge and quark field variables
Montvay94

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the partition function @xmath is chosen such that @xmath = 1 and
@xmath denotes an arbitrary function of the field variables, for
instance, @xmath pairs of quark fields and a product of link variables

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For simplicity, the indices @xmath and @xmath denote the set of all
internal symmetry indices, like color and spinor degrees of freedom. The
color indices of link variables are hidden. Lattice sites are denoted by
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath and @xmath refers to one particular direction
on the lattice.

In contrast to any formulation in the continuum, the lattice action
@xmath maintains exact gauge invariance. Since the gauge fields take
values only in the group @xmath , i.e. they are restricted to a compact
manifold, the functional integration measure is well-defined and
gauge-fixing is not necessary if gauge-invariant observables @xmath are
considered. However, in this thesis gauge-variant quantities are
investigated, in particular in Landau gauge. Therefore, gauge-fixing
becomes necessary here as well. In Sec. 3.2 this is discussed in more
detail.

#### 3.1.2 The Wilson action with clover-improved fermions

Apart from the requirement of local gauge invariance the definition of
@xmath is not unique. There are infinite ways to define a lattice action
of QCD, but any definition has to be such that it takes the classical
continuum form for vanishing lattice spacing @xmath . This freedom
allows for a clever reduction of systematic errors caused by finite
lattice spacings. Any reasonable formulation will give the same
continuum theory up to finite renormalizations of the gauge coupling and
the quark masses Luscher:2002pz .

Common actions used in the literature consist of two parts, a gauge
@xmath and a fermionic part @xmath , i.e. they are of the general form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Both parts depend on the gauge fields @xmath and the fermionic part
contains in addition bilinear expressions in the fermion fields @xmath
and @xmath constructed such that the whole action is manifestly gauge
invariant.

For the gauge part we have employed the standard Wilson gauge action
Wilson:1974sk throughout this study. It is given by the sum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

over traces of plaquettes denoted here by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It represents a square of four links on the lattice. The parameter
@xmath is defined such that @xmath takes its classical continuum form in
the limit @xmath , i.e. it is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is the bare coupling constant.

For the fermionic part @xmath there are various definitions in use which
either belong to the family of Wilson or of Staggered fermion actions or
start therefrom. For the purpose of this study fermions of the Wilson
type have been employed. In fact, our choice are clover–improved Wilson
fermions Sheikholeslami:1985ij ; Luscher:1996sc . The corresponding part
of the action can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where for each flavor @xmath the fermion matrix @xmath is defined to act
upon the (Grassmann valued) fermion fields, @xmath and @xmath ,
according to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

(see e.g. Gockeler:2004wp ). The fermion fields are normalized such that
they correspond to the continuum fields by rescaling @xmath . Due to the
last term in Eq. ( 3.8 ), @xmath is sufficient to remove all @xmath
errors for on-shell quantities ¹ ¹ 1 For gauge dependent quantities it
is an open question whether further, gauge non-invariant (but BRST
invariant) terms must be added Skullerud:2000un . However, one usually
assumes any such term to be small. . The value of the parameter @xmath
depends on @xmath and has to be tuned appropriately. The clover
field-strength tensor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the definition of the plaquette (see Eq. ( 3.5 )) has been
extended such that the @xmath , @xmath directions can be negative
Gockeler:2004wp . The hopping parameter @xmath is related to the
(subtracted) bare quark mass via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined as the value of @xmath at which the pion mass
vanishes. In this study we consider only the cases of either infinite
heavy quarks, i.e. no quarks ( @xmath ) or @xmath mass degenerate
quarks. The former case is known as the quenched approximation of QCD,
whereas the latter is an approximation to the real, unquenched world of
two light and a number of heavier quarks that do respond to the gauge
field.

#### 3.1.3 Vacuum expectation values from MC simulations

After having defined the lattice action we now come back to the
definition of vacuum expectation values in Eq. ( 3.2 ) and outline the
way Monte Carlo (MC) simulations are employed to calculate them. First
note that the integral over the fermionic variables can be done
instantly due to their Grassmann nature. We obtain Montvay94

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the effective action @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.12 )) depends only on
gauge fields. @xmath denotes an arbitrary function depending on link
variables only. The tensor @xmath ( @xmath ) if @xmath is an even (odd)
permutation of the lattice sites @xmath ; or zero else. This tensor
multiplied with elements of the inverse fermion matrix @xmath appears
due to the integration over (Grassmann valued) fermion fields present in
the observable. It is absent if vacuum expectation values of pure
gluonic observables @xmath are considered.

Since the fermionic part @xmath is usually of the form as given in Eq. (
3.7 ), the effective action can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in our case the fermion matrix @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 3.8 ).
The determinant in Eq. ( 3.12 ) is known as the fermion determinant . In
the quenched approach to QCD this determinant is set to equal one. This
simplifies numerical calculations of expectation values enormously,
however, at the expense neglecting quark loops.

To evaluate the remaining integral in Eq. ( 3.11 ) we can perform
numerical MC simulations which allow us to estimate vacuum expectation
values as statistical averages. Note that after discretization the
generating functional @xmath of our lattice theory corresponds to a
partition function of a statistical system.

In a typical MC simulation of lattice QCD, sets of gauge field
configurations @xmath are successively generated by an appropriately
chosen Markov process. Ideally, this process samples a large number of,
say @xmath , independent configurations being a realization of the
Boltzmann weight

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is known as important sampling . On each configuration @xmath the
observable of interest @xmath is measured such that the sample average

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an estimator of the ensemble average @xmath . The latter is equal to
the expectation value @xmath . The difference between the ensemble
average and its estimator @xmath is important, because the latter is
just an average over a finite sample of @xmath gauge fields and
therefore is naturally afflicted with a statistical error of @xmath .
Only in the limit @xmath they would match. Here @xmath refers to the
(usually unknown) standard deviation of the observable @xmath . It can
be estimated for example by the jackknife ( e.g. Wu:1986yt ) or the
bootstrap method efron .

In addition to the statistical error an estimate is also afflicted by
systematic errors due to the finite volume @xmath and the finite lattice
spacing @xmath , respectively. To estimate those, MC simulations are
usually performed on different lattice sizes and at different setups of
the parameter @xmath (and eventually @xmath ). The latter two are
related to the lattice spacing and the quark mass. With respect to all
these effect, ideally the continuum value is obtained by taking the
multiple limit

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This limit, in this order, corresponds to the prescription of an
axiomatic field theory.

### 3.2 The Landau gauge on the lattice

The major focus of this thesis is to investigate the infrared behavior
of the gluon and ghost propagators and other observables in Landau
gauge. For their calculation gauge-fixing is necessary as well. In the
following we discuss how the Landau gauge condition is imposed in our
lattice simulations and then we define all observables relevant for this
study.

Gauge-fixing in the continuum usually includes a parameter, the gauge
parameter @xmath , that causes the measure of the functional integral to
peak around a particular gauge field on the gauge orbit. Lattice
gauge-fixing achieves the same by a two-step process. First an ensemble
of lattice gauge field configurations is generated using standard MC
methods. Since the lattice action @xmath as defined in Eq. ( 3.12 ), is
invariant under gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

the ensemble generated does not satisfy any gauge condition. Then in a
second step, for each such generated configuration @xmath a gauge
transformation @xmath is chosen such that @xmath satisfies the (lattice
version of the) gauge condition. In this way, a particular configuration
on the gauge orbit of @xmath is chosen.

#### 3.2.1 The gauge functional

For the particular case of Landau gauge, one usually searches for a
gauge transformation @xmath , keeping @xmath fixed, that maximizes a
certain functional, the gauge functional @xmath . This typically reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the lattice volume. Obviously, in the trivial case
of @xmath the largest value @xmath is obtained for @xmath . For any
other @xmath , choosing a maximum of @xmath makes all @xmath on average
as close to unity as possible. A continuum analog of the gauge
functional has been given in Eq. ( 2.3 ).

The functional @xmath has many different local maxima which can be
reached by inequivalent gauge transformations @xmath , the number of
which increases with the lattice size. As the inverse coupling constant
@xmath is decreased, increasingly more of those maxima become accessible
by an iterative gauge fixing process starting from a given (random)
gauge transformation @xmath . In this study we have employed two popular
algorithms for gauge-fixing: over-relaxation Mandula:1990vs and
Fourier–accelerated gauge-fixing Davies:1987vs . ² ² 2 For a comparison
of both algorithms see App. A.2.1 The different gauge copies
corresponding to the maxima reached are called Gribov copies , due to
their resemblance to the Gribov ambiguity in the continuum Gribov:1977wm
. All Gribov copies @xmath belong to the same gauge orbit spanned by the
Monte Carlo configuration @xmath . They all satisfy the differential
Landau gauge condition (lattice transversality condition) @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the non-Abelian (hermitian) lattice gauge potential which
may be defined at the midpoint of a link

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way it is accurate to @xmath . Note that this association
between lattice and continuum gauge fields is not unique, but the one
chosen here represents the maximally local choice for such an assignment
Mandula:1987rh . The bare gauge coupling @xmath is related to the
inverse lattice coupling via @xmath in the case of @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.6
)).

In the following, we will drop the label @xmath for convenience, i.e. we
assume @xmath to satisfy the Landau gauge condition such that @xmath
maximizes the functional in Eq. ( 3.14 ) relative to the neighborhood of
the identity. To simplify notation we will also use a more compact
notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the lattice gluon fields, but it is always understood that they
dwell at the midpoint of a link. ³ ³ 3 This one should keep in mind if
the Fourier transform of the gluon field has to be calculated.
Additionally, we give the adjoint expression of a lattice gluon field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.2.2 The Faddeev-Popov operator

Before we can go further and introduce the observables relevant for this
study, it is necessary to give first a lattice expression for the
Faddeev-Popov (FP) operator in Landau gauge. This operator can be easily
derived by considering a one-parameter subgroup of the local @xmath
gauge group defined by (see e.g. Zwanziger:1990by )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The generators @xmath of the @xmath group have been defined in Sec.
1.1.1 . In fact, if we assume @xmath to represent a local maximum of the
gauge functional then for any @xmath it holds that @xmath for all @xmath
. Consequently, at @xmath the first derivative of the one-parameter
function @xmath with respect to @xmath should vanish. One can easily
show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so any maximum of the gauge functional automatically satisfies the
lattice Landau gauge condition. Then the second derivative of @xmath at
@xmath defines a symmetric quadratic form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whose kernel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

is the Hessian of @xmath . @xmath defines a real symmetric matrix that
in the case of @xmath satisfying @xmath equals the FP operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath refers to the covariant derivative Zwanziger:1993dh . A
lattice definition for @xmath can be found, for instance, in the same
reference. After some algebra one can show that in the adjoint
representation this can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.2.3 Defining @xmath, @xmath and @xmath on the lattice

On the lattice the Gribov ambiguity of the Landau gauge condition finds
its expression in the ambiguity to find a local maxima of the gauge
functional in Eq. ( 3.14 ). Therefore, terms like transversal plane,
Gribov region and fundamental modular region also translate to the
lattice formulation.

The transversal plane is constituted by all (gauge transformed)
configurations @xmath that satisfy the lattice Landau gauge condition
@xmath using the definition ( 3.15 ), i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The subset of @xmath whose elements in addition give rise to a
semipositive definite FP operator @xmath is called the Gribov region

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Of course any element in @xmath is a local maximum of the gauge
functional, but only those which are global maxima constitute the
fundamental modular region

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a finite lattice it has been proven that the interior of @xmath
consists of non-degenerate absolute maxima (or minima depending on the
definition). Gribov copies may only occur on the boundary @xmath
Zwanziger:1993dh .

### 3.3 Lattice definition of our observables

#### 3.3.1 The (inverse) FP operator in momentum space

In subsequent sections we shall derive expressions for the numerical
calculation of the ghost propagator and the ghost-gluon-vertex
renormalization constant in momentum space. For theses purposes the
following Fourier transform

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.21)
  -- -- -- --------

of the inverse FP operator @xmath is of interest. Here and in the
following the scalar product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

of lattice momentum @xmath and lattice site @xmath is understood. @xmath
denotes the lattice extension in direction @xmath .

Due to its eight trivial zero eigenvalues the inverse @xmath needs to be
defined with care. If we are just interested in non-zero momenta @xmath
we are automatically in a subspace orthogonal to the space spanned by
the (space-time constant) zero modes. Hence, for non-zero momenta we can
apply, for example, the conjugate gradient method to solve the sparse
linear system

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

using a fixed source @xmath with @xmath complex components @xmath . Here
@xmath and @xmath label the vector components of @xmath , while index
@xmath specifies the different sources on the right hand side of Eq. (
3.23 ), i.e. which of the color components are non-zero. The solution
@xmath to this linear system can then be used to write the Fourier
transform in Eq. ( 3.21 ) as the following scalar product in space-time
⁴ ⁴ 4 For our convenience, @xmath carries the index @xmath as well, in
order to trace back afterwards the color index of non-zero components of
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

With Eq. ( 3.23 ) it is clear that @xmath represents the @xmath vector
components with respect to the matrix multiplication of @xmath with
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the numerical calculation of @xmath we rather solve the two
independent linear systems

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

than that given in Eq. ( 3.23 ), because @xmath . With this notation we
can write the Fourier transform in Eq. ( 3.24 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We shall see subsequently that the calculation of both, @xmath and
@xmath , is even not always necessary depending on the observable
considered. For example, for the calculation the ghost-gluon-vertex
renormalization constant we only have to solve Eq. ( 3.26 ). This, as we
shall see later, relies on the fact that the FP operator is symmetric
and thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 3.3.2 The gluon and ghost propagator

##### The gluon propagator

Studying nonperturbatively gauge-dependent quantities on the lattice the
gluon propagator is perhaps the simplest object to start with. Given the
definition for the lattice gluon fields @xmath in Eq. ( 3.16 ), the
gluon propagator is estimated in lattice simulations by the MC average
of the corresponding two-point function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this study we are in particular interested in the Fourier transform
of this two-point function which on the lattice is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the term @xmath in general is not translational invariant.
However, we have imposed this invariance for the vacuum expectation
value by summing over all differences @xmath available on the lattice.
If we assume that also on the lattice the gluon propagator in Landau
gauge has the continuum tensor structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

then all the physical information is contained in the scalar function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the number of colors of @xmath .

##### Connecting a lattice momentum to its continuum counterpart

Before we proceed with the ghost propagator we can define already here
how the lattice momentum @xmath is related to its continuum counterpart
@xmath . In fact, it is well-know that due to lattice artifacts the
tree-level gluon propagator @xmath does not simply reproduce its
continuum expression, but rather has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, one usually employes Eq. ( 3.33 ) for translating a lattice
momentum @xmath to the corresponding continuum momentum @xmath . Even
more importantly, in Ref. Leinweber:1998uu it has been verified that the
lattice gluon propagator in Landau gauge shows scaling at @xmath and
@xmath in the entire range of studied momenta @xmath if these are
defined according to Eq. ( 3.33 ). Also systematic effects with respect
to the tensor structure of the gluon propagator (see Eq. ( 3.30 )) are
reduced. So the definition in Eq. ( 3.33 ) is a reasonable definition of
@xmath though it becomes worse at larger @xmath . Since we are
interested mainly in the infrared properties of the gluon propagator we
will use this definition of @xmath in our study.

##### The ghost propagator

Beside the gluon propagator we are also interested in the Landau gauge
ghost propagator. Given the lattice definition of the FP operator in
Eq. ( 3.18 ) this propagator (in momentum space) can be estimated in
lattice simulations by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Although the inverse of the FP operator itself is not translational
invariant, the vacuum expectation value (here the ensemble average) has
to be. Therefore, a sum over all possible differences @xmath at the same
momentum @xmath is taken here again.

Since the continuum ghost propagator is of the form @xmath we are
interested in the scalar function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last step the expression @xmath as defined Eq. ( 3.21 ) has
been used. With respect to the discussion in Sec. 3.3.1 , the trace can
be calculated by using Eq. ( 3.3.1 ) and ( 3.28 ) which finally yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are solutions to the two independent linear
systems given in Eq. ( 3.25 ) and ( 3.26 ).

In our lattice simulations we solved the two linear systems by applying
the pre-conditioned CG algorithm (PCG) where as pre-conditioning matrix
we used the inverse Laplacian operator @xmath with diagonal color
substructure. This significantly has reduced the amount of computing
time as it is discussed in more detail in App. A.3 .

##### Eigenmode expansion of the ghost propagator

For a better understanding of the infrared behavior it is interesting to
analyze the ghost propagator also by exploiting the spectral
representation of the inverse FP operator for a given gauge field @xmath
in terms of its real (ascendent) eigenvalues @xmath and its (normalized)
eigenvectors @xmath in coordinate space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are the components of @xmath . Taking the Fourier
transformed vectors @xmath at lattice momentum @xmath and averaging over
a Monte Carlo (MC) generated ensemble of gauge field configurations one
can compute the ghost propagator from truncated mode expansions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

denotes the contribution of the eigenvalues and eigenmodes on a given
gauge field configuration. Here the vector and scalar product notation
refers to the color indices. The Fourier momenta @xmath are related to
the physical momenta @xmath by Eq. ( 3.33 ).

In fact, if the whole eigenvalue spectrum and all eigenvectors were
known the ghost propagator would be determined completely. However, this
is numerical too demanding. Nevertheless, restricting the sum in Eq. (
3.37 ) to the @xmath lowest eigenvalues and eigenvectors ( @xmath ), we
can figure out to what extent this sum saturates the full value @xmath
determined using Eq. ( 3.34 ). We will see in Chapt. 6 that at lowest
momentum the low-lying part of the FP spectrum gives the major
contribution to @xmath .

#### 3.3.3 The Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter

The next observable we are interested in is the Kugo-Ojima confinement
parameter. According to Sec. 2.3.1 this parameter @xmath is defined as
the zero-momentum limit of some function @xmath which itself has been
introduced in Eq. ( 2.17 ) using a particular correlation function. On
the lattice this requisite correlation function is of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here the (adjoint) lattice covariant derivative @xmath acts upon a
color-space vector as given in Eq. ( 3.20 ) and the lattice gluon fields
@xmath are defined according to Eq. ( 3.17 ). With respect to the
Lorentz-structure as given in Eq. ( 2.17 ) the function @xmath is
obtained by the sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

over Lorentz indices where @xmath denotes the bare coupling constant and
@xmath is the number of dimensions. For the actual lattice calculation
of @xmath we note that the correlation function @xmath can be written as
a scalar product of a plane wave and a vector @xmath multiplied by the
covariant derivative

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the solution of the linear system @xmath with @xmath
being the FP matrix and a source @xmath defined by the components

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As for the ghost propagator the pre-conditioned conjugate-gradient
algorithm (see appendix A.3 ) has been employed to extract @xmath for
each non-zero momentum @xmath , separately. Then by using Eq. ( 3.38 )
the function @xmath is determined.

#### 3.3.4 Renormalization of propagators

Quantities like gluon or ghost propagators as they come out from typical
lattice simulations have to be renormalized yet. Assuming multiplicative
renormalization the renormalized continuum propagators @xmath and @xmath
are related to the bare, dimensionless lattice propagators via

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The renormalization constant @xmath and @xmath are determined by
imposing a renormalization condition at some chosen renormalization
scale @xmath . In this study we apply the scheme for renormalization
according to which the renormalized propagators equal there tree-level
form at some momentum @xmath . Here for the scalar functions of gluon
and ghost propagators it holds that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the subsequent chapter we consider in the majority of cases not the
propagators themselves but their dressing functions @xmath and @xmath
(see Eq. ( 1.33 ) and ( 1.34 )). They describe the deviation of the
propagators from their tree-level forms. With Eq. ( 3.39 ) and ( 3.40 )
it is clear that at the renormalization point @xmath the dressing
functions equal one.

#### 3.3.5 The ghost-gluon-vertex renormalization constant

Apart from the renormalization constants of the gluon and ghost
propagators we are also interested in @xmath , the renormalization
constant of the ghost-gluon vertex. In Landau gauge, the most general
tensor structure of this vertex with gluon momentum @xmath and ghost
momenta @xmath and @xmath is given by (see e.g. Schleifenbaum:2004id )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath are scalar functions which describe the deviation
from the tree-level from. They are assumed to have the same color
structure as in perturbation theory, i.e. @xmath and @xmath .

In a scheme the renormalized vertex @xmath equals its tree-level
expression @xmath at a renormalization point @xmath . Therefore, if we
consider the particular renormalization scheme @xmath which is defined
by subtracting the vertex function at the asymmetric point @xmath and
@xmath , then the renormalization constant @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the tree-level expression is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since in this renormalization scheme the tensor structure of the
ghost-gluon vertex boils down to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath we arrive at the (inverse) vertex renormalization constant
given by Cucchieri:2004sq

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the lattice, the definition for @xmath can be derived in a similar
manner as in the continuum (see e.g. Cucchieri:2004sq ). Only the
tree-level expression of the vertex is different. Using the tree-level
expression known from lattice perturbation theory the definition of the
ghost-gluon-vertex renormalization constant is given by Cucchieri:2004sq

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant @xmath and @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 3.33 ). Here
@xmath refers to the number of lattice points in direction @xmath and
@xmath takes values in the interval @xmath as usual.

The vertex @xmath can be obtained by amputating the external ghost and
gluon legs from the three-point function of gluon, ghost and anti-ghost
fields. In the scheme considered here this yields Cucchieri:2004sq

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath refer to gluon and ghost propagators,
respectively, and @xmath is given on the lattice by the MC average

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this expression @xmath denotes the Fourier transform of the gluon
fields @xmath at zero momentum, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.16 ). @xmath is the inverse of the FP
operator in momentum space considered at non-zero momenta (see Eq. (
3.21 )). If combined with the definition in Eq. ( 3.41 ) the
renormalization constant @xmath can be estimated by the MC average

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath represents the average

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the same as defined above and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the derivation we have used the antisymmetry of @xmath , Eq. ( 3.3.1
) and ( 3.28 ). We see that if we calculate the ghost propagator anyway
we can use the set of solutions @xmath ( @xmath ), obtained at an
intermediate step, to extract the ghost-gluon-vertex renormalization
constant @xmath at the same momenta as the ghost propagator.

## Chapter 4 Results for lattice QCD Green’s functions {window}

[0,l, I ,] n this chapter results for lattice QCD in Landau gauge, both
in the quenched and unquenched cases, are presented. We start with a
discussion of systematic effects due to finite volumes, discretization
and the problem of Gribov copies. For this we restrict our attention to
the quenched approximation. The infrared behavior of the gluon and ghost
dressing functions is analyzed then, along with a discussion of
unquenching effects. Subsequently, we report on results for the running
coupling constant and the renormalization constant of the ghost-gluon
vertex.

### 4.1 General prerequisites

#### 4.1.1 Specification of our lattice samples

In this study we have analyzed pure @xmath gauge configurations, all
thermalized with the standard Wilson gauge action at three values of the
inverse coupling constant @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The different
lattice sizes studied are given in Table 4.1 . For thermalization an
update cycle of one heatbath and four micro-canonical over-relaxation
steps was used.

In addition, we have analyzed dynamical @xmath gauge configurations
provided to us by the collaboration ¹ ¹ 1 We thank the collaboration, in
particular Gerrit Schierholz and Dirk Pleiter , for giving us access to
their configurations via the International Lattice Data Grid (ILDG). .
Those configurations were generated using the same gauge action,
supplemented with the interaction with two flavors of clover-improved
Wilson fermions. A definition of that action was given in Eq. ( 3.12 ).
The different pairs of couplings @xmath are specified in Table 4.2
together with the lattice sizes that have been used.

#### 4.1.2 Gauge–fixing

Each gauge configuration @xmath was transformed into Landau gauge by
searching for a local gauge transformation @xmath that maximizes the
functional @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.14 ). For this purpose either one
of the two algorithm commonly used, namely the over-relaxation (RLX)
Mandula:1990vs method or Fourier–accelerated gauge-fixing (FAG)
Davies:1987vs were employed. Both algorithms are iterative in nature and
each iteration-cycle increases the functional @xmath until a (local)
maximum is reached ² ² 2 In App. A.2.1 we compare both algorithms and
analyze how the iteration numbers scale with the lattice size. . As
stopping criterion not the functional itself, but the violation of
transversality (see Eq. ( 3.15 )) was used. In fact, the iteration
process stopped as soon as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

was fulfilled at each lattice site, i.e. the lattice average was even
lower. For some configuration we used @xmath which is also appropriate.

#### 4.1.3 The fc-bc strategy

A subset of our quenched gauge configurations (see Table 4.1 ) were
gauge-fixed more than once in order to investigate the influence of the
Gribov ambiguity of gauge-dependent observables. In Sternbeck:2005tk we
have investigated such a dependence, following the strategy of choosing
for each gauge configuration @xmath the first ( fc ) and the best ( bc )
gauge copy among @xmath copies. Each copy has been fixed to Landau gauge
always starting from a new random gauge copy of @xmath . As best we have
considered that copy with largest functional value among the @xmath
gauge copies. Of course, the first gauge copy is as good as any other
arbitrarily selected gauge copy.

For each set of fc and bc copies we then have measured the ghost and
gluon propagators as well as the eigenvalue spectrum of the FP operator
(see Chapt. 6 ) to determine the systematic effect caused by the Gribov
ambiguity. In the following we call this particular way of studying the
dependence on Gribov copies as the fc - bc strategy . Below we shall
also motivate why we think that our values for @xmath given in Table 4.1
are sufficient for this purpose. Of course, the more gauge copies one
gets to inspect, the bigger the likeliness that the copy labeled as bc
actually represents the absolute maximum of the functional in Eq. ( 3.14
). But as it is discussed in more detail below, the expectation value of
gauge variant quantities, evaluated on bc representatives, is converging
more or less rapidly with increasing number @xmath .

#### 4.1.4 Selection of momenta

Our implementation of the lattice gluon propagator first constructs the
lattice gauge fields @xmath according to Eq. ( 3.17 ) and then
Fourier-transforms these using a Fast-Fourier transformation (FFT)
algorithm ³ ³ 3 For all FFTs we have employed the FFTW -library FFTW98 ,
see also online: http://www.fftw.org . . Because a FFT provides us with
all lattice momenta @xmath at once, the data for the gluon propagator
@xmath have been determined for all momenta available.

It is obvious from Eq. ( 3.33 ) that different lattice momenta @xmath
give rise to the same value @xmath . Naively, one would average over all
data of @xmath at different @xmath but same @xmath . This however leads
to systematic errors due to finite volume and discretization effects. It
has been shown Leinweber:1998uu that both of these systematic errors can
be reduced by applying two cuts on the data, i.e. only a subset of
momenta is used. But within this subset, all data with same @xmath are
then averaged over all different realizations of @xmath and
configurations.

One of these cuts, known as the cylinder cut Leinweber:1998uu , reduces
errors due to finite lattice spacings. Conceived in general terms, it
selects data of @xmath with @xmath lying in a cylinder with radius of
one momentum unit along one of the (lattice) diagonals @xmath . To be
specific,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the extension in spatial direction. In the special case
of @xmath , Eq. ( 4.2 ) reduces to @xmath . In agreement with
Leinweber:1998uu this recipe has drastically reduced lattice artifacts
for the gluon propagator, in particular for larger momenta.

The other of the two cuts is known as the cone cut Leinweber:1998uu . It
addresses finite volume errors by removing all data @xmath with one or
more vanishing momentum components @xmath . We have applied this cut to
our data only for smaller lattice volumes. In the next section we shall
show in more detail how finite volume effects have influenced our data
at lower momenta. In particular, if asymmetric lattice geometries are
used the cone cut is necessary.

For the ghost propagator and some other quantities considered in this
thesis, the numerical calculation involves an individual inversion of
the FP operator for each vector @xmath . Due to limited computing time
we did not had the chance to obtain data for all momenta allowed by the
cuts. However, our selection of different @xmath were guided by either
cuts.

#### 4.1.5 Mapping to physical units

The @xmath values chosen for the quenched case allow us to apply the
results of Ref. Necco:2001xg , giving a parameterization of the
functional dependence of the lattice spacing @xmath , or better of
@xmath , on @xmath . Using such parameterization and the Sommer scale
@xmath Sommer:1993ce we obtain for the three values @xmath , 6.0 and 6.2
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath or @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
In our opinion, this mapping between @xmath and @xmath is more
appropriate as another one formerly used by us and others (see
Sternbeck:2004xr ; Sternbeck:2004qk ; Silva:2004bv ; Leinweber:1998uu ).

For our sets of unquenched gauge configurations the values of @xmath
were provided to us by the collaboration (see Table II in Ref.
Gockeler:2005rv ). Using again @xmath we can assign to each pair of
@xmath and @xmath a lattice spacing in physical units. These are given
in Table 4.2 together with other specifications.

Finally, with the help of Eq. ( 3.33 ) we can then map lattice momenta
@xmath , or better @xmath , to physical momenta @xmath . If not
otherwise stated, @xmath is always given in GeV @xmath .

### 4.2 Systematic effects on gluon and ghost propagators at low
momentum

In this section different systematic effects on the gluon and ghost
propagators are discussed. We start with effects due to finite volume
and finite lattice spacings, followed by a warning to refrain from using
quite asymmetric lattice geometries. Finally, attention is paid to the
dependence on Gribov copies.

#### 4.2.1 Finite volume and discretization effects

Precisely because we have applied the above-mentioned cuts to our data,
it is quite natural to analyze here the different systematic effects on
the gluon and ghost propagators of changing either the lattice spacing
@xmath or the physical volume @xmath . However, due to the preselected
set of momenta for the ghost propagator and the three chosen @xmath
values, our study is partial and limited to a region of intermediate
momenta. For the gluon propagator this has been done in more detail by
other authors (see e.g. Bonnet:2001uh ).

##### Finite volume effects

Keeping first the lattice spacing fixed we have found that both the
ghost and gluon dressing functions calculated at the same physical
momentum @xmath decrease as the lattice size is increased. This is
illustrated for various momenta in Fig. 4.1 . There both dressings
functions versus the physical momentum are shown for different symmetric
lattice sizes at @xmath , 6.0 and 6.2. In contrast to our study
Sternbeck:2005tk here we show data obtained on fc gauge copies, because
the larger lattice sizes were manageable only without repeating
gauge-fixing several times.

In this figure we have not dropped data with vanishing momentum
components @xmath ( i.e. those excluded by the cone cut) to emphasize
the influence of a finite volume on those (low) momenta. We also show
data from simulations on a @xmath and @xmath lattice. One clearly sees
that the lower the momenta the larger the effect due to the finite
volume. In comparison with @xmath and 6.0 this is even more drastic at
@xmath . At this @xmath the lattice spacing is about @xmath . Thus the
largest volume considered at @xmath is about @xmath , which is even
smaller than the physical volume of a @xmath lattice at @xmath .

In summary we can state that for both dressing functions finite volume
effects are clearly visible at volumes smaller than @xmath , which
corresponds to a @xmath lattice at @xmath . The effect grows with
decreasing momentum or decreasing lattice size (see the right panels in
Fig. 4.1 ). At larger volumes, however, the data for @xmath coincide
within errors for the different lattice sizes (left and middle panels).
For @xmath we find only small finite volume effects for both dressing
functions at the lowest momentum if data obtained on a @xmath , @xmath
and a @xmath lattice at @xmath and 6.0 are considered.

##### Discretization errors

Based on our chosen @xmath values and lattice sizes we can pick up equal
physical volumes (with different coarseness) only approximately. Hence
also the physical momenta are only approximately the same if the ghost
and gluon dressing functions are compared at different @xmath , i.e. at
different lattice spacings. Therefore, it is difficult to analyze the
systematic effect of changing @xmath if for both dressing functions this
leads to small hidden variations in @xmath . Consequently, in Fig. 4.2
we show data for the ghost and gluon dressing functions obtained at
approximately the same physical volume @xmath for two different @xmath
as functions of @xmath . This allows us to disentangle by inspection a
change of data due to varying @xmath , given the physical dependence of
the propagators on @xmath . Looking at Fig. 4.2 one concludes that the
gluon dressing function at the same physical momentum and volume
increases with decreasing the lattice spacing. A similar effect (beyond
error bars) is not observable for the ghost dressing function.

#### 4.2.2 Asymmetric lattices cause strong systematic errors

Besides discretization and finite volume errors, there are also
systematic effects involved using asymmetric lattice geometries. It
could be tempting to use an asymmetric lattice such that in one
direction, for example in time directions, the lattice extension is much
longer than in all other directions. Going this way, one would tend to
believe that much lower momenta can be studied compared to using
symmetric lattice geometries at same computational costs. This approach
has been pursued for example in Silva:2005hb ; Oliveira:2005hg ;
Silva:2005hd ; Oliveira:2004gy aiming at the infrared behavior of the
gluon propagator, in particular, at the determination of an infrared
exponent for this propagator.

However, as a comparison of our data obtained either for symmetric or
asymmetric lattice geometries suggests: “There is no free lunch!” . The
more asymmetrically a lattice has been chosen, the larger are the
systematic errors encountered by that. To make this point more clear, we
have calculated both the ghost and gluon propagators not only on
symmetric lattices as discussed above, but also on lattices of sizes
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath all at the same @xmath (see runs A-1
to A-4 in Table 4.1 ). The corresponding data are plotted in Fig. 4.3
together with those obtained on a @xmath and a @xmath lattice at the
same value of @xmath (S-6, S-7 in Table 4.1 ). The lower panels of this
figure show the corresponding dressing functions.

In Fig. 4.3 we clearly see that data obtained on a @xmath lattice suffer
under the largest systematic errors in the low momentum region compared
to the other data. In fact, the data on a @xmath lattice, shown using
open squares in this figure, exhibit the smallest asymmetry effects.
There only the data point at the lowest on-axis momentum for the ghost
propagator is lower in tendency than an extrapolation including the
lowest momentum data point referring to a @xmath lattice would give. For
the gluon propagator this deviation is even smaller. Also for data on a
@xmath lattice, shown using open diamonds, the asymmetry effect is
small. There only the data point at the lowest on-axis momentum @xmath
is lower (larger) than the corresponding result for the ghost (gluon)
propagator on a @xmath lattice at the same momentum @xmath . At larger
momenta this effect is negligible within errors for these particular
sets of data ( @xmath and @xmath lattice).

Considering instead data generated on the lattices sizes @xmath and
@xmath , the results at the six or seven lowest momenta are
significantly different to what is expected from the data obtained on
symmetric lattices. A data inspection yields that the distorted momenta
are only the on-axis momenta @xmath allowed by a cylinder cut, but
forbidden by a cone cut (see Sec. 4.1.4 for a definition of these cuts).

Similar systematic effects due to asymmetric lattice geometries have
been reported recently for the gluon propagator in three-dimensional
pure @xmath gauge theory Cucchieri:2006za , but in fact already in the
well-known reference Leinweber:1998uu for pure @xmath gauge theory.
Therefore, extractions of an infrared exponent for the gluon propagator
using only on-axis momenta on asymmetric lattices (see e.g. the
references mentioned above) should be taken with reservations.

We note in passing that we also see in Fig. 4.3 points from asymmetric
lattice geometries at not so small momenta which are slightly larger
(lower) compared to those for the ghost (gluon) propagator on symmetric
lattices. With respect to our discussion of finite volume effects above,
we can, however, interpret this observation more generally as a finite
volume effect caused by the lower spatial volumes of these asymmetric
lattices.

#### 4.2.3 Facing the problem of Gribov copies

Apart from the systematic effects inherent in any lattice study, it is
known that the presence of Gribov copies may also causes a systematic
error on the data of gauge-variant quantities. Below it is shown that
this is indeed the case for the ghost propagator, while the influence on
the gluon propagator seems to be negligible ( i.e. hidden in the
statistical noise). In Sternbeck:2005tk we have investigated this
following the fc - bc strategy introduced in Sec. 4.1.3 . For each set
of fc and bc copies we have measured the ghost and gluon propagator to
determine the systematic error caused through the Gribov ambiguity.

##### Estimating the number of gauge copies

In pursuing the fc - bc strategy, at some stage one has to figure out
how large @xmath has to be approximately. This does not mean that we can
be confident that the set of best copies then in any respect represents
the real ones, i.e. those which give rise to the absolute maximum of the
gauge functional @xmath (Eq. ( 3.14 )) for each @xmath . It turns out,
however, that for each gauge-variant observable there exists a certain
@xmath that warrants the convergence of that particular observable.

Numerically, it turns out that the dependence of the ghost propagator on
the choice of the best copy is most severe for the smallest momentum. In
addition, this sensitivity depends on the lattice size and @xmath .
Therefore we studied first the dependence of the ghost and gluon
propagators at lowest momentum (ignoring the cone cut) on the (same)
best copies as function of the number of gauge copies @xmath under
inspection. This was done at @xmath where we used @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath lattices. The number of thermalized configurations used for these
three lattice sizes are given in [Table 4.1 : F-2 to F-4]. To check the
dependence on @xmath also a simulation at @xmath on a @xmath lattice was
performed [Table 4.1 : F-1].

The results of this investigation are shown in Fig. 4.5 and 4.5 . While
there the ghost propagator is shown as an average over the two
realizations @xmath and @xmath of the smallest lattice momentum @xmath ,
the gluon propagator has been averaged over all four non-equivalent
realizations. Note that @xmath .

In Fig. 4.5 and 4.5 it is clearly visible that the expectation value of
the gluon propagator does not change within errors as @xmath increases,
independently from the lattice size and @xmath . Contrarily, the ghost
propagator at @xmath on a @xmath lattice saturates (on average) if
calculated on the best among @xmath gauge copies. At @xmath the number
of necessary gauge fixings attempts reduces to @xmath on a @xmath and
@xmath lattice. On the @xmath lattice a small impact of Gribov copies is
visible, namely @xmath is sufficient for convergence. The lower panels
of Fig. 4.5 and 4.5 show the average of the relative difference @xmath
of the corresponding (current best) functional value @xmath to the value
@xmath of the overall best copy after @xmath , respectively @xmath ,
attempts. This may serve as an indicator how large @xmath has to be, on
average, for the chosen algorithm to find a maximum of @xmath close to
the global one. In Table 4.1 the respective numbers @xmath for the
different simulations are given.

##### Gribov copies may cause systematic errors

Having specified the necessary amount of gauge copies we focus now on
the influence the Gribov ambiguity might have on the gluon and ghost
propagators. To investigate this a combined study of the gluon and ghost
propagators on the same sets of fc and bc representatives of our
thermalized gauge field configurations has been performed (see
Sternbeck:2005tk ). This has allowed us to assess the importance of the
Gribov copy problem for the ghost propagators in the low-momentum
region.

To be specific we have generated different sets of quenched gauge
configuration using the inverse coupling constants @xmath , 6.0 and 6.2
and the lattice sizes @xmath and @xmath . The corresponding entries in
Table 4.1 are S-1, S-2, S-4, S-5, S-8 and S-9. Following our fc - bc
strategy, each gauge configuration @xmath has been fixed to Landau gauge
a number of @xmath times using over-relaxation and starting always from
an random gauge copy of @xmath . Then for each @xmath the first ( fc )
and the best ( bc ) gauge copy (among @xmath copies) form the two
ensembles for measurements of the ghost and gluon propagator.

In Fig. 4.6 we illustrate the effect of the different Gribov copies by
plotting the ratios @xmath and @xmath of the ghost and gluon dressing
functions, respectively. @xmath and @xmath refer to values determined on
first ( fc ) gauge copies, whereas @xmath and @xmath to those on best (
bc ) copies. Obviously, in Fig. 4.6 there is no influence visible for
the gluon propagator within the statistical noise. On the contrary, for
the ghost propagator the Gribov problem can cause @xmath deviations in
the low-momentum region ( @xmath ). For better gauge copies the ghost
dressing function becomes less singular in the infrared. This can also
be seen in Fig. 4.8 and 4.8 where both fc and bc data for the ghost
propagator are shown.

A closer inspection of the data in Fig. 4.6 and 4.8 indicates that the
influence of Gribov copies on the ghost propagator becomes weaker for
increasing the lattice size. In fact, comparing in Fig. 4.6 ratios for
the ghost dressing function at @xmath , the rise at @xmath is obviously
larger than that at @xmath . In both cases the data are from simulations
on a @xmath lattice. Thus, it seems that by increasing the physical
volume (lower @xmath ) the effect of the Gribov ambiguity gets smaller
if the same physical momentum is considered. This we can also deduce
from Fig. 4.8 and 4.8 . There obviously the difference between @xmath
and @xmath at lower momentum reduces when @xmath decreases. We think
this observation is not biased by a too small number @xmath of inspected
gauge copies since, judging from Fig. 4.5 and 4.5 , @xmath as specified
in Table 4.1 seems to be on the safe side. However, in a future project
one should definitely check the ratios on a @xmath lattice at @xmath to
eliminate the last doubts.

We conclude: the ghost propagator systematically depends on the choice
of Gribov copies, while the impact on the gluon propagator is not
resolvable within our statistics. However, there are indications that
the dependence on Gribov copies decreases with increasing physical
volume. This is also in agreement with the data listed in the two
lattice studies Bakeev:2003rr ; Cucchieri:1997dx of the @xmath ghost
propagator @xmath , while it is not explicitly stated there. In fact, in
Ref. Bakeev:2003rr the ratio @xmath at @xmath on a @xmath lattice is
larger than that on a @xmath lattice at the same physical momentum. In
Bogolubsky:2005wf similar indications have been found for @xmath taking
non-periodic @xmath transformations into account.

Note also that this observation is in agreement with a recent claim by
Zwanziger according to which in the infinite volume limit averaging over
gauge configurations in the Gribov region should lead to the same result
as averaging over configurations in the fundamental modular region
Zwanziger:2003cf .

### 4.3 The infrared behavior of gluon and ghost propagator in the
quenched and unquenched case

After discussing different systematic effects on the gluon and ghost
propagators or on the corresponding dressing functions we concentrate
now on the infrared behavior. Thereby, however, we shall study a further
systematic effect, namely the change of data at lower momenta due to
unquenching the theory. As we shall see below, this change is negligible
for the ghost propagator, but conspicuously large for the gluon
propagator at not so small momenta.

#### 4.3.1 The gluon propagator

From the material presented above it is clear that the gluon propagator
in Landau gauge does not suffer from the Gribov ambiguity, at least in
the momentum range considered. Therefore, if we restrict ourselves in
the following to consider only gauge copies, the systematic effect
involved will stay most probably within statistical errors. This has the
advantage of allowing us to use data obtained on larger lattice sizes
even though they have been collected only from the ensemble of gauge
copies.

Just as a reminder, in our simulations the gluon propagator was
determined for all momenta at once. However, only a subset of data was
used for the final analysis. For details see Sec. 4.1.4 where our
selection of momenta is specified. The way how lattice momenta are
connected to physical ones is discussed in Sec. 4.1.5 . Beside this, it
is also clear that all data obtained in lattice simulations have to be
subject to a renormalization, discussed in Sec. 3.3.4 . In the following
the data presented for the gluon and ghost dressing functions, @xmath
and @xmath , are renormalized such that at the renormalization point
@xmath they are fixed to @xmath .

##### The quenched gluon propagator

In Fig. 4.10 the dressing function of the gluon propagator is collected
from data at different @xmath values as a function of the (physical)
momentum @xmath . Based on the experiences gained in previous sections
only data obtained on larger lattice sizes are presented there. Beside
of a cylinder cut applied to all data, a cone cut has been imposed to
data related only to the lattice sizes @xmath and @xmath . Since finite
volume errors on the larger lattices are small, it is not necessary to
impose this cut there.

Obviously, the data surviving all cuts lie along a smooth curve which
not only is nonperturbatively enhanced around @xmath as expected, but
also decreases in a sufficiently large range of low momenta. Therefore,
it appears natural trying to fit the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

to the data at lower momenta. As mentioned above, from studies of
truncated DSE for the gluon propagator an infrared exponent @xmath with
@xmath is expected to describe the infrared behavior Lerche:2002ep ;
Zwanziger:2001kw .

We have tried to fit this ansatz to the data by imposing a
upper-momentum cut @xmath that has been varied. The parameters @xmath
and @xmath extracted and the values of @xmath used are listed in Table
4.3 . As can be seen in this table shifting @xmath to larger momenta a
fit with ansatz ( 4.3 ) becomes worse. The parameters of our best fit to
the data have been given in bold letters and in Fig. 4.10 we have
plotted the corresponding fitting function @xmath . Although this fit
supports the conjecture of an infrared vanishing gluon propagator our
value of @xmath is lower than expected from the DSE studies. However,
there is a tendency for @xmath to rise as the interval of momenta,
contributing to the fit, is shrinking towards the infrared. Therefore,
we cannot exclude the expected infrared behavior to become realized at
much lower momenta.

##### The unquenched gluon propagator

Beside of our measurements in the quenched approximation we have also
determined the gluon propagator on gauge-fixed copies (gauge-fixed only
once) of dynamical gauge configurations specified in Table 4.2 . The
results of the corresponding dressing functions are shown in Fig. 4.10 .
With respect to finite volume effects reported above for the quenched
case we have plotted in this figure only data obtained on a @xmath
lattice, nevertheless for three different pairs of @xmath and @xmath
(see D-2, D-3 and D-4 in Table 4.2 ). Note, the data related to the
@xmath lattice (D-1) turn out to exhibit similar finite volume effects
as reported for quenched configurations.

In order to perform a comparison with our quenched data with the
greatest of ease some of the quenched data have been included in this
figure as well, namely the results at @xmath associated with a @xmath
and a @xmath lattice. The lattice spacing associated with this @xmath is
comparable to those of the dynamical configurations. As above the
dressing functions were renormalized at @xmath .

As can be seen from Fig. 4.10 , the unquenching effect becomes clearly
visible for the gluon dressing function, in particular around @xmath .
There the non-perturbative enhancement, characteristic to this function,
is drastically reduced compared to the quenched data ( @xmath ). It also
becomes softer as the quark mass is decreasing, even though this is a
small effect. This has been observed also in recent lattice computations
of the gluon propagator using configurations generated with dynamical
AsqTad-improved staggered quarks Bowman:2004jm as well as from
unquenching studies for the ghost and gluon propagators within the DSE
approach Fischer:2005wx ; Fischer:2005en ; Fischer:2003rp . We refer
also to recent lattice studies with dynamical Kogut-Susskind and Wilson
fermions Furui:2005bu ; Furui:2005he . The difference between quenched
and unquenched data in the ultraviolet asymptotic tail is consistent
with what is expected from perturbation theory (see Sec. 1.3.4 ).

Unfortunately, the amount of data collected for momenta in the range
@xmath does not allow for a fit to the ansatz given in Eq. ( 4.3 ).
Intuitively, one may guess, looking at the low–momentum tendency of the
unquenched data points in Fig. 4.10 , that in the infrared the
unquenched gluon dressing function might match that of the quenched
case.

#### 4.3.2 The ghost propagator

In the discussions of different systematic effect we have found that the
Gribov ambiguity has an influence on the ghost propagator. Nevertheless,
in Fig. 4.8 we have also seen that even though the effect is visible in
the data, the systematic error one would encounter by neglecting the
Gribov copy problem is not that large. Since at present our data
collected on gauge copies cover much lower momenta, we analyze in the
following only those. Incidentally, this also allows for a fair
comparison of our quenched and unquenched data.

##### The quenched ghost propagator

The ghost dressing function has been determined on the same gauge
configurations as that of the gluon propagator discussed above. However,
the list of momenta studied is much shorter than that of the gluon
propagator. Anyway, we have tried to cover as much as possible the whole
range of momenta with special focus on the infrared region. The
selection of momenta was guided by the cylinder cut and for smaller
lattices sizes sharpened by the cone cut.

Our results for the quenched ghost dressing function are shown in Fig.
4.12 . As for the gluon dressing function we used @xmath as
renormalization point such that @xmath . The data all lie along a smooth
curve. Thus we may conclude that both cylinder and cone cut work well
also for the ghost propagator. Note that in contrast to the gluon
dressing function here a cone cut has not been imposed on a @xmath
lattice.

As expected the ghost dressing function seems to diverge with decreasing
momenta and we have tried to fit the infrared behavior again by an
ansatz motivated through the mentioned studies of the ghost propagator
within the DSE approach. To be specific, we fitted the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

to the data at lower momenta. From the mentioned studies one usually
expects to get @xmath Lerche:2002ep ; Zwanziger:2001kw . Even more
importantly, one expects @xmath to hold. See below for a discussion
about that.

The ansatz ( 4.4 ) has been fitted to our data by imposing an upper
momentum cut @xmath . However, in contrast to the gluon dressing
function, here the parameter @xmath and @xmath turn out to be more
robust against shifting @xmath . This can be seen in Table 4.3 where the
parameters obtained are given. In Fig. 4.12 we show the corresponding
fitting function. Even though data at the lowest three momenta available
on a @xmath lattice are shown in Fig. 4.12 they do not contribute to the
fit. We also have used data only at @xmath , because including data at
@xmath in the fit makes it even worse.

Our fits to the data suggest that @xmath which is far away from values
larger than 0.5. Therefore, we cannot confirm the expected infrared
exponent @xmath on the basis of our data. Also the not so small values
found for @xmath indicate that the power ansatz ( 4.4 ) seems to be not
reasonable for the range of momenta considered. Note also that the
linear rise of the data in Fig. 4.12 (momentum log-axis) for decreasing
momenta suggest the ghost dressing function might diverge
logarithmically at least in the considered range of momenta. However, we
do not know arguments that would support this.

Together with our results for the gluon dressing function we can neither
confirm the expected values of the infrared exponents nor that there the
relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds with @xmath , at least from the data available to us. Our fits
yield @xmath . Furthermore, one should remark here that even though we
have fitted the Ansätze ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.3 ) to the corresponding
dressing functions, the fits are quite unstable. For the ghost dressing
function the fitting function does even not really describe the tendency
of data towards the infrared (see Fig. 4.12 ).

##### The unquenched ghost propagator

In Fig. 4.12 we present our full QCD result for the ghost dressing
functions. There we have not discard data at the lowest on-axis momentum
in order to illustrate the systematic effect encountered through the
asymmetric lattice geometry. For comparison, selected data of the
quenched case ( i.e. for infinite quark mass) are also shown, namely
those on @xmath and @xmath lattice at @xmath . As in the quenched case
the dressing function has been renormalized such that @xmath at @xmath .

In contrast to the gluon dressing function, in Fig. 4.12 the unquenching
effect is very small. In the ultraviolet the unquenched data are
slightly lower and at lower momenta they are slightly larger than the
quenched data, but altogether the effect stays within error bars and
thus can be neglected in the region of momenta considered here.
Negligible unquenching effect are in agreement with what is expected
from unquenching studies for the ghost and gluon propagators within the
DSE approach Fischer:2005wx ; Fischer:2003rp . We refer also to recent
lattice studies with dynamical Kogut-Susskind and Wilson fermions
Furui:2005bu ; Furui:2005he . Thus, even though we cannot confirm the
predicted infrared exponent (from the DSE studies), we affirm that the
influence of fermions on the infrared behavior of the ghost propagator
is negligible.

### 4.4 The running coupling and the ghost-gluon vertex

After extensively reporting on results obtained for the gluon and ghost
dressing functions, now we focus on the running coupling constant @xmath
. As explained in Sec. 2.2.2 , @xmath may be defined by a
renormalization-group-invariant combination of the gluon and ghost
dressing functions (Eq. ( 2.10 ))

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Remember that this definition relies on the assumption that the
ghost-gluon vertex in Landau gauge stays bare also beyond perturbation
theory. Below we give numerical evidence confirming @xmath in a scheme
where the gluon momentum equals zero. This we show for both the quenched
and unquenched case of @xmath . Similar results indicating this,
directly Cucchieri:2004sq and indirectly Bloch:2003sk , were presented
in studies of the quenched @xmath gauge theory, but also in
semiperturbative calculations within the DSE approach
Schleifenbaum:2004id .

#### 4.4.1 Results for the running coupling constant

Based on our data for the renormalized gluon and ghost dressing
functions, we have estimated the product in Eq. ( 4.5 ) using the
bootstrap method with drawing 500 random samples. Since the
ghost-gluon-vertex renormalization constant @xmath has been set to one,
there is an overall normalization factor which has been fixed by fitting
the data for @xmath to the well-known perturbative results of the
running coupling @xmath at 2-loop order (see also Bloch:2003sk ).
Defining @xmath , the 2-loop running coupling is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath -function coefficients @xmath and @xmath have been defined in
Eq. ( 1.45a ) and ( 1.45b ). They are independent of the renormalization
prescription. The value of @xmath has been fixed by the same fit. The
lower bound @xmath has been chosen such that an optimal value for @xmath
has been achieved.

The results are shown in Fig. 4.14 . There also the 1-loop contribution
is shown where we used the lower bound @xmath . The best fit of the
2-loop expression to the data gives @xmath ( @xmath ), while @xmath is
obtained ( @xmath ) using just the 1-loop part. For the 2-loop
expression we used @xmath . The value for @xmath is similar within
errors to the @xmath result given in Ref. Bloch:2003sk . Note that we
have imposed again a cone cut to data obtained on a @xmath and @xmath
lattice.

Approaching the infrared limit in Fig. 4.14 one clearly sees @xmath
increasing for @xmath GeV @xmath . However, after passing a maximum at
@xmath GeV @xmath @xmath decreases again. The same behavior is found on
our sets of dynamical gauge configurations. These results are presented
in Fig. 4.14 where quenched data ( @xmath : @xmath and @xmath ) are also
shown for comparison. In fact, looking at Fig. 4.14 we clearly see that
the same turnover, as found in the quenched case, can be assumed for the
unquenched case, even though the data at the lowest (on-axis) momenta
have to be taken with special care. (See our discussion concerning
systematic effects due to asymmetric lattices.) Therefore, the data
points at @xmath have to be checked carefully on larger symmetric
lattices, in order to eliminate the last doubts.

We observe a quite clear unquenching effect for @xmath extending from
the perturbative range down to the infrared region. We think that this
is caused in the majority due to unquenching effects as found for the
gluon propagator in Sec. 4.3.1 .

Note that a similar infrared behavior of @xmath as presented here has
been observed in other lattice studies Furui:2003jr ; Furui:2004cx . But
opposed to Ref. Furui:2004cx we argue that the existence of a turnover
is independent on the choice of Gribov copies. In fact, qualitatively we
have found the same behavior if @xmath is calculated on bc gauge copies.
To illustrate this, in Fig. 4.15 we show the corresponding data
extracted in bc copies. There we have not impose the cone cut on data
associated with the @xmath lattice. Obviously, @xmath decreases also in
this case and a decreasing running coupling constant is not due to
restricting to fc gauge copies.

The values for @xmath and @xmath are the same within error bars as
obtained on gauge copies.

We should remark here that our observation of an infrared decreasing
running coupling is in agreement with recent studies of DSE results
obtained on a torus Fischer:2002eq ; Fischer:2002hn ; Fischer:2005ui ;
Fischer:2005nf . In those studies @xmath was shown to tend to zero for
@xmath in one-to-one correspondence with what one finds on the lattice.
This would indicate very strong finite-size effects and a slow
convergence to the infinite-volume limit. However, on the lattice we do
not find any indication for such a strong finite-size effect, except the
convergence to the infinite-volume limit would be extremely slow. An
alternative resolution of this problem has been proposed by Boucaud
et al. Boucaud:2005ce . These authors have argued ⁴ ⁴ 4 We thank
A. Lokhov for bringing us the arguments in Boucaud:2005ce to our
attention. that the ghost-gluon vertex in the infrared might contain
@xmath -dependent contributions which could modify the DSE results for
the mentioned propagators. Note, however, that recent DSE studies of the
ghost-gluon vertex did not provide hints for such a modification
Schleifenbaum:2004id ; Alkofer:2004it . Thus, at present there seems to
be no solution of the puzzle.

For completeness we mention that running coupling constants decreasing
in the infrared have also been found in lattice studies of the 3-gluon
vertex Boucaud:1998bq ; Boucaud:2002fx and the quark-gluon vertex
Skullerud:2002ge .

#### 4.4.2 The vertex renormalization constant

For discussing the infrared behavior of the running coupling it is
interesting to have an independent check of whether the renormalization
constant @xmath really stays constant for all renormalization points.
Remember, this is always assumed if renormalization-group invariance is
demonstrated for the product of gluon and ghost dressing functions in
Eq. ( 4.5 ) and hence is important for this particular definition of a
nonperturbative running coupling constant.

In principle the finiteness of @xmath has to be checked in each
renormalization scheme separately. A first attempt to calculate @xmath
on the lattice was made in Cucchieri:2004sq for quenched @xmath gauge
theory using the particular renormalization scheme of zero gluon
momentum (see also Bloch:2003sk for an indirect determination). To
confirm these findings also for the gauge group @xmath in the quenched
and unquenched case, we have used the same renormalization scheme as in
Cucchieri:2004sq for a calculation of @xmath . The necessary observable
to be estimated on the lattice has been derived in Sec. 3.3.5 (see Eq. (
3.44 )). Since this is a combination of MC averages for the ghost and
gluon propagators and for the 3-point function @xmath of gluon, ghost
and anti-ghost fields (see Eq. ( 3.43 ) and ( 3.45 )) we used again the
Bootstrap method to estimate errors.

Our data for the inverse of @xmath from quenched simulations are shown
in Fig. 4.17 . To simplify matters, we have restricted ourselves to
present only data obtained on the largest lattice available at @xmath
and 6.0. For data on smaller lattices we refer to our recent conference
proceeding Sternbeck:2005re . The data there agree within errors with
those presented here.

In Fig. 4.17 we clearly see that @xmath stays constant in the region of
momenta considered. This holds for the data at both @xmath and @xmath .
Only a slight variation is visible in the interval @xmath , but this
remains within error bars. The same can be concluded from our data
obtained on unquenched configurations using a @xmath lattice. These are
shown in Fig. 4.17 for three different settings of @xmath and @xmath
(see the data set entries D-2 , D-3 , D-4 in Table 4.2 ). For all three
cases, the renormalization constant @xmath does not differ beyond error
bars from being constant, but there is a certain trend of deviation from
unity which systematically depends on the parameter setting @xmath .

For each tuple there is also one data point at the lowest (on-axis)
momentum available on a @xmath lattice ( i.e. @xmath ) which is much
lower than unity. This particular deviation we also find at the lowest
on-axis momentum in our data obtained on quenched configurations at
@xmath when using a @xmath and @xmath lattice (not shown). Since the
data taken in simulations on a @xmath lattice at the same @xmath do not
show such a deviation, see Fig. 4.17 , this effect is most probably
caused by the asymmetric lattice geometry as it was reported also for
the propagators in Sec. 4.2.1 . Data at this momentum on an asymmetric
lattice would have to be ignored. To eliminate the last doubts we have
also inspected our data for @xmath obtained at the lowest on-axis
momenta on a @xmath lattice at @xmath . We find for these data that this
particular deviation is even more dramatic. Hence, asymmetric lattices
are not appropriate for studying the ghost-gluon-vertex renormalization
constant at very low momentum.

In summary, our results for the quenched and unquenched case of @xmath
are in full agreement with those presented in Cucchieri:2004sq for the
case of @xmath . Even though there is a weak deviation of @xmath from
being constant this will not have a dramatic influence on the running
coupling. Together with our data for the running coupling we can thus
confirm that in the special scheme considered here (gluon momentum
equals zero) the product in Eq. ( 4.5 ) is indeed renormalization-group
invariant and thus defines a nonperturbative running coupling which
monotonously decreases with decreasing momentum in the range @xmath .

It is worthwhile to continue the lattice calculations of @xmath using
other renormalization schemes, for example the scheme with a symmetric
subtraction point. This has been undertaken in a recent study
Schleifenbaum:2004id where a semiperturbative calculation of @xmath
within the DSE approach has been presented. There are also data shown
for the same renormalization scheme as used by us which qualitatively
agree with our results and those in Cucchieri:2004sq .

## Chapter 5 Confinement criteria under the lattice microscope {window}

[0,l, H ,] ere we discuss data for the @xmath Landau gauge gluon and
ghost propagators in the light of the Gribov-Zwanziger horizon condition
and the Kugo-Ojima confinement scenario. For the latter we also present
recent data for the function @xmath whose zero-momentum limit @xmath ,
the Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter, is expected to be minus one. Note
that our lattice estimate of the function @xmath is (to our knowledge)
the first presented in the literature. The data have been renormalized
using a minimization process, developed here for the first time. We show
that, under the assumption the ghost dressing function being divergent
in the infrared, the function @xmath will reach minus one at zero
momentum. Finally, we discuss numerical evidence for the gluon
propagator violating reflection positivity explicitly.

### 5.1 Is the Gribov-Zwanziger horizon condition satisfied?

The Gribov–Zwanziger horizon condition has been introduced in Sec. 2.3.2
. It states that on the one hand the ghost propagator in Landau gauge
diverges in the limit of vanishing momenta more rapidly than @xmath ,
whereas on the other hand the gluon propagator vanishes in the same
limit.

It should be clear from the discussion in the previous chapter that our
data support the picture of a diverging ghost propagator, even though we
cannot confirm an infrared exponent @xmath , a value expected from
studies of the ghost DS equation. Therefore, the Gribov–Zwanziger
horizon condition appears to be satisfied with respect to our data of
the ghost propagator in Landau gauge.

Concerning the gluon propagator, however, we cannot give a conclusive
statement of whether it vanishes or stays finite in the infrared. We
have tried to fit the ansatz given in Eq. ( 4.3 ) to our data for the
gluon dressing function. As mentioned in Sec. 4.3.1 this ansatz is
reasonable only if applied to data at the lowest momenta available to
us. We also could not confirm the corresponding value of the infrared
exponent as expected from studies of the gluon DS equation. In any case,
with respects to the range of momenta available to us we cannot state
without doubt whether a power law as that given in Eq. ( 4.3 ) really
describes the behavior of the gluon dressing function at much lower
momenta. Therefore, we cannot judge on the existence of an infrared
finite or vanishing gluon propagator, even though our fit with ansatz
Eq. ( 4.3 ) supports the latter option.

There have been attempts in the recent literature Bonnet:2001uh ;
Boucaud:2006pc to argue for a finite gluon propagator in the infrared
based on lattice data for the gluon propagator at zero four-momentum,
i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath refers to the lattice gluon field as defined in Eq. ( 3.17 )
and @xmath represent the volume in lattice units. For notations we refer
to Chapt. 3 . In order to estimate the corresponding value @xmath in the
infinite volume limit, in the Refs. Bonnet:2001uh ; Boucaud:2006pc the
ansatz Bonnet:2001uh

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

has been applied to the data of @xmath for different volumes ¹ ¹ 1 Note
that we distinguish between @xmath and @xmath . See below for a
discussion. . To set the scale for @xmath , the gluon propagator @xmath
has been renormalized in scheme choosing as renormalization point @xmath
. In doing so, both studies Bonnet:2001uh ; Boucaud:2006pc independently
confirm a manifest finite value, namely

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

An extrapolation of our data yields the estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that approximately agrees with those of these studies. See also Fig. 5.1
. Note that for @xmath we obtain @xmath which agrees within errors with
that in Boucaud:2006pc , but not with Bonnet:2001uh . In Bonnet:2001uh
the tree-level, mean-field improved gauge action of Lüscher and Weisz
Weisz:1982zw ; Weisz:1983bn ; Luscher:1984xn has been employed, while in
Boucaud:2006pc and in this thesis the standard Wilson gauge action has
been used. This might be the reason for the deviation in @xmath .

It is important to note that estimates of @xmath have to be taken with
caution, because these actually do not represent the true infinite
volume limit @xmath . It is also not clear whether a linear ansatz is
correct Bonnet:2001uh . In this context, it is worthwhile to recall a
comment already made in Bonnet:2001uh concerning the infinite volume
limit. This cannot be taken such simple as outlined above. In fact, the
infinite volume limit is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

That is, the continuum limit (at fixed physical volume) has to be taken
before the infinite volume limit. This was not done for the given
estimates of @xmath and thus a complete systematic extrapolation to the
infinite volume limit remains to be carried out yet Bonnet:2001uh . For
this one would first need to calculate @xmath using different lattice
spacings @xmath , while keeping the physical volume fixed. The results
would then have to be extrapolated to the continuum limit. Repeating
this for a variety of lattice volumes the different continuum limits
obtained one could try to extrapolate to the infinite volume limit
@xmath . This, of course, is the essence of the limit in Eq. ( 5.2 ).

Therefore, we think a conclusive statement of whether in Landau gauge
the gluon propagator at zero momentum is finite or not cannot be made
neither from our data at zero and non-zero momentum nor from the data
available in the literature at present.

### 5.2 The Kugo-Ojima confinement parameter

In section Sec. 2.3.1 we have introduced the Kugo-Ojima confinement
scenario. According to this scenario, colored asymptotic states, if any,
are confined from the physical state space of QCD in covariant gauges by
the quartet mechanism, if for the function @xmath , with @xmath defined
in Eq. ( 2.17 ), the zero-momentum limit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is realized. As pointed out by Kugo Kugo:1995km , in Landau gauge this
limit is connected to an infrared diverging ghost dressing function
@xmath . This can be easily seen from Eq. ( 2.18 ) which yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have made an attempt to confirm the realization of the limit in Eq. (
5.3 ) — here for lattice QCD in Landau gauge — not only by giving
numerical evidence for a diverging ghost dressing function (see Sec.
4.3.2 ), but also by estimating the function @xmath for different
momenta @xmath from our lattice simulations.

#### 5.2.1 Expected infrared behavior

Before discussing numerical results it is interesting to figure out
first what can be expected for the momentum dependence of @xmath in the
infrared. In fact, due to Eq. ( 2.18 ) we know that in the limit of
vanishing momenta the function @xmath approaches the asymptote

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we assume that, for example, the power law @xmath describes the ghost
dressing function at very low momenta, then the asymptote @xmath , and
so the function @xmath , should expose an infrared behavior as
illustrated in Fig. 5.2 for different infrared exponents @xmath . Even
if such a power law will turn out not to be appropriate for @xmath — the
results presented in Sec. 4.3.2 at least give rise to some doubt — it is
commonly believed (and in agreement with our results) that the ghost
dressing function diverges in the infrared; and this of course
independent of the renormalization point @xmath chosen. Therefore, based
on Eq. ( 2.18 ) the function @xmath is expected to reach minus one and
to join @xmath at vanishing momentum, irrespective of the chosen @xmath
.

To confirm this point with numerical data, in Fig. 5.3 we show @xmath as
obtained from our data for the ghost dressing functions renormalized at
different momenta @xmath . In this figure we clearly see that the
different curves referring to different @xmath approach each other
slowly with decreasing momentum. With respect to Fig. 5.2 we expect that
all these curves run slowly towards minus one in the zero momentum limit
by definition (see Eq. ( 5.4 )) if the ghost dressing function diverges
in the infrared no matter how.

#### 5.2.2 Explicit lattice data for the function @xmath

Apart from the asymptotes @xmath relying solely on data for the ghost
dressing functions we have also calculated on the lattice the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

explicitly in terms of MC averages for @xmath at different @xmath (see
Eq. ( 3.38 )). These estimates were obtained on @xmath lattice from our
(quenched) gauge-fixed configurations thermalized at @xmath and 6.0 (see
runs labeled as S-3 and S-6 in Table 4.1 ).

##### Renormalization

As for other observables the lattice data of @xmath have to be
renormalized yet, i.e. assuming multiplicative renormalizability we have
to define a factor @xmath that relates the bare estimate @xmath to a
renormalized one

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For this we have made use again of Eq. ( 2.18 ). It relates the
renormalized ghost dressing function @xmath to the renormalized function
@xmath at finite @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As in Sec. 4.3.2 , we have renormalized the ghost dressing function at
the renormalization point @xmath and so with Eq. ( 5.5 ) we can
renormalize @xmath at the same point. However, the function @xmath (see
Kugo:1995km ) is not available to us, causing some difficulties for the
determination of @xmath .

Nevertheless, we know that for small momenta @xmath the term @xmath
becomes less dominant in Eq. ( 5.5 ). With the ansatz of a Taylor
expansion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have made a @xmath fit using ² ² 2 For minimization we used the new C
++ implementation of the library MINUIT MINUIT

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and our lattice data for @xmath and for @xmath renormalized at @xmath .
By applying the momentum cut @xmath we have gained in this way @xmath
and the other parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The parameters are
given in Table 5.1 together with a value for @xmath .

Of course, the number of terms in the Taylor expansion depends on the
region of momenta considered. We have found that the given order is
necessary, but also sufficient in our case. Note that due to the number
of parameters and the amount of data available for @xmath in the
minimization process we have not distinguished between data at @xmath
and 6.0. In general, the factor @xmath differs for the two @xmath
values, but due to multiplicative renormalization there is an additional
factor that relates both. From data inspection we found that we can
approximate this to be one in our case.

##### Discussion of numerical results

In Fig. 5.4 we show data for the renormalized function @xmath at @xmath
and 6.0 as a function of momentum @xmath . Since the ghost dressing
function was renormalized at @xmath so was the function @xmath mediated
by the minimization process mentioned above. In this figure we also show
data for the asymptote @xmath renormalized at the same @xmath . Note
that only @xmath has been of relevance for providing this figure.

We clearly see that @xmath and @xmath approach each other with
decreasing momenta. Therefore, as the ghost dressing function is
expected to diverge in the infrared, we expect @xmath to approach minus
one as does the asymptote @xmath by definition. In Fig. 5.4 the growth
of @xmath becomes slower as the momentum decreases, but this behavior we
anticipate from our discussion above (see Fig. 5.2 ) concerning the
infrared behavior expected for @xmath .

Although we cannot give a reasonable extrapolation of @xmath towards the
zero momentum limit, our results for both @xmath and @xmath confirm that
in the infrared the realization of the limit given in Eq. ( 5.3 ) can be
studied solely in terms of the ghost propagator. As this propagator we
have found to diverge stronger than @xmath , the function @xmath will
reach minus one at zero momentum. This is because in the infrared the
difference @xmath seems to vanish as we have confirmed in this study for
the first time (see Fig. 5.4 ).

Here a remark is in order. The studies of Furui and Nakajima
Nakajima:1999dq ; Nakajima:2000mp ; Furui:2003jr ; Furui:2004cx ) yield
as a limit for @xmath values ranging between @xmath and @xmath . We
cannot confirm these results in our study, because with respect to our
data such limits would correspond to linear or quadratic extrapolations
towards the zero momentum limit in a figure using a linear momentum
scale. However, linear or quadratic extrapolations would not be valid in
this context.

### 5.3 The gluon propagator explicitly violates reflection positivity

In this section we will show that our data for the gluon propagator
presented in Sec. 4.3 show evidence for a violation of reflection
positivity. To substantiate this, a subset of data obtained on our
larger lattices has been selected for both the quenched and the
unquenched case and then the temporal correlator @xmath of the gluon
propagator has been calculated. The continuum expression of this
correlator is defined in Eq. ( 2.23 ); and the lattice equivalent is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the number of lattice points in @xmath (time)
direction and @xmath refers to the gluon propagator in momentum space.

Starting with the quenched gluon propagator at @xmath , the results of
the correlator are shown in Fig. 5.6 for the lattice sizes @xmath and
@xmath . It is obvious from this figure that the gluon propagator
violates reflection positivity in a finite range of @xmath . The same
holds for the gluon propagator in the unquenched case as can be seen in
Fig. 5.6 . There we made use of our measurements of the gluon propagator
on a @xmath lattice at different values of @xmath and @xmath . These
values are given in Table 4.2 and the labels D-2, D-3 and D-4 refer to
these.

Following Refs. Alkofer:2000wg ; Aiso:1997au ; Cucchieri:2004mf , the
statement of reflection-positivity violation can be made even more clear
by considering the quantity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a discretized expression of the continuum quantity @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we adopted the notation Aiso:1997au ; Cucchieri:2004mf

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the spectral density @xmath is positive definite, so is @xmath . But
if instead @xmath is found to be negative then there cannot be a
positive definite spectral density, which entails violation of
reflection positivity. This can easily be seen in Fig. 5.8 where values
of @xmath are shown for the data considered above. There @xmath is
clearly negative for all @xmath and therefore reflection positivity must
be violated.

Beside of @xmath , one usually also discusses in this context the rise
of an effective gluon mass . On the lattice this can be defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath again refers to the real space propagator of the gluon
fields (Eq. ( 5.7 )). Already in the first numerical study of the gluon
propagator Mandula:1987rh this effective mass was observed to rise with
increasing distance @xmath (see also Bernard:1992hy ; Marenzoni:1993td
). In fact, the definition of @xmath in Eq. ( 5.9 ) yields that
Cucchieri:2004mf

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If reflection positivity were satisfied, then @xmath would be positive
semi-definite and therefore @xmath . However, for the gluon propagator
in Landau gauge the opposite was found. This has suggested from the
beginning Mandula:1987rh that the @xmath lattice gluon propagator
violates reflection positivity. With our data in Fig. 5.6 and 5.6 we
show this explicitly for the quenched and unquenched @xmath gauge
theory.

For the sake of completeness we have calculated the effective gluon mass
also for our data. The results are plotted in Fig. 5.8 where @xmath is
shown as a function of @xmath for the quenched and unquenched case,
respectively. The effective gluon mass is clearly rising within error
bars for moderate values of @xmath .

Summarizing, our study has found a clear signal for the violation of
reflection positivity for both the quenched and the unquenched gluon
propagator. If we consider this statement in conjunction with the
results presented in the former section which support the Kugo-Ojima
confinement criterion to be satisfied for lattice QCD in Landau gauge,
then this supports the assumption that the transverse gluon states are
confined by the quartet mechanism.

## Chapter 6 Spectral properties of the Faddeev-Popov operator {window}

[0,l, S ,] pectral properties of the Landau gauge FP operator are
important for understanding many aspects of QCD in Landau gauge. In this
chapter we report on a study of some of these properties, restricting
ourselves to the quenched approximations of lattice QCD. We shall start
with a discussion of the low-lying eigenvalue distribution where the
impact of the Gribov ambiguity is shown in particular. Concerning the
infrared behavior of the ghost propagator discussed above here we will
analyze the contribution of the different eigenvalues and eigenmodes of
the FP operator to the ghost propagator at low momentum. Localization
properties of the eigenmodes analyzed in addition.

### 6.1 Specification of lattice samples

Our investigation of the infrared behavior of ghost and gluon
propagators (see Sec. 4.3 ) has revealed that unquenching effects are
negligible within errors for the ghost propagator. We expect the same to
hold for the FP operator itself. Therefore, we have analyzed its
spectral properties solely in the quenched approximation of QCD.

For this analysis we have used a subset of our pure @xmath gauge
configurations thermalized with the standard Wilson action at @xmath and
@xmath using the lattice sizes @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . To study the
influence of the Gribov ambiguity we followed again our fc - bc strategy
introduced in Sec. 4.1.3 and have generated two ensembles of first ( fc
) and best ( bc ) gauge-fixed configurations. On those ensembles the
low-lying eigenvalues @xmath of the FP operator and the corresponding
eigenmodes have been separately extracted. For this we used the
parallelized version of the ARPACK package arpack , PARPACK .

To be specific, the 200 lowest (non-trivial) eigenvalues and their
corresponding eigenfunctions have been calculated at @xmath using the
lattice sizes @xmath and @xmath (see Table 6.1 ). Due to restricted
amount of computing time only 50 eigenvalues and eigenmodes have been
extracted on the @xmath lattice at the same @xmath . In addition, 90
eigenvalues have been calculated on a @xmath lattice at @xmath providing
us with an even larger physical volume. This allows us to check whether
low-lying eigenvalues are shifted towards @xmath as the physical volume
is increased. The eight (trivial) zero eigenvalues with the
corresponding constant zero modes have always been discarded.

### 6.2 The low-lying eigenvalue spectrum

We start the discussion with the two lowest (nontrivial) eigenvalues of
the FP operator and then give an estimate for the density of low-lying
eigenvalues.

#### 6.2.1 The lowest and second lowest eigenvalues

The distributions of the two lowest-lying eigenvalues, @xmath and @xmath
, of the FP operator are shown for different volumes in Fig. 6.1 . There
@xmath represents the average number (per configuration) of eigenvalues
found in the interval @xmath . To disentangle the distributions for the
two different sets of gauge copies, open (full) bars refer to the
distribution on fc ( bc ) gauge copies.

It is obvious from this figure that both eigenvalues, @xmath and @xmath
, are shifted to lower values as the physical volume is increased. In
conjunction the spread of @xmath values is shrinking. This would be even
more obvious, if we had shown both distributions as functions of @xmath
in physical units.

It is also visible that the two low-lying eigenvalues @xmath ( @xmath )
on fc gauge copies tend to be lower than those on bc copies. However,
this holds only on average as can be seen from Fig. 6.2 . There the
differences @xmath of the lowest eigenvalues on fc and bc gauge copies
are shown for different lattice sizes at @xmath and @xmath . It is
evident that there are only few cases where @xmath , even though @xmath
always holds for the gauge functional.

In addition we have checked how the average values @xmath of the
respective eigenvalue distributions tends towards zero as the linear
extension @xmath of the physical volume is growing. For this the lattice
spacing @xmath has been specified in physical units. As in Chapt. 4 we
followed Ref. Necco:2001xg to fix @xmath . For @xmath and 6.2 we used
@xmath =1.446 GeV and 2.914 GeV, respectively, using the Sommer scale
@xmath fm.

If the low-lying eigenvalues are supplemented with physical units it
turns out that the average values of their distributions tend towards
zero stronger than by volume scaling proportional to @xmath . In fact,
using the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

to fit the data of @xmath for different @xmath , always a positive
@xmath is found. The parameter of these fits are given in Table 6.2 and
in Fig. 6.4 we show the data and the corresponding fitting functions.
There one clearly sees, the low-lying eigenvalues not only approach
zero, but also become closer to each other with increasing @xmath . The
latter issue has been addressed by fitting the differences @xmath of
adjacent average values using the same ansatz Eq. ( 6.1 ). In Table 6.2
we give the parameter of such fits.

#### 6.2.2 An estimate for the density of low-lying eigenvalues

The eigenvalue density @xmath is of particular interest. At small @xmath
this quantity has been estimated here by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the average number @xmath of eigenvalues per gauge-fixed
configuration within the interval @xmath divided by the bin size @xmath
. For normalization the denominator @xmath has been chosen, since the FP
matrix is a @xmath sparse symmetric matrix with @xmath linearly
independent eigenstates. The trivial zero modes would be described by a
term @xmath in @xmath (not shown).

The estimates for the density @xmath are shown in Fig. 6.4 for the
different volumes used. The bin sizes have been reasonably adjusted for
each volume separately. In Fig. 6.4 one clearly sees the eigenvalue
density close to @xmath becomes steeper as a function of @xmath as the
physical volume becomes larger. It is remarkable that the increase going
from @xmath to @xmath on a @xmath lattice is larger than going from
@xmath to @xmath at @xmath fixed, although in both cases the physical
volume is increased by a factor of about 16.

### 6.3 Eigenmode expansion of the ghost propagator

Along with the calculation of the low-lying eigenvalues, the
corresponding eigenvectors @xmath have been determined as well. These
are of particular importance for the infrared behavior of the ghost
propagator as it becomes clear from Eq. ( 3.37 ). In fact, if all
eigenvalues @xmath of the FP operator and the corresponding eigenvectors
@xmath in momentum space were available the ghost propagator could be
constructed out of them according to Eq. ( 3.37 ) and ( 3.36 ).
Unfortunately, their determination for each configuration is numerically
too demanding.

However, restricting the sum in Eq. ( 3.37 ) to the @xmath lowest
eigenvalues and eigenvectors ( @xmath ), we can figure out to what
extent these modes, i.e. the corresponding estimator Eq. ( 3.36 ) and (
3.37 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

saturates the full ghost propagator @xmath . The latter is obtained, of
course, independently for a set of momenta by inverting the FP matrix on
a set of plane waves. See Sec. 4.3.2 for the corresponding data of
@xmath .

The degree of saturation is shown in Fig. 6.5 for the lowest @xmath and
the second lowest momentum @xmath available on different lattice sizes
for @xmath . There the values of @xmath have been presented relative to
the values for the full propagator @xmath in order to assess the
saturation for different volumes. Since @xmath has been obtained by a
fast Fourier transformation of the eigenvector @xmath , all lattice
momenta @xmath are available. Thus @xmath refers to the average over all
@xmath giving raise to the same momentum @xmath . The full propagator
values @xmath at @xmath and @xmath , however, refer to the averages over
lattice momenta @xmath and to @xmath , respectively.

Let us consider first the lowest momentum @xmath . We observe from Fig.
6.5 that the approach to convergence differs, albeit slightly, for the
three different lattice sizes. The relative deficit for @xmath rises
with the lattice volume. For @xmath the rate on a @xmath lattice is even
a bit larger than that on a @xmath lattice. We could not afford to get
data for @xmath on the @xmath lattice. However, for the @xmath and
@xmath lattices the rates of convergence are about the same. For
example, taking only 20 eigenmodes one is definitely far from saturation
(by about 50%) whereas 150 to 200 eigenmodes are sufficient to reproduce
the ghost propagator within a few percent. In other words, the ghost
propagator at lowest momentum on a @xmath ( @xmath ) lattice is formed
by the lowest 0.12% (0.03%) of the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
FP operator.

For the second lowest momentum @xmath the contribution of even 200
eigenmodes is far from being sufficient to approximate the propagator.

### 6.4 The problem of exceptional configurations

We turn now to a peculiarity of the ghost propagator at larger @xmath of
which has been reported already in Sternbeck:2005tk ; Sternbeck:2005vs .
It was also seen in an earlier @xmath study Bakeev:2003rr . While
inspecting our data we found, though rarely, that there are
exceptionally large values in the Monte Carlo (MC) time histories of the
ghost propagator at lowest momentum.

In Fig. 6.6 such time histories are shown of the ghost propagator on fc
and bc gauge copies for the two smallest momentum realizations @xmath
and @xmath . From left to right the panels are ordered in ascending
order with the (physical) lattice sizes @xmath , @xmath and @xmath at
@xmath and @xmath at @xmath .

As can be seen from this figure in the majority extreme spikes are
reduced (or even not seen) when the ghost propagator could be afforded
to be measured on a better gauge copy ( bc ) for a particular
configuration. Furthermore, it is obvious that the exceptionality of a
given gauge copy is exhibited not simultaneously for all different
realizations of the lowest momentum. Consequently, to reduce the impact
of such large values on the evaluation of a statistical average for the
ghost propagator one should average, if possible, over all momentum
realizations giving rise to the same momentum @xmath .

We have tried to find a correlation of such outliers in the history of
the ghost propagator with other quantities measured in our simulations.
For example we have checked whether there is a correlation between the
values of the ghost propagator @xmath as they appear in Fig. 6.6 and the
lowest eigenvalue @xmath of the FP operator.

In Fig. 6.8 we show such correlation in a scatter plot for different
lattice sizes at @xmath and @xmath . There each entry corresponds to a
pair @xmath measured on a given gauge copy of our sets of fc and bc
copies. It is visible in this figure, gauge copies giving rise to an
extremely large MC value for the ghost propagator are those with very
low values for @xmath . This holds for the @xmath and @xmath lattice.
However, a very low eigenvalue is not sufficient to obtain large MC
values for @xmath as can be seen in the same figure. It is possible, of
course, that such gauge copies with extremely small eigenvalues would
turn out to be exceptional for another realization of lowest momentum
@xmath than those two we have used. This might explain why some
configurations with extremely small lowest eigenvalues were not found to
be exceptional with respect to the ghost propagator at @xmath and @xmath
.

In the light of Eq. ( 3.37 ) it is not adequate to concentrate just on
the lowest eigenvalues. Instead, one can monitor the contribution of a
certain number of eigenvalues @xmath and eigenmodes @xmath to the ghost
propagator at some momentum in question. Therefore, we have compared the
truncated sums @xmath according to Eq. ( 3.37 ) with the MC history
values of the full ghost propagator @xmath . In fact, we show in the
scatter plots in Fig. 6.8 the ratios @xmath versus @xmath for @xmath and
for various lattice sizes.

Obviously there is a strong correlation between the chosen group of
low-lying modes and the MC time history values of the full ghost
propagator. Indeed, if we consider values @xmath to be exceptional in
the left-most panel ( @xmath lattice) we find that the contribution of
the 10 lowest modes amounts to more than 75% of the actual value of the
ghost propagator. On the opposite, for low @xmath values the main
contributions come necessarily from the higher eigenmodes, while the 10
lowest modes contribute a minor part only. A similar but less dominant
contribution of the 10 lowest modes is found for the time histories
produced on larger lattices ( @xmath , @xmath ).

### 6.5 Localization properties of low-lying eigenvectors

In recent years a good deal of attention has been directed to the
localization properties of various operators (Dirac operator, covariant
Laplacian) in the hope to understand more about confinement beyond heavy
quark probes. The first quantity of interest is the inverse
participation ratio ( IPR ). Given an eigenvector @xmath the IPR is
defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Although a direct physical meaning for this quantity is lacking yet, it
is a measure for the localization of an eigenvector. It enables us to
distinguish between eigenmodes with approximately uniformly distributed
modulus squared @xmath ( @xmath ) and more specific ones with a small
number of sites @xmath having large intensity @xmath ( @xmath ) where
they might be pinned down by special local gauge field excitations.
Note, the eight (trivial) zero modes ( @xmath ) of the FP operator are
constant and have @xmath .

In Fig. 6.9 the relative distribution @xmath of IPR values per
gauge-fixed configuration are shown, separately for certain groups of
eigenstates. Again open (full) histogram bars refer to the distribution
on fc ( bc ) gauge copies. From this figure we learn that the majority
of eigenvectors of the Faddeev-Popov operator is not localized
independent of the choice of gauge copies. In any case, the rare cases
of large values have been found among the 10 lowest non-zero eigenmodes.
This becomes more likely as the physical volume is increased. So far we
have no physical interpretation what causes the stronger localization in
these rare cases.

[]

## Conclusions and outlook {window}

[0,l, I ,] n this study we have focused on the infrared properties of
@xmath gluodynamics in Landau gauge using the framework of lattice QCD.
We have tried to cover as much as possible the different aspects
relevant within this context and to verify several assumptions made in
recent years. In doing so, we hope to have provided a consistent
analysis of several issues that have an effect on the infrared behavior
of gluon and ghost propagators, and that, in turn, the behavior we have
found satisfies necessary criteria for confinement which apply to QCD in
Landau gauge.

#### The method

For this study we used the Wilson formulation of lattice QCD with and
without dynamical clover-improved Wilson fermions. The gauge group was
fixed to @xmath . The quenched gauge configurations were generated at
the three values @xmath , 6.0 and 6.2 using a variety of different
symmetric and asymmetric lattice geometries. In the symmetric case we
used the lattice sizes @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
whereas the asymmetric lattices were chosen to be of size @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . To study unquenching effects we have
analyzed gauge configurations provided to us by the collaboration. These
configurations were thermalized on a @xmath lattice in the presence of
two flavors of clover-improved Wilson fermions using three different
pairs of @xmath and @xmath . The corresponding lattice spacings are
comparable to that at @xmath in the quenched case.

Both the quenched and unquenched configurations were transformed such
that they satisfy the lattice Landau gauge condition. For gauge-fixing
we used either over–relaxation or Fourier–accelerated gauge-fixing. A
subset of our quenched configurations was gauge-fixed even more than
once, always starting from a different random gauge copy of the initial
(unfixed) configuration. This has allowed us to examine how the Gribov
ambiguity affects the gluon and ghost propagators and the eigenvalue
spectrum of the FP operator.

#### The results

In the following we give a summary of our results presented in previous
chapters. Then we draw our conclusions and give recommendations for
future studies.

##### The influence of the Gribov ambiguity

We have demonstrated that the presence of Gribov copies systematically
affects the ghost propagator at low momentum, whereas for the gluon
propagator such an effect stays within error bars (see also
Sternbeck:2005tk ). To be specific: Measuring the ghost propagator and
ignoring the Gribov ambiguity, the ghost propagator near the momentum
@xmath ( @xmath ) turns out to be overestimated by about 5% (2%)
compared to an estimate obtained on a ensemble of best gauge copies. As
best we have considered that gauge-fixed copy which gave rise to the
largest gauge functional value for a particular gauge configuration. Our
results corroborate previous findings for the @xmath gluon and ghost
propagators Cucchieri:1997dx ; Bakeev:2003rr ; Nakajima:2003my , but
cast doubt on those for the @xmath gluon propagator ( @xmath , @xmath
lattice) in Silva:2004bv .

Additionally, our data are in favor of the picture promoted in
Zwanziger:2003cf . According to this, continuum vacuum expectation
values of correlation functions obtained from a functional integration
over the fundamental modular region @xmath are equal to those over the
Gribov region @xmath . Gribov copies inside @xmath should not affect
expectation values in the continuum, because functional integrals are
dominated by the common boundary of @xmath and @xmath . We have found
some numerical evidence that the influence of Gribov copies on the ghost
propagator decreases at the same (physical) momentum if the physical
volume is enlarged. Note that very recently Bogolubsky:2005wf similar
indications have been found for the @xmath gauge group taking
non-periodic @xmath transformations into account. In order to eliminate
the last doubts, a future study should continue and follow our fc - bc
strategy (explained in the text) on lattice sizes larger than @xmath .

To make the study of the Gribov-copy dependence more complete, we have
also shown that the Gribov ambiguity is reflected in the low-lying
eigenvalue spectrum of the FP operator. We have found that, on average,
the low-lying eigenvalues extracted on bc gauge copies are larger than
those on fc copies. Thus better gauge-fixing (in terms of the gauge
functional) has the tendency to keep gauge-fixed configurations slightly
away from the Gribov horizon.

##### Other systematic effects on the propagators

Using different lattices sizes at three different @xmath values, we have
tried to analyze the systematic effects on the gluon and ghost
propagators of changing either the lattice spacing @xmath or the
physical volume @xmath . We have found that for both, the gluon and
ghost dressing functions, finite volume effects are clearly visible at
volumes smaller than @xmath , which corresponds to a @xmath lattice at
@xmath . The effect grows with decreasing momentum or decreasing lattice
size. At larger volumes, however, the data for @xmath coincide within
errors for the different lattice sizes. For @xmath we have found only
small finite volume effects for both dressing functions at the lowest
momentum. This is based on data obtained on the lattice sizes @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath using @xmath and 6.0. Concerning discretization
effects our study is only partial and limited to a region of
intermediate momenta. In any case, fixing the physical volume to @xmath
we have found that the gluon dressing function at constant physical
momentum increases with decreasing the lattice spacing. A similar effect
(beyond error bars) is not observable for the ghost dressing function.

We have combined this investigation of lattice artifacts with an
analysis of effects caused by asymmetric lattice geometries. We could
demonstrate that the more asymmetric the lattice size has been chosen,
the larger are the systematic errors induced by that. In fact, data
obtained for the ghost (gluon) propagator on asymmetric lattices are
less enhanced (suppressed) than those obtained on symmetric lattices
geometries. The same effects have been reported recently for the gluon
propagator in three-dimensional pure @xmath gauge theory
Cucchieri:2006za . Therefore, extractions of an infrared exponent for
the gluon propagator using only on-axis momenta on asymmetric lattices
Silva:2005hb ; Silva:2005hd (without adapting the lattice spacing in the
different directions to compensate this) should be taken with caution.

##### Infrared behavior of gluon and ghost propagators

Studying the momentum dependence of the gluon and ghost dressing
functions, we have applied cuts on our data, namely the cylinder and the
cone cut Leinweber:1998uu . They have much reduced the lattice artifacts
mentioned above. In fact, our data for the renormalized dressing
functions surviving these cuts lie on smooth curves if considered as
functions of the momentum.

We have compared these renormalized data with recent solutions of
truncated system of DSEs for the gluon and ghost propagators and have
tried to extract the infrared exponents, @xmath and @xmath , for the
gluon and ghost dressing functions, respectively. From fits with the
corresponding power laws to our data we cannot confirm the relation
@xmath as expected from DSE studies in the continuum vonSmekal:1997is ;
vonSmekal:1998yu . Also, both exponents are found to be significantly
lower than expected in Lerche:2002ep ; Zwanziger:2001kw . Such a
conclusion was also drawn in other lattice studies Boucaud:2005ce ;
Boucaud:2006if ; Furui:2004cx .

Moreover, our fits suggest that power-behaved gluon and ghost
propagators are not the best description of the momentum dependence of
our data, at least in the region of lower momenta considered here. The
data for the ghost propagator seem to depend logarithmically on the
momenta in this region. This observation has been confirmed very
recently in Boucaud:2006if , even though in this reference also
arguments for an infrared finite ghost dressing function have been put
forward.

Studying unquenching effects on the gluon and ghost propagators we have
found that these effects are small for the ghost propagator, but are
clearly visible for the gluon propagator at intermediate momenta.
Concerning the infrared limit of both propagators, the influence of two
fermion flavors seems to become less towards lower momenta. This all
agrees with the findings in DSE studies ( e.g. Fischer:2003rp ;
Fischer:2005wx ).

From our data, we cannot judge without doubt on the existence of an
infrared vanishing gluon propagator.

##### The running coupling constant and the ghost-gluon vertex

In connection with the infrared behavior of the gluon and ghost dressing
functions, we have determined the running coupling constant based on the
ghost-gluon vertex. This coupling constant is found to match the
RG-invariant two-loop expression considering data at large momenta.
However, for @xmath the running coupling constant decreases with
decreasing momentum. The same is observed considering data for the
unquenched case. Also an influence of Gribov copies cannot be made
responsible for this. Therefore, we cannot confirm an infrared fixed
point for this coupling constant as it has been proposed in DSE studies
vonSmekal:1997is ; vonSmekal:1998yu (see also Alkofer:2004it ). This
reflects once more the different infrared exponents we have found for
the gluon and ghost propagators.

In any case, our data are in qualitative agreement with recent studies
of DSEs on a torus Fischer:2002eq ; Fischer:2002hn ; Fischer:2005ui ;
Fischer:2005nf . There a similar behavior for the gluon and ghost
propagators and for the running coupling constant at low momentum has
been presented. Also other lattice studies agree with our results for
this coupling constant Furui:2003jr ; Furui:2004cx ; Boucaud:2005ce .

In order to verify that the assumption of a bare ghost-gluon vertex is
valid beyond perturbation theory, we have calculated the corresponding
renormalization constant @xmath using a scheme with zero gluon momentum.
Our data show that in this scheme @xmath is approximately equal to one
within error bars for all momenta considered here. Only a slight
deviation is visible in the interval @xmath . Unquenching effects are
not resolvable. We thus agree with a recent DSE study
Schleifenbaum:2004id where a semiperturbative calculation of @xmath has
been presented using a scheme with asymmetric (the same as used by us)
and symmetric subtraction points. Furthermore, our results are in full
agreement with those presented in Cucchieri:2004sq for the case of
@xmath . It is worthwhile to continue the lattice calculation of @xmath
using other renormalization schemes, for example with a symmetric
subtraction point.

Together with our data for the running coupling constant we can thus
confirm that the product in Eq. ( 2.10 ) is renormalization-group
invariant in the particular scheme considered here and defines a
nonperturbative running coupling constant which, as shown here,
decreases monotonously with decreasing momentum @xmath .

##### Results on the confinement criteria

In addition we have presented results which support the Kugo–Ojima
confinement scenario Kugo:1979gm to be realized for lattice QCD in
Landau gauge. To confirm this, one has to show that the function @xmath
defined via the Green’s function in Eq. ( 2.17 ) Kugo:1995km ;
Alkofer:2000wg has the zero-momentum limit: @xmath . Alternatively, if
this limit is realized then the (renormalized) ghost dressing function
@xmath must diverge in the same limit. This is because at zero momentum
it holds that @xmath Kugo:1995km .

In this thesis we have shown that the ghost dressing function seems to
diverge at zero momentum which is in favor of the Kugo–Ojima confinement
scenario and also satisfies the Gribov-Zwanziger horizon condition
Gribov:1977wm ; Zwanziger:1992qr ; Zwanziger:2001kw . Moreover, we have
measured the function @xmath at different momenta @xmath . To our
knowledge a direct calculation of @xmath has never been done before.
Conclusions in other studies Furui:2003jr ; Furui:2004cx ; Watson:2001yv
; Alkofer:2001iw were drawn on results obtained for the ghost dressing
functions only. For the renormalization of @xmath we have developed a
new ansatz using a minimization process (see Sec. 5.2.2 for details).
Our renormalized data for both the ghost dressing function and the
function @xmath are consistent with @xmath approaching minus one in the
limit of vanishing momenta, even though this convergence is very slow.
Therefore, as the ghost dressing function diverges we expect @xmath to
reach minus one. Hence the Kugo-Ojima confinement criterion is realized.

Based on our data obtained on larger lattice sizes we are also in the
fortunate position to present numerical evidence that not only the
quenched but also the unquenched @xmath gluon propagator in Landau gauge
violates reflection positivity explicitly . Thus, on one hand, we agree
with other lattice studies for quenched @xmath Mandula:1987rh ;
Bernard:1992hy ; Marenzoni:1993td ; Furui:2004cx and for
three-dimensional @xmath Cucchieri:2004mf gauge theory. On the other
hand, we confirm presently available solutions to the corresponding DSE
of the gluon propagator Alkofer:2003jj , even though our data suggest a
different infrared exponent for the gluon propagator.

Since reflection positivity is violated by the gluon propagator and the
Kugo–Ojima confinement criterion seems to be satisfied, we agree with
the conjecture that transverse gluon states are confined by the quartet
mechanism Kugo:1979gm .

##### Spectral properties of the FP operator

We have also investigated the spectral properties of the FP operator and
their relation to the ghost propagator in @xmath Landau gauge
Sternbeck:2005vs . As expected from Ref. Zwanziger:2003cf we have found
that the low-lying eigenvalues are shifted towards @xmath and the
eigenvalue density @xmath becomes a steeper rising function as the
volume is increased.

On average, the corresponding FP eigenmodes are not localized, however,
a few large values have been seen among the lowest eigenmodes.

We could demonstrate that the ghost propagator at low momentum is
dominated by the low-lying eigenvalues and eigenmodes of the FP
operator. For example, the value of the ghost propagator at lowest
momentum (on a @xmath lattice at @xmath ) can be estimated using a
number of 200 low-lying eigenvalues and eigenmodes of the FP operator.
In other words, a fraction of about 0.12% of the whole spectrum is
sufficient to reconstruct the asymptotic result. For larger volumes the
number of necessary eigenmodes seems to be somewhat larger. Also for the
next higher momentum, saturation needs a much bigger part of the
low-lying spectrum.

#### Concluding remarks

We hope to have presented a careful numerical study of different aspects
of @xmath Landau gauge gluodynamics, a subject which has been the focus
of much attention in recent years. We have concentrated on the low
momentum region and have clarified the influence of different systematic
effects on the infrared behavior of gluon and ghost propagators in
Landau gauge. We have shown that the momentum dependence of both
propagators is consistent with different criteria for confinement.
Considering also our results for the running coupling constant and for
the ghost-gluon vertex we agree with the findings of other lattice
studies and of DSE studies on a torus. However, there is some
disagreement with DSE studies in the continuum. At present there seems
to be no solution of this puzzle.

We think, it is interesting to look in a future study also at the
momentum dependence of other vertex functions and of the quark
propagator in Landau gauge. In particular, for clover-improved Wilson
fermions this has not been done before. It is also worthwhile to perform
a similar study using another gauge condition, for example, the Coulomb
gauge. Such investigations might provide further valuable information
towards a full understanding of nonperturbative QCD (see e.g.
Zwanziger:1998ez ; Cucchieri:2000gu ; Zwanziger:2002sh ;
Greensite:2003xf ).

In the same way, the larger momentum region should be investigated
further. Note that our study has focused only on the infrared momentum
region. Since computing time was restricted, the amount of data for the
ghost propagator and for the running coupling constant in the
ultraviolet momentum region is not as large as in the low momentum
region. It is worthwhile, however, to continue and to perform additional
measurements at larger momenta considering different loop-expansions of
the corresponding asymptotic form. In particular, an investigation of
nonperturbative power corrections to the ghost and gluon propagators in
Landau gauge (see e.g. Boucaud:2000nd ; Boucaud:2000ey ; Boucaud:2001st
; Boucaud:2005xn ) due to non-zero values of QCD condensates could be an
interesting topic in future lattice studies.

[]

## Appendix A Some details on algorithms and performance {window}

[0,l, W ,] e list algorithms and numerical libraries used in this study
for the different purposes and we give references for further details.
Then we report on some experiences we gained with gauge-fixing. In
particular, we compare the performance of over-relaxation and
Fourier-accelerated gauge-fixing. After this, we analyze gauge
functional values obtained by following our fc - bc strategy and
demonstrate that the final ranking of functional values is already
visible at an intermediate iteration step. We show that the inversion of
the FP matrix can be accelerated by using a pre-conditioned conjugate
gradient algorithm.

### a.1 A note on the algorithms used

For the generation of our quenched configurations we employed the hybrid
over-relaxation algorithm. It has become standard for the simulation of
pure gauge theory and is a combination of several, say @xmath ,
micro-canonical over-relaxation steps Brown:1987rr ; Creutz:1987xi and
one heatbath Fabricius:1984wp ; Kennedy:1985nu step. In both steps a
decomposition of @xmath link variables into @xmath matrices, as proposed
by Cabbibo and Marinari Cabibbo:1982zn , was applied. We have always
used @xmath . Further details on these algorithms can be found, for
examples, in the PhD theses Knechtli:1999tw ; Gehrmann:2002pn .

All sets of our unquenched @xmath gauge configurations were provided to
us through the collaboration which generated them using the hybrid Monte
Carlo algorithm Duane ; Gottlieb with even-odd preconditioning Gupta .

Both the quenched and unquenched configurations were transformed such
that they satisfy the lattice Landau gauge condition (see Eq. ( 4.1 )).
For gauge-fixing we have employed two popular algorithms:
over-relaxation (RLX) Mandula:1990vs and Fourier–accelerated
gauge-fixing (FAG) Davies:1987vs . For Fourier–accelerated gauge-fixing
we used the implementation as introduced in Davies:1987vs . For future
studies, however, we recommend to use the multigrid implementation of
FAG as proposed in Cucchieri:1998ew . This implementation is better
suited for a parallel computing environment with distributed memory (see
App. A.2.1 ).

Fourier transforms, for example of the gluon fields, were calculated
using an algorithm that performs a Fast-Fourier transformation (FFT).
For all FFTs, we have employed the FFTW -library FFTW98 . We can
recommend this library (see also online: http://www.fftw.org ).

For observables which involve the inverse of the FP operator we applied
the pre-conditioned conjugate gradient algorithm to solve the
corresponding linear systems. As pre-conditioning matrix we used the
inverse Laplacian operator @xmath with diagonal color substructure. This
significantly has reduced the amount of computing time as it is
discussed in more detail in App. A.3 .

The eigenvalues and eigenmodes of the FP operator were calculated using
the ARPACK package, PARPACK arpack . For minimization of @xmath
functions we used the new C ++ implementation of the library MINUIT
MINUIT . We can recommend both libraries too.

### a.2 Experience report on lattice Landau gauge fixing

In this section we report on some experiences we made with gauge-fixing.
Since efficiency of gauge-fixing algorithms is an important issue in
studying gauge-dependent quantities, this report might help in future
studies.

#### a.2.1 Over-relaxation versus Fourier–accelerated gauge-fixing

For the purpose of this study we have employed two different algorithms
for fixing thermalized gauge configurations to Landau gauge. These are
over-relaxation (RLX) Mandula:1990vs and Fourier–accelerated
gauge-fixing (FAG) Davies:1987vs . Both algorithms are commonly used in
the lattice community, but usually either of them is chosen. The reason
why we used two is simple: Initially, we had started with
over-relaxation, but later we checked whether computing time can be
saved using FAG instead. Now this puts us in the fortunate position to
provide an explicit cross-check on the performance of both algorithms.
This might be interesting for future studies, in particular when writing
applications for computing time.

Even though both algorithms are quite different, they are both iterative
in nature. After each iteration-cycle the functional @xmath (Eq. ( 3.14
)) is increased a bit until a (local) maximum is reached. As stopping
criterion not the functional itself, but the violation of transversality
(see Eq. ( 3.15 )) is used. In our implementation the iteration process
stopped as soon as @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

was fulfilled at each lattice site @xmath . The number of necessary
iterations depends on the lattice sizes, but usually it also varies
quite strongly for different configurations using the same lattice size.
To get an impression about these variations have a look at Fig. A.2 .
There @xmath is shown versus the numbers of iterations for two different
random gauge copies of the same gauge configuration.

In any case, the mean iteration number @xmath and the mean iteration
time @xmath (until the final precision is reached) scale with the
lattice size @xmath according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath denote the number of lattice points in spatial and
temporal direction, respectively. That this scaling holds for both
algorithms can be seen in Fig. A.1 . There in the upper (lower) panel we
show @xmath ( @xmath ) as a function of the lattice size. The parameters
from fits of the Ansätze in Eq. ( A.2 ) to the data are given in Table
A.1 . Obviously, FAG performs better on larger lattice sizes than RLX.

The reason why in our implementation the actual amount of computing time
for FAG is comparable to that of RLX is just because we have performed
two Fast-Fourier transformations (FFTs) in each iteration cycle of FAG.
Of course, in a parallel computing environment with distributed memory
FFT routines usually do not scale well if the number of processors in
increased. Therefore, for future studies we rather recommend to use the
multigrid implementation of FAG as proposed by Cucchieri and Mendes
Cucchieri:1998ew .

#### a.2.2 A way to preselect best gauge copies

We have seen above that fixing gauge configurations to Landau gauge
might become a CPU time intensive task on large lattices. This was even
more intensive for us when we followed our fc - bc -strategy (see Sec.
4.1.3 ). For this, several random gauge copies for each gauge
configuration @xmath were gauge-fixed. Then we have selected the first
gauge copy and that with the largest (final) functional value (Eq. (
3.14 )) to study the influence of Gribov copies on different
observables. Obviously, it would be quite helpful if the final ranking
of functional values were known, without actually doing all the
necessary iterations.

Starting just from a random gauge copy of @xmath we cannot forecast the
final functional value, because those iterative gauge-fixing algorithms
behave like a chaotic system under change of initial conditions. For
example, if the order of going through the lattice is changed, a
different functional value might been reached. Also checking the ranking
of functional values after a fixed number of iterations is not very
reasonable, since iteration processes are quite different as is
illustrated in Fig. A.2 . There the functional values @xmath and the
maximal violation of transversality @xmath (Eq. ( A.1 )) are shown at
intermediate iteration steps for two sample gauge copies. Although both
iteration processes started from a (different) random gauge copy of the
same configuration, the ways to convergence differ substantial. For one
process, labeled as copy 15 , the functional @xmath reveals more often
irregular jumps to larger values during the iteration loop than for the
other process. This happens always in conjunction with sudden increases
of @xmath . However, inspecting Fig. A.3 such non-monotonous behavior is
seen in the majority only for larger values of @xmath . Thus it seems
that for @xmath below some threshold the final ranking of functional
values is already fixed.

From our study we know the final and a list of intermediate functional
values for each gauge-fixed copy of @xmath , because we actually have
gauge-fixed each copy until the gauge condition was reached. Therefore,
we can check now if the final ranking of functional values is already
visible at an intermediate iteration state, i.e. at fixed, but larger
values of @xmath .

To be specific, in Fig. A.4 we show the probability of whether that copy
with the largest functional value at an intermediate value of @xmath is
that with the largest functional value (best copy) after gauge-fixing
has finished. Of course, for @xmath below the convergence criteria this
holds and for @xmath (not fixed) it does not.

Looking at Fig. A.4 we easily see that the probability of having found
those copies which will result in the largest functional values
increases with lowering @xmath . For @xmath the probability is almost
100%, independent of @xmath and the lattice size. In other words, to
select the best gauge-fixed copy for each configuration @xmath , it is
enough to gauge-fix several random copies of @xmath until the value
@xmath has been reached and then continue the process only for that with
the largest intermediate functional value among all. In this way copies
are singled out which will definitely not reach a larger functional
value compared to others. If we had used this strategy we would have
saved about 40% (57%) of the total number of iterations for the @xmath
lattice at @xmath (6.2), which is quite a lot.

### a.3 Speeding up the inversion of the FP operator

For the solution of the linear system @xmath with symmetric matrix
@xmath , the conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm is the method of choice.
Its convergence rate depends on the condition number, the ratio of
largest to lowest eigenvalue of @xmath . When all @xmath obviously the
FP operator is minus the Laplacian @xmath with a diagonal color
substructure. Thus instead of solving @xmath one rather solves the
transformed system

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this way the condition number is reduced, however, the price to pay
is one extra matrix multiplication by @xmath per iteration cycle. In
terms of CPU time this should be more than compensated by the reduction
of iterations.

The pre-conditioned CG algorithm (PCG) can be described as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the scalar product.

To perform the additional matrix multiplication with @xmath we used two
fast Fourier transformations @xmath , due to @xmath . The performance we
achieved is presented in Table A.2 . We conclude that on larger lattice
sizes the reduction of iterations is about 70-75%, while the resulting
reduction of CPU time depends on the lattice size. This is because we
are using the fast Fourier transformations in a parallel CPU
environment. If the ratio of used processors to the lattice size is
small (see e.g. the data for @xmath lattice at this table), almost the
same reductions of CPU time as for the number of iterations is achieved.

Further improvement may be achieved by using the multigrid Poisson
solver to solve @xmath . This method is supposed to perform better on
parallel machines. Perhaps a further improvement is possible by using as
pre-conditioning matrix @xmath which is an approximation of the FP
operator @xmath to a given order Zwanziger:1993dh (see also Furui:2003jr
). However, the larger the order, the more matrix multiplications per
iteration cycle are required. This may reduce the overall performance.
We have not checked so far which is the optimal order.

[ ]