##### Contents

-    \thechapter Fields of moduli
    -    1 Fields of definition
    -    2 The field of moduli of a curve
    -    3 Chow forms, Chow points, and Chow fields
    -    4 Curves as divisors
    -    5 @xmath -structures
    -    6 Fields of moduli relative to Galois extensions
    -    7 Moduli spaces
-    \thechapter Finite subgroups of projective general linear groups
    -    8 Notation and terminology
    -    9 Finite subgroups of the 2-dimensional projective general
        linear groups
    -    10 Finite subgroups of the 3-dimensional projective general
        linear groups
-    \thechapter Isomorphisms of hyperelliptic and plane curves
    -    11 Isomorphisms of hyperelliptic curves
    -    12 Isomorphisms of plane curves
-    \thechapter Hyperelliptic curves definable over their fields of
    moduli
    -    13 The main result for hyperelliptic curves
    -    14 A note about defining equations
-    \thechapter Hyperelliptic curves not definable over their fields of
    moduli
-    \thechapter Plane curves definable over their fields of moduli
    -    15 Invariant forms
    -    16 Invariant binary forms
    -    17 Useful equations of hyperelliptic curves
    -    18 The main result for plane curves
-    \thechapter Plane curves not definable over their fields of moduli
    -    19 Plane curves with diagonal automorphism groups
    -    20 Plane curves with automorphism groups given by @xmath
    -    21 Plane curves with automorphism groups given by @xmath

###### Acknowledgements. I would like to thank my advisor Bjorn Poonen
to whom I am very grateful for many helpful suggestions, advice, and
inspiration. I would also like to thank my friends Rajan Mehta and Bjørn
Kjos-Hanssen for making my stay in Berkeley pleasant and fun.

## Introduction

The field of moduli @xmath of a curve @xmath over a field @xmath is the
intersection over all fields of definition of @xmath , where @xmath is
the base extension of @xmath to a curve over an algebraic closure @xmath
of @xmath . It has the property that for all @xmath , we have @xmath if
and only if @xmath is the identity. It is well known that if the genus
@xmath of a curve @xmath is @xmath or @xmath , then it can be defined
over its field of moduli. It also can be deduced from Theorem 1 of [ 36
] , that a curve with no nontrivial automorphisms can be defined over
its field of moduli. However, if @xmath and if the automorphism group of
@xmath is nontrivial, the curve @xmath may not be definable over its
field of moduli. The first examples of curves not definable over their
fields of moduli were given by Shimura on page 177 of [ 31 ] . These
curves are hyperelliptic @xmath -curves with two automorphisms. In this
thesis, we study the definability of plane and hyperelliptic curves,
over fields of characteristic not equal to @xmath , over their fields of
moduli.

In the first chapter, we relate alternate definitions of “fields of
moduli” of curves to one another, give our own definition of “field of
moduli,” and show in what sense it is equivalent to the others. We also
briefly mention the relationship between the field of moduli of a curve
of genus @xmath and the residue field at the corresponding point on the
moduli space of curves of genus @xmath .

The definability of a curve over its field of moduli depends heavily on
the structure of its group of automorphisms. To understand the
automorphism groups and isomorphisms of plane and hyperelliptic curves
we need to understand the structure of the finite subgroups of the
@xmath and @xmath -dimensional projective general linear groups. In
Chapter 2, we list these groups and study some of their properties. In
Chapter 3, we discuss the automorphism groups and isomorphisms of
hyperelliptic and plane curves.

Recall that a curve of genus @xmath is hyperelliptic. In [ 13 ] it is
shown that a curve of genus @xmath over a field of characteristic
different from @xmath , can be defined over its field of moduli if its
automorphism group has more than two elements. By Theorem 22 of [ 7 ] ,
any curve of genus @xmath over a field of characteristic @xmath , can be
defined over its field of moduli. In Section 1 of [ 29 ] , it is
conjectured that a hyperelliptic curve over a field of characteristic
@xmath is definable over its field of moduli if its automorphism group
has more than two elements.

In Chapter 4, we prove our main theorem for hyperelliptic curves: Let
@xmath be a hyperelliptic curve over a field of @xmath characteristic
not equal to @xmath and let @xmath be the hyperelliptic involution of
@xmath . Then @xmath is definable over its field of moduli of @xmath is
not cyclic or if @xmath is cyclic of order equal to the characteristic
of @xmath . Our main result for hyperelliptic curves relies heavily on a
result of Dèbes and Emsalem from [ 12 ] , that states that a curve
@xmath can be defined over its field of moduli @xmath if a certain
@xmath -model of the curve @xmath has a @xmath -rational point.

The authors of [ 6 ] have attempted to classify all hyperelliptic curves
over @xmath with fields of moduli @xmath relative to @xmath but not
definable over @xmath . Due to some errors in their paper, some curves
are missing from their list and many curves on their list are, in fact,
definable over @xmath . In Chapter 5, we give the complete list of
hyperelliptic @xmath -curves, up to isomorphism, not definable over
their fields of moduli relative to @xmath . Every curve @xmath in the
list has @xmath cyclic of order @xmath for some @xmath . Evidently the
results of [ 6 ] , were not known to the author of [ 29 ] at the time he
made his conjecture. Nor were we aware of them as we had independently
constructed similar examples, not included in the list of [ 6 ] , before
learning of their results.

In Chapter 6, we prove our main result for plane curves: Let @xmath be a
smooth plane curve over a field @xmath of characteristic @xmath where
@xmath or @xmath . Let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath . Then
@xmath is definable over its field of moduli if @xmath is not @xmath
-conjugate to a diagonal subgroup of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or a
semi-direct product of a diagonal group an a @xmath -group. See Lemma
10.7 in Chapter 2, for a detailed description of these groups.

Lastly, in Chapter 7, we give new examples of plane curves not definable
over their fields of moduli. These curves have diagonal automorphism
groups, automorphism groups given by @xmath , and automorphism groups
given by @xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter Fields of moduli

The notion of fields of moduli for polarized varieties was first
introduced by Matsusaka in [ 19 ] and was later defined by Shimura in [
30 ] for polarized abelian varieties and polarized abelian varieties
with further structures. Their definitions, for the field of moduli of a
polarized (abelian) variety @xmath , depend heavily on the construction
of certain subvarieties of projective space whose closed points consist
of Chow points of certain projective embeddings of @xmath . Both authors
define this notion in the case of characteristic zero and of positive
characteristic. Koizumi in [ 17 ] gives a more general definition of
field of moduli for geometric objects satisfying certain conditions. He
removed artificial assumptions previously thought necessary for the
proof of the existence of fields of moduli for polarized varieties in
positive characteristic. In the case of polarized varieties, Koizumi’s
definition agrees with the definitions given by Matsusaka and Shimura.

We will focus our attention on the field of moduli of a curve. We give a
definition of field of moduli that agrees with the definition given by
Koizumi.

### 1 Fields of definition

###### Definition 1.1.

Let @xmath be a field. A variety over @xmath ( @xmath -variety) is an
integral separated scheme of finite type over @xmath .

###### Remark 1.2.

We will sometimes speak of a variety @xmath without mention of a base
field. In this case it should be understood that @xmath is a @xmath
-variety for some field @xmath .

###### Notation 1.3.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be a @xmath -variety, and let @xmath
be an extension field of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the base extension
@xmath .

###### Definition 1.4.

Let @xmath be fields where @xmath is an algebraic closure of @xmath .
Let @xmath be an @xmath -variety. Then @xmath is defined over @xmath if
and only if there is a @xmath -variety @xmath such that @xmath is
isomorphic (as an @xmath -variety) to @xmath . We say that @xmath is a
field of definition of @xmath . We say that @xmath is definable over
@xmath if there is a @xmath -variety @xmath such that @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath .

###### Definition 1.5.

Let @xmath be fields and let @xmath be a geometrically integral @xmath
-variety. Let @xmath be a subvariety of @xmath . We say that @xmath is
defined over @xmath as a subvariety of @xmath if there exists an @xmath
-subvariety @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath as subvarieties of @xmath
. In this case, we say that @xmath is a field of definition of @xmath as
a subvariety of @xmath . We will write “ @xmath is of field of
definition of @xmath ” to indicate that @xmath is a field of definition
of @xmath as a subvariety of @xmath .

###### Lemma 1.6.

Let @xmath be fields, let @xmath be a geometrically integral @xmath
-variety, and let @xmath be a closed subvariety of @xmath . Then there
is a unique field of definition @xmath of @xmath with @xmath such that
for any field of definition @xmath of @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath
. We call @xmath the minimum field of definition of @xmath as a
subvariety of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Proposition 3.11 in [ 34 ] . ∎

###### Remark 1.7.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be a projective @xmath -variety, and
let @xmath be an embedding. Let @xmath be the ideal sheaf of @xmath in
@xmath and let @xmath be the corresponding ideal. Then the minimum field
of definition of @xmath is the smallest field @xmath contained in @xmath
such that @xmath can be generated by elements in @xmath .

### 2 The field of moduli of a curve

###### Definition 2.1.

Let @xmath be a field. A curve over @xmath is a smooth, projective,
geometrically integral @xmath -variety of dimension @xmath .

###### Remark 2.2.

We will sometimes, especially in the case of plane curves, say “smooth
curve” even though it is redundant.

###### Notation 2.3.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath . For @xmath , the curve
@xmath is the base extension @xmath of @xmath by the morphism @xmath .

###### Definition 2.4.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath . Let @xmath be an algebraic
closure of @xmath . The field of moduli @xmath of @xmath is the
intersection over all fields of definition of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath , let @xmath be an algebraic
closure of @xmath , and let @xmath be the field of moduli of @xmath .
Many define the field of moduli of a curve @xmath as the subfield @xmath
of @xmath fixed by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 5.8 in Section 5 shows that, in fact, @xmath is a purely
inseparable extension of @xmath . So @xmath has the property that if
@xmath then @xmath if and only if @xmath .

Theorem 5.8 is due to Koizumi [ 17 ] . We will give a proof here based
on the proof given in [ 17 ] , but with more details.

We need to define a few notions and supply some needed results first.

### 3 Chow forms, Chow points, and Chow fields

###### Definition 3.1.

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath be a @xmath -variety. The @xmath
-cycles of @xmath are the elements of the free @xmath -module over the
irreducible closed @xmath -subvarieties of @xmath . The components of a
cycle @xmath are the @xmath with nonzero coefficients. A @xmath -cycle
is effective if all of its components have positive coefficients. A
@xmath -cycle is called a @xmath -divisor of @xmath if all of its
components have codimension @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.

Let @xmath be fields and let @xmath be a geometrically integral @xmath
-variety. Then we have a morphism of schemes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a @xmath -subvariety of @xmath we define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs over the maximal points of @xmath and @xmath is the
closure of @xmath . By linearity we can extend @xmath to a map from the
@xmath -cycles of @xmath to the @xmath -cycles of @xmath . An @xmath
-cycle @xmath on @xmath is said to be @xmath -rational if there exists a
@xmath -cycle @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Remark 3.3.

Let @xmath be fields, let @xmath be a geometrically integral @xmath
-variety, and let @xmath be a closed subvariety of @xmath . Then @xmath
is a @xmath -rational cycle of @xmath if and only if @xmath is defined
over @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.4 (Chow).

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath be a @xmath -variety of dimension
@xmath . The set of @xmath -tuples of hyperplanes in @xmath which have a
common intersection with @xmath are parameterized by an irreducible
hypersurface @xmath . The hypersurface @xmath is given by a
multi-homogeneous form @xmath in the set of @xmath variables
corresponding to each @xmath . The form @xmath is called the Chow form
of @xmath and is unique up to multiplication by an element of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See §1 of [ 9 ] for the original proof or Chapter 8 of [ 23 ] for a more
modern treatment. ∎

###### Definition 3.5.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be a @xmath -variety, and let @xmath
be an effective @xmath -cycle on @xmath . The Chow form of @xmath is the
product @xmath where for each @xmath , @xmath is the Chow form of @xmath
.

###### Definition 3.6.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be a @xmath -variety, let @xmath be an
effective @xmath -cycle on @xmath , and let @xmath be the Chow form of
@xmath . The coefficients of @xmath can be seen as a point of projective
space called the Chow point of @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.7.

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath be an effective @xmath -cycle in
@xmath . Then the Chow point of @xmath uniquely determines @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from Proposition 8.24 on page 67 and Proposition 8.15 on
page 64 of [ 23 ] . ∎

###### Definition 3.8.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be an @xmath -variety, and let @xmath
be an effective @xmath -cycle on @xmath . The Chow field @xmath of
@xmath is the field obtained by adjoining to the prime field of @xmath
the ratios of the nonzero coefficients of the Chow point of @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.9.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be a @xmath -cycle on @xmath , and let
@xmath be the Chow field of @xmath . Then @xmath is rational over a
finite purely inseparable extension of @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is
rational over @xmath if @xmath is perfect or if there exists a
geometrically integral @xmath -variety @xmath such that @xmath is a
divisor of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See page 47 of [ 24 ] . ∎

### 4 Curves as divisors

###### Definition 4.1.

Let @xmath be a field. A hypersurface @xmath of degree @xmath over
@xmath is an @xmath -variety given by a homogeneous form of @xmath of
degree @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.2.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field. Suppose we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a curve, and @xmath is a smooth projective variety of
dimension @xmath , all over @xmath . Then for all sufficiently large
@xmath , there exists a hypersurface @xmath of degree @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is a smooth projective variety of dimension @xmath
containing @xmath . Furthermore, the set of hypersurfaces of degree
@xmath with this property forms an open dense subset of the projective
space parameterizing all hypersurfaces of degree @xmath which contain
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath . Let @xmath be the ideal sheaf of @xmath in @xmath and let
@xmath . Let @xmath be the projective space associated with the vector
space @xmath . So we can view @xmath as the set of hypersurfaces @xmath
of degree @xmath which contain @xmath . Any element in @xmath is
determined by a nonzero global section @xmath . For a closed point
@xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose that @xmath and suppose that @xmath for all closed points @xmath
. Since the dimension of @xmath is larger that @xmath , by Corollary 7.9
on page 244 of [ 15 ] , @xmath must be connected, hence irreducible
since @xmath is smooth. So @xmath must be a smooth projective variety of
dimension @xmath containing @xmath .

For a closed point @xmath , fix @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath be
the local ring of @xmath on @xmath with maximal ideal @xmath . We define
a map of @xmath -vector spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by letting @xmath be the image of @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath if and
only if the image of @xmath is zero in @xmath . If if @xmath is a
nonregular point of @xmath then @xmath . Note that if @xmath then @xmath
and we must have @xmath since the image of @xmath is zero in @xmath . So
if @xmath is not in the kernel of @xmath , then either @xmath is a
regular point of @xmath and @xmath or @xmath . So a hypersurface @xmath
is in @xmath for some closed point @xmath , if and only if @xmath for
some @xmath .

Let @xmath be the homogeneous ideal corresponding to @xmath and let
@xmath be a set of generators of degrees @xmath , respectively. From now
on suppose that @xmath is strictly greater that @xmath for all @xmath .
Since @xmath is a closed point and @xmath is algebraically closed,
@xmath is generated by linear forms in the coordinates.

Suppose that @xmath and suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath is equal to
the image of @xmath in @xmath , for some @xmath with @xmath . Since
@xmath there exists @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath and pick @xmath
with @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath . Since @xmath is independent of
our choice of @xmath , the image of @xmath is also independent of our
choice of @xmath . Since @xmath , we may assume that @xmath . Then
@xmath . So @xmath is surjective if @xmath .

Now suppose that @xmath . Let @xmath be the local ring of @xmath on
@xmath with maximal ideal @xmath . Since @xmath , there exists a natural
surjective map of @xmath -vector spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , choose @xmath so that @xmath and let @xmath . Then the
kernel of @xmath is generated by the @xmath . The composition @xmath is
equal to the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined by letting @xmath be equal to the image of @xmath in @xmath .
This is, of course, the zero map since @xmath for all @xmath . It
follows that the sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact. Since both @xmath and @xmath are nonsingular, @xmath has
dimension @xmath and @xmath has dimension @xmath . We see that if @xmath
, then the image of @xmath has dimension @xmath .

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is the projective space associated with the vector space
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the subsets of @xmath consisting of all pairs @xmath such
that @xmath is a closed point and @xmath . Define @xmath similarly,
using @xmath in place of @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are the sets of
closed points of some quasi-projective varieties @xmath and @xmath
respectively. The fibres of the projections @xmath and @xmath have
dimension @xmath and @xmath respectively. So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . So @xmath is the set of closed points of a projective
variety @xmath . Then the local ring at a point of @xmath has dimension
less than or equal to @xmath . It follows that each irreducible
component of @xmath has dimension less than or equal to @xmath . So
@xmath . Consider the projection @xmath . Since @xmath we must have
@xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath is properly contained in @xmath . If
@xmath then @xmath satisfies the requirements of the lemma.

Finally note that since @xmath is projective, @xmath is proper, so since
@xmath is closed in @xmath , @xmath is closed in @xmath . Therefore,
@xmath is an open dense subset of @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 4.3.

Let @xmath be an infinite subfield of an algebraically closed field
@xmath . Let @xmath be an @xmath -curve, let @xmath be a smooth,
projective, geometrically integral @xmath -variety of dimension @xmath ,
and suppose we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for sufficiently large @xmath , there exists a hypersurface @xmath
of degree @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is a smooth projective
variety of dimension @xmath containing @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is a
geometrically integral @xmath -variety.

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath and let @xmath be as in Lemma 4.2 . Then by Lemma 4.2 , for
sufficiently large @xmath , @xmath contains an open dense subset @xmath
consisting of hypersurfaces @xmath of degree @xmath such that @xmath is
smooth of dimension @xmath .

Since @xmath is infinite, the @xmath -rational points of @xmath are
Zariski dense in @xmath so they cannot all be contained in the
complement of @xmath . So @xmath is nonempty. So there exists @xmath
such that @xmath is smooth projective variety of dimension @xmath
containing @xmath .

As shown in the proof of Lemma 4.2 , @xmath is smooth and connected (and
therefore integral). Since @xmath is algebraically closed, to prove the
last statement we show that @xmath is smooth and connected. By
Proposition 17.7.4(v) on pages 72-73 of [ 14 ] , since @xmath is smooth,
@xmath is smooth. Suppose that @xmath is not connected. Then @xmath for
some nonempty closed and open subschemes @xmath and @xmath . This
implies that @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are nonempty closed and
open subschemes of @xmath , we get a contradiction.

∎

###### Corollary 4.4.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field and let @xmath be a curve
embedded in projective space. Let @xmath be the Chow field of @xmath .
Then @xmath is the minimum field of definition of @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath is not infinite, then it is perfect and so our statement
follows by Lemma 3.9 . Assume that @xmath is infinite. If @xmath this is
trivial. If @xmath then @xmath is a divisor of @xmath so this follows by
Lemma 3.9 . Assume that @xmath . Then we may apply Corollary 4.3 to
@xmath to obtain a smooth, projective, geometrically integral @xmath
-variety @xmath of dimension @xmath with @xmath . We may repeat this
procedure, applying Corollary 4.3 to @xmath to obtain a smooth,
projective, geometrically integral @xmath -variety @xmath of dimension
@xmath with @xmath , until we obtain a smooth, projective, geometrically
integral @xmath -variety @xmath of dimension @xmath with @xmath . Then
@xmath is a divisor of @xmath . So by Lemma 3.9 , the minimum field of
definition of @xmath as a subvariety of @xmath is @xmath . ∎

### 5 @xmath-structures

###### Definition 5.1.

Let @xmath be a curve over an algebraically closed field @xmath . Let
@xmath be such that every divisor on @xmath of degree @xmath is very
ample. Then the pair @xmath is called an @xmath -structure on @xmath .

###### Definition 5.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two curves over an algebraically closed field
@xmath . We say that two @xmath -structures @xmath and @xmath , on
@xmath and @xmath respectively, are isomorphic if and only if @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Notation 5.3.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be a very ample
divisor on @xmath . Let @xmath be a basis for @xmath , and let @xmath be
an embedding given by @xmath . Then, unless otherwise stated, @xmath is
to be viewed as a subvariety of @xmath and not as an abstract curve. We
will call any embedding given by a basis for @xmath an embedding
determined by @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.4.

Let @xmath be a variety defined over a field @xmath and let @xmath be an
algebraic closure of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is finitely generated
over its prime subfield. Let @xmath be the intersection over all fields
@xmath with @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 22 ] . ∎

###### Lemma 5.5.

Let @xmath be a curve over an algebraically closed field @xmath and let
@xmath be an @xmath -structure on @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of all
non-degenerate embeddings of @xmath determined by divisors of degree
@xmath on @xmath . Then the set of Chow points of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

form a set of closed points @xmath of a geometrically reduced
quasi-projective variety @xmath embedded in a projective space @xmath .
Let @xmath be the minimal field of definition of the closure @xmath .
Then @xmath is defined over @xmath and @xmath is the intersection of the
fields of definition of the curves

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The first statement of the Lemma is proved in Lemma 4 of [ 19 ] . See
the proof of Theorem 2.2 in [ 17 ] for a simpler construction of @xmath
or page 104 of [ 30 ] for a similar construction in the case of an
abelian variety. (Note that in the terminology of [ 17 , 19 , 30 ] , all
varieties by definition are geometrically reduced.) In each construction
it is shown that @xmath is defined over all fields of definition for the
curves

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the proof of Lemma 4 of [ 19 ] it is shown that @xmath is defined
over all fields of definition for the curves

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In Theorem 3 of [ 19 ] , it is shown that @xmath is defined over the
minimum field of definition @xmath of @xmath .

By Corollary 4.4 , if @xmath then the minimum field of definition of
@xmath is the Chow field of @xmath . Let @xmath be the algebraic closure
of @xmath . Since @xmath is finitely generated over its prime field, by
Proposition 5.4 , @xmath is the intersection of all fields @xmath with
@xmath such that @xmath . For each @xmath with @xmath , we have @xmath
if and only if @xmath is a field of definition of @xmath for some @xmath
. Since @xmath , it follows that the intersection of the fields of
definition of the curves

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is equal to @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 5.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two isomorphic curves over an algebraically
closed field @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -structures on
@xmath and @xmath respectively. It is easy to see, following the
notation of Lemma 5.5 , that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.7.

Let @xmath be a curve over an algebraically closed field @xmath , Let
@xmath , and suppose that @xmath and @xmath are two @xmath -structures
on @xmath . Then, following the notation of Lemma 5.5 , @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is proven on page 52 of [ 17 ] ∎

###### Theorem 5.8 (Koizumi).

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath , let @xmath be an algebraic
closure of @xmath , let @xmath , and suppose that @xmath is an @xmath
-structure on @xmath . Then, following the notation of Lemma 5.5 ,
@xmath is the field of moduli of @xmath . Furthermore, the subfield
@xmath of @xmath fixed by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a purely inseparable extension of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the field of moduli of @xmath . It is immediate from Lemma
5.5 that @xmath . Let @xmath be a field of definition of @xmath and let
@xmath be an @xmath -curve such that @xmath . Choose an effective
divisor @xmath on @xmath of degree @xmath large enough so that @xmath is
an @xmath -structure @xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath be a basis for @xmath
. Then @xmath is defined over @xmath , so @xmath . By Lemma 5.7 , @xmath
. This implies that @xmath is contained in every field of definition of
@xmath . Thus @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath and let @xmath be as in Lemma 5.5 . It is clear that
@xmath is an @xmath -structure on @xmath and if @xmath , then @xmath and
so @xmath .

Conversely, suppose that @xmath and @xmath . Then for all @xmath we have
@xmath . Let @xmath be a non-degenerate embedding of @xmath determined
by a divisor of degree @xmath and let @xmath be the Chow point of @xmath
. Then the Chow point of @xmath is @xmath . Since @xmath , by Lemma 3.7
, @xmath is equal to @xmath for some embedding @xmath of @xmath ,
determined by a divisor of @xmath of degree @xmath . So @xmath . It
follows that @xmath if and only if @xmath .

Thus @xmath is a purely inseparable extension of @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 5.9.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be its field of
moduli. Then @xmath is definable over a finite separable extension of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath and choose @xmath so that
@xmath is an @xmath -structure on @xmath . Let @xmath be the
quasi-projective variety corresponding to @xmath . Let @xmath be the
separable closure of @xmath . By Lemma 5.10 below, @xmath . So there
exists a finite separable extension field @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath . Then @xmath is definable over @xmath . ∎

Since the following lemma is well known, we omit the proof.

###### Lemma 5.10.

Let @xmath be a separably closed field and let @xmath be a geometrically
reduced @xmath -variety. Then @xmath is Zariski dense in @xmath .

The proof of the following lemma, although slightly different from the
proof of Proposition 3.2 in [ 25 ] , is based on an idea given in the
proof of Proposition 3.2 of [ 25 ] . Let @xmath be fields where @xmath
is a purely inseparable extension of @xmath . Let @xmath be a polarized
abelian variety over @xmath . Proposition 3.2 of [ 25 ] states that
@xmath is definable over @xmath if @xmath contains the field of moduli
of @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.11.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and suppose that @xmath is a
purely inseparable extension of a field @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is
definable over a finite separable extension of @xmath . Then @xmath is
definable over @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a finite separable extension of @xmath contained in an
algebraic closure @xmath of @xmath . Suppose there exists a curve @xmath
over @xmath such that @xmath . Then there exists a finite extension
field @xmath of @xmath , containing @xmath such that @xmath over @xmath
. Replacing @xmath with a larger field if necessary, we may assume that
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath are subfields of @xmath with @xmath ,
where @xmath is Galois, and where @xmath is purely inseparable. So
@xmath is purely inseparable and @xmath is Galois. It follows that
@xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, we have @xmath . We have the following
picture: {diagram} & & F’ & &
& \ruLine Galois & & \luLine p. ins. &
F 1 ⊇F & & & & F 2 ⊇L
& \rdLine p. ins. & & \ldLine Galois &
& & K & &

Let @xmath , let @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath be their function
fields respectively. Let @xmath be the function field of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is Galois with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is purely inseparable. Let @xmath . Then @xmath is Galois,
with Galois group isomorphic to @xmath , and @xmath is purely
inseparable. We have the following picture: {diagram} & & F’(X F’ ) & &
& \ruLine Galois & & \luLine p. ins. &
F 1 (X 1 ) & & & & F 2 (X 2 )
& \rdLine p. ins. & & \ldLine Galois &
& & M & &
& & \dLine & &
& & K & &
and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An isomorphism @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and an isomorphism @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , the sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is split exact. So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 5.12.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a
purely inseparable extension of a field @xmath that contains the field
of moduli of @xmath . Then @xmath is definable over @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the field of moduli of @xmath . By Corollary 5.9 , @xmath
is definable over a finite separable extension @xmath of @xmath . So
@xmath is definable over the compositum @xmath which is a finite
separable extension of @xmath . Then by Lemma 5.11 , @xmath is definable
over @xmath . ∎

### 6 Fields of moduli relative to Galois extensions

We introduce another definition of “field of moduli” that is commonly
used and is defined relative to a given Galois extension.

###### Definition 6.1.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be a subfield
of @xmath such that @xmath is Galois. The field of moduli of @xmath
relative to the extension @xmath is defined as the fixed field @xmath of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 6.2.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath , let @xmath be a subfield of
@xmath such that @xmath is Galois, let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be the field of moduli of @xmath relative to @xmath .
Then the subgroup @xmath is a closed subgroup of @xmath for the Krull
topology. That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The field of @xmath is contained in each field of definition between
@xmath and @xmath (in particular, @xmath is a finite extension of @xmath
). Hence if the field of moduli is a field of definition, it is the
smallest field of definition between @xmath and @xmath . Finally, the
field of moduli of @xmath relative to the extension @xmath is @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Proposition 2.1 in [ 12 ] . ∎

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be a subfield
of @xmath such that @xmath is Galois. The following theorem gives
necessary and sufficient conditions for @xmath to be a field of
definition for @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.3 (Weil).

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be a subfield
of @xmath such that @xmath is Galois. Let @xmath and suppose for all
@xmath there exists an @xmath -isomorphism @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then there exist a @xmath -curve @xmath and an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined over @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

See the proof of Theorem 1 of [ 36 ] . ∎

###### Remark 6.4.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be a subfield
of @xmath such that @xmath is Galois, and @xmath be the function field
of @xmath . If @xmath is the field of moduli of @xmath relative to
@xmath we get an exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The conditions of Theorem 6.3 are satisfied precisely when this sequence
is split exact. That is, when there exists a subgroup @xmath isomorphic
to @xmath such that @xmath .

The following four results of Dèbes, Emsalem , and Douai will be of use
to us. They rely on the notions of a cover and the field of moduli of a
cover, for which we refer the reader to §2.4 in [ 11 ] .

###### Theorem 6.5.

Let @xmath be a Galois extension and @xmath be a curve of genus larger
than @xmath defined over @xmath with @xmath as field of moduli. Then
there exists a @xmath -model @xmath of the curve @xmath such that the
cover @xmath with @xmath -base @xmath is of field of moduli @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Theorem 3.1 in [ 12 ] . The authors make the additional assumption
that the characteristic of @xmath does not divide @xmath but do not use
it in their proof. ∎

###### Corollary 6.6.

Suppose that @xmath is a finite field and that @xmath is algebraically
closed. Then @xmath can be defined over @xmath .

###### Proof.

It suffices to show that the cover @xmath with @xmath -base @xmath can
be defined over @xmath , since a field of definition of the cover is
automatically a field of definition of @xmath . By Theorem 6.5 , the
field of moduli of the cover @xmath with @xmath -base @xmath is @xmath .
If @xmath is a finite field then @xmath is a projective profinite group.
In this case, by Corollary 3.3 of [ 11 ] the cover @xmath can be defined
over @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 6.7.

Suppose that @xmath is algebraically closed and that @xmath is a
hyperelliptic curve. If @xmath has a @xmath -rational point, then @xmath
is a field of definition of @xmath .

###### Proof.

It suffices to show that the cover @xmath with @xmath -base @xmath can
be defined over @xmath , since a field of definition of the cover is
automatically a field of definition of @xmath . By Theorem 6.5 , the
field of moduli of the cover @xmath with @xmath -base @xmath is @xmath .
By Corollary 6.6 , we may assume that @xmath is infinite. Since @xmath ,
@xmath has a rational point off the branch point set of @xmath . Then by
Corollary 3.4 and § 2.9 of [ 11 ] , the cover can be defined over @xmath
. ∎

###### Corollary 6.8.

Suppose that @xmath is algebraically closed and that @xmath is prime to
the characteristic of @xmath . If @xmath has a @xmath -rational point,
then @xmath is a field of definition of @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is Corollary 4.3(c) of [ 12 ] . ∎

The curve @xmath of Theorem 6.5 and Corollary 6.7 is called the
canonical model of @xmath over the field of moduli of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be the field of
moduli of @xmath . We now show the relationship between @xmath and the
fields of moduli of @xmath relative to Galois extensions of @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.9.

Let @xmath be a curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be the field of
moduli of @xmath . Then @xmath is definable over @xmath if and only if
given any algebraically closed field @xmath , and any subfield @xmath
with @xmath Galois, @xmath can be defined over its field of moduli
relative to the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that given any algebraically closed field @xmath , and any
subfield @xmath with @xmath Galois, @xmath can be defined over its field
of moduli relative to the extension @xmath . By Corollary 5.9 , @xmath
is definable over a finite separable extension field @xmath of @xmath .
Let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath . Without loss of
generality we may assume that @xmath is a curve over @xmath . Then there
exists a field @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath is separable and
@xmath is purely inseparable. Then the field @xmath is the field of
moduli of @xmath relative to the extension @xmath . By assumption,
@xmath is definable over @xmath . So by Lemma 5.11 , @xmath is definable
over @xmath . Thus @xmath is definable over @xmath .

The other direction follows immediately from the definition of @xmath .
∎

### 7 Moduli spaces

Let @xmath be a curve of genus @xmath ( @xmath over a field @xmath , let
@xmath be its field of moduli, and let @xmath be the coarse moduli space
of curves of genus @xmath viewed as a scheme over the prime field of
@xmath . The curve @xmath gives a morphism @xmath whose image @xmath is
a closed point of @xmath . Let @xmath be the residue field at @xmath .
In this section we show the relationship between @xmath and @xmath .

###### Theorem 7.1 (Baily, 1962).

Following the above notation, suppose the characteristic of @xmath is
@xmath . Then @xmath .

(cf.Baily [ 1 ] )

###### Theorem 7.2 (Sekiguchi, 1985).

Following the above notation, @xmath is a purely inseparable extension
of @xmath .

(cf.Sekiguchi [ 26 ] )

###### Theorem 7.3 (Sekiguchi, 1985, 1988).

There exist both hyperelliptic and non-hyperelliptic curves whose fields
of moduli are nontrivial purely inseparable extensions of the residue
fields of the corresponding points on their moduli spaces.

(cf.Sekiguchi [ 26 , 27 ] )

## Chapter \thechapter Finite subgroups of projective general linear
groups

### 8 Notation and terminology

Let @xmath be a field. Throughout this thesis @xmath denotes the group
of nonsingular @xmath matrices over the field @xmath and @xmath denotes
the subgroup of @xmath consisting of elements of determinant @xmath .

Let @xmath be a prime number and let @xmath be a finite field with
@xmath elements, where @xmath . Throughout this thesis, let @xmath be
the subgroup of @xmath consisting of matrices @xmath such that @xmath is
the transpose of the matrix obtained from @xmath via the automorphism
@xmath of @xmath and let @xmath .

For any group @xmath , @xmath denotes @xmath where @xmath is the center
of @xmath .

We will use a matrix with round brackets to denote an element of @xmath
and a matrix with square brackets to denote the image in @xmath of an
element of @xmath . For example,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denotes a matrix in @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denotes its image in @xmath .

### 9 Finite subgroups of the 2-dimensional projective general linear
groups

Throughout this section let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of
characteristic @xmath with @xmath or @xmath .

###### Lemma 9.1.

Any finite subgroup @xmath of @xmath is conjugate to one of the
following groups:

1.   I: when @xmath or @xmath is relatively prime to @xmath .

    1.  @xmath

    2.  @xmath

    3.  @xmath

        @xmath

    4.  @xmath

    5.  @xmath

        @xmath

    where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity,
    @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity, and @xmath is a
    primitive @xmath root of unity.

2.   II: when @xmath is divisible by @xmath .

    1.  @xmath , where @xmath is a finite additive subgroup of @xmath
        containing @xmath and @xmath is a root of unity such that @xmath

    2.  @xmath

    3.  @xmath

    where @xmath is the finite field with @xmath elements, where @xmath
    .

###### Proof.

See §§71-74 in [ 35 ] and Chapter 3 in [ 32 ] . ∎

###### Remark 9.2.

It can be directly verified that @xmath and @xmath are subgroups of
@xmath when the characteristic of @xmath is @xmath . Indeed, in this
case @xmath is @xmath conjugate to @xmath and @xmath is @xmath conjugate
to @xmath . So the result of Lemma 9.3 (b) is still valid in
characteristic @xmath .

###### Lemma 9.3.

Let @xmath be the normalizer of @xmath in @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath if @xmath ,

2.  @xmath , @xmath if @xmath ,

3.  @xmath ,

4.  @xmath ,

5.  @xmath ,

6.  @xmath

7.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  See §71 in [ 35 ] .

2.  Since @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath , @xmath . Conjugation
    of @xmath by @xmath gives a homomorphism @xmath . A computation
    shows that the centralizer @xmath of @xmath in @xmath is @xmath .
    The kernel of this homomorphism is @xmath . Since @xmath , every
    automorphism of @xmath is given by conjugation by an element of
    @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath , so @xmath .

    For @xmath , see §71 in [ 35 ] .

3.  Since @xmath is a characteristic subgroup of @xmath , @xmath . As
    @xmath is normal in @xmath , we get @xmath .

4.  Since @xmath is a characteristic subgroup of @xmath , @xmath . Thus
    @xmath .

5.  Conjugation of @xmath by @xmath gives a homomorphism @xmath . The
    kernel of this homomorphism is the centralizer of @xmath in @xmath ,
    which is just the centralizer @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . A
    computation shows that @xmath is just the identity. Since @xmath is
    finite, @xmath is a finite subgroup of @xmath . Since @xmath , by
    Lemma 9.1 we must have @xmath .

6.  We first show that @xmath is finite. Conjugation of @xmath by @xmath
    gives a homomorphism @xmath . The kernel of this homomorphism is the
    centralizer @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . A computation shows that
    @xmath is just the identity. Since @xmath is finite, so is @xmath .
    By Lemma 9.1 any finite subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath must be
    isomorphic to either @xmath or @xmath for some @xmath . Since @xmath
    is normal in @xmath , @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath . So
    @xmath , in particular @xmath is strictly contained in @xmath . By
    the corollary on page 80 of [ 32 ] , @xmath is simple for @xmath .
    It follows that @xmath for @xmath . By Theorem 9.9 on page 78 of [
    32 ] , the only nontrivial normal subgroup of @xmath is @xmath if
    @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

7.  Clear from the proof of the previous case.

∎

###### Lemma 9.4.

Let @xmath be one of the subgroups listed in Lemma 9.1 and let @xmath be
a finite subgroup which properly contains @xmath .

1.   If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath
    , @xmath with @xmath , or @xmath for some finite field @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath
    , or @xmath for some finite field @xmath where @xmath .

3.   If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some finite field
    @xmath where @xmath .

4.   If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath , or
    @xmath for some finite field @xmath where @xmath .

5.   If @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath for some @xmath with @xmath ,
    @xmath , or @xmath for some finite field @xmath where @xmath .

6.   If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some
    finite field @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  By Lemma 9.1 , @xmath must be isomorphic to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some finite field
    @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . (Note that
    @xmath .) The group @xmath has a unique subgroup isomorphic to
    @xmath . So @xmath . Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . Since @xmath is the unique
    subgroup of @xmath isomorphic to @xmath , the result follows.

2.  Since @xmath is not a subgroup of @xmath , by Lemma 9.1 , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some finite
    field @xmath . In the last two cases note that @xmath and @xmath
    have a diagonal element of order @xmath if and only if @xmath .

    If @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath has an element of order
    @xmath that commutes with the elements of order @xmath in @xmath . A
    computation shows that @xmath .

3.  Since @xmath is not a subgroup of @xmath , @xmath , or a cyclic
    group, by Lemma 9.1 , @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath , or
    @xmath for some finite field @xmath . In the last two cases note
    that @xmath and @xmath have a diagonal element of order @xmath only
    if @xmath .

    Suppose that @xmath . It can be shown that @xmath has @xmath
    subgroups isomorphic to @xmath and that each one contains a subgroup
    isomorphic to @xmath which is normal in @xmath . So @xmath . By
    Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . So @xmath .

    If @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath has an element of order
    @xmath that commutes with the elements of order @xmath in @xmath . A
    computation shows that @xmath .

4.  By Lemma 9.1 , @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath
    for some finite field @xmath . In the last two cases note that
    @xmath and @xmath have a diagonal element of order @xmath if and
    only if @xmath .

    If @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath has an element of order
    @xmath that commutes with the elements of order @xmath in @xmath . A
    computation shows that @xmath .

5.  By Lemma 9.1 , @xmath for some @xmath with @xmath , @xmath , or
    @xmath for some finite field @xmath . In the last two cases note
    that @xmath and @xmath have an diagonal element of order @xmath only
    if @xmath .

    If @xmath for some @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath has an element
    of order @xmath that commutes with the elements of order @xmath in
    @xmath . A computation shows that @xmath .

6.  By Lemma 9.1 , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some finite
    field @xmath .

    Suppose that @xmath . Since @xmath has a unique subgroup isomorphic
    to @xmath we have @xmath . By Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . So @xmath .

∎

### 10 Finite subgroups of the 3-dimensional projective general linear
groups

Throughout this section let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of
characteristic @xmath with @xmath or @xmath . Before we begin
classifying the finite subgroups of @xmath we need to prove a few
lemmas.

###### Lemma 10.1.

Let @xmath be a field of characteristic @xmath . Let @xmath be a finite
subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath is isomorphic to a finite subgroup of
@xmath (and @xmath ) for some finite field @xmath of order @xmath for
some @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is finite, @xmath for some finitely generated @xmath
-algebra @xmath where @xmath is a finite field of with @xmath elements.
Let @xmath . Then @xmath gives an affine variety over @xmath . Let
@xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath and let @xmath . Let @xmath and
write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath and where the @xmath are not
identically zero for all @xmath . Let @xmath denote the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The map @xmath given by @xmath is a homomorphism and is injective if and
only if @xmath for all @xmath . We show that there exists @xmath such
that @xmath gives an isomorphism of @xmath onto a finite subgroup of
@xmath for some finite field @xmath .

Note that if @xmath is the image of a diagonal matrix then @xmath is not
in the kernel of @xmath for any @xmath since it is the image of a matrix
in @xmath .

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath fix a lift

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath are not identically zero for all @xmath . For each
@xmath , choose @xmath with @xmath , let @xmath , and let @xmath . Then
since @xmath , there must exist @xmath such that @xmath . It follows
that the map @xmath gives an isomorphism from @xmath onto a finite
subgroup of @xmath for some finite field @xmath . (Note that @xmath .) ∎

Given a finite group @xmath of order @xmath and a field @xmath , let
@xmath be the algebra of @xmath over @xmath . Recall that a left @xmath
-module corresponds to a representation of @xmath over @xmath and that a
simple @xmath -module corresponds to an irreducible representation of
@xmath over @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of isomorphism classes of
simple @xmath -modules.

###### Lemma 10.2.

Let @xmath be a finite irreducible subgroup of @xmath of order @xmath .
Let @xmath be the field obtained by adjoining the @xmath roots of unity
to the prime field of @xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath conjugate to a
finite subgroup of @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is shown in [ 5 ] that an irreducible representation of a finite
group @xmath of order @xmath can be written in the field of the @xmath
roots of unity. Since any finite irreducible subgroup of @xmath is the
image of an irreducible representation @xmath , our result follows. ∎

The next two corollaries follow easily from Lemma 10.3 .

###### Corollary 10.3.

Let @xmath be a finite irreducible subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath is
@xmath -conjugate to a finite subgroup of @xmath and @xmath where @xmath
is a finite extension of the prime subfield of @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is clear by Lemma 10.2 . ∎

###### Corollary 10.4.

Let @xmath be a finite subgroup of @xmath of order @xmath . Let @xmath
be the characteristic of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is zero or @xmath
. Then @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to a finite subgroup of @xmath where
@xmath is a finite extension of the prime subfield of @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then by Theorem 1.2 of [ 18 ] , the group algebra @xmath is
semisimple. So every @xmath -module is a direct sum of irreducible
modules. Our result follows easily. ∎

###### Lemma 10.5.

Let @xmath be a prime. Let @xmath be a finite group of order @xmath .
Let @xmath be a field of characteristic @xmath . Assume further that
@xmath is complete with respect to a discrete valuation @xmath with
valuation ring @xmath , maximal ideal @xmath , and residue field @xmath
of characteristic @xmath . Any representation @xmath is isomorphic to a
representation @xmath . Furthermore if @xmath then the operation of
reduction @xmath defines a bijection from @xmath onto @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from Proposition 43 and the remark on page 128 of [ 28 ] .
∎

###### Corollary 10.6.

Two finite subgroups @xmath , @xmath of order prime to @xmath are
conjugate if and only if there exists two @xmath conjugate subgroups
@xmath , @xmath with @xmath under the reduction @xmath map.

###### Proof.

This is clear by Lemma 10.5 . ∎

An element of @xmath which is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is called intransitive . A subgroup of @xmath consisting entirely of
intransitive elements is also called intransitive. If a subgroup @xmath
is intransitive then it is isomorphic to a subgroup of @xmath , and
there is a natural map from @xmath onto a subgroup @xmath .

###### Lemma 10.7.

Any finite subgroup @xmath of @xmath is conjugate to one of the
following groups:

1.   I: when @xmath or @xmath is relatively prime to @xmath .

    1.   an intransitive group @xmath whose image @xmath in @xmath is
        equal to one of the groups in Lemma 9.1 Case I,

    2.   a group generated by

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and @xmath , where @xmath is a finite group generated by the
        image in @xmath of diagonal matrices. Such a group will be
        called a group of type @xmath . Let

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath . The group of order @xmath generated by @xmath and
        @xmath will be called @xmath .

    3.   a group generated by

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and a group of type @xmath . Such a group will be called a group
        of type @xmath . Following the notation of (b), the group of
        order @xmath generated by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath will be
        called @xmath .

    4.   the group @xmath of order @xmath generated by @xmath and

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity.

    5.   the group @xmath of order @xmath generated by @xmath and @xmath
        , where

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity.

    6.   the group @xmath of order @xmath generated by @xmath and @xmath
        of (e),

    7.   the group @xmath of order @xmath generated by

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and where @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity.

    8.   the group @xmath of order @xmath generated by @xmath of (g) and

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath and @xmath .

    9.   the group @xmath of order @xmath generated by

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity, @xmath ,
        @xmath , and @xmath .

2.   II: when @xmath is divisible by @xmath .

    1.  @xmath

    2.  @xmath

    3.  @xmath

    4.  @xmath

    5.  @xmath which is defined as the image of @xmath under the
        injective map

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

    6.  @xmath which is defined as the image of @xmath under the map
        from (n).

    7.  @xmath , @xmath , or the group @xmath containing @xmath with
        index @xmath , and with

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath and @xmath . In all cases char @xmath . The group
        @xmath is independent of our choice of @xmath . That is, the
        generators obtained by replacing @xmath with @xmath also
        generate @xmath .

    8.  @xmath of (g), @xmath of (i), a group of type @xmath from (b),
        or a group of type @xmath from (c). In all cases char @xmath .
        For convenience, in characteristic @xmath , we will refer to
        @xmath as @xmath , @xmath as @xmath , a group of type @xmath as
        a group of type @xmath , and a group of type @xmath as a group
        of type @xmath .

    9.   a semidirect product @xmath where, for @xmath , @xmath is an
        elementary abelian @xmath -group consisting entirely of elements
        of the form

          -- -------- -- ------------
             @xmath      ( @xmath )
          -- -------- -- ------------

        or

          -- -------- -- ------------
             @xmath      ( @xmath )
          -- -------- -- ------------

        and where @xmath is an intransitive group whose image @xmath is
        one of the groups listed in Lemma 9.1 that is not equal to a
        group given in Lemma 9.1  (a) or (f). If the order of @xmath is
        prime to @xmath then @xmath is nontrivial.

    10.  A semidirect product @xmath where @xmath is a nontrivial @xmath
        -group consisting entirely of elements of the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and where @xmath is a finite diagonal subgroup of @xmath

    where @xmath is the finite field with @xmath elements, with @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  I: The finite subgroups of @xmath , where @xmath , are classified in
    Chapter VII of [ 20 ] . Using Corollary 10.6 , we obtain a
    classification for the finite subgroups of @xmath in any
    characteristic where @xmath .

    1.  See pages 206-207 and page 236 of [ 20 ] .

    2.  See Lemma 108 on page 230 and page 236 of [ 20 ] .

    3.  By §112 on page 236 of [ 20 ] , any group not conjugate to any
        of the other groups in this Lemma is conjugate to a group @xmath
        generated by a group of type @xmath , and an element @xmath of
        the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        We need to show that @xmath is @xmath conjugate to a group
        generated by a group of type @xmath and @xmath . Observe that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        A computation shows that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Then

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Let

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        A computation shows that @xmath . So @xmath is in @xmath . Since
        @xmath is the image of a diagonal matrix we must have @xmath for
        some @xmath . Observe that @xmath . Note that @xmath . Since
        @xmath is generated by the images of diagonal matrices and since
        diagonal matrices commute we have @xmath . So we have

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        It follows that @xmath is of the desired form.

    4.  and (e) See pages 236-239 of [ 20 ] .

    5.  See pages 236-239 of [ 20 ] and page 217 of [ 21 ] .

    6.  See pages 250-252 of [ 20 ] and page 224 of [ 21 ] .

    7.  See pages 250-252 of [ 20 ] and page 225 of [ 21 ] .

    8.  See pages 250-251 of [ 20 ] and §131 of [ 35 ] .

2.  II: The subgroups of @xmath , for a finite field @xmath , are
    classified in [ 3 ] . By Lemma 10.1 , any finite subgroup of @xmath
    is isomorphic to a subgroup of @xmath for some finite field @xmath .
    By Corollary 10.3 , any finite irreducible subgroup of @xmath is
    @xmath -conjugate to a subgroup of @xmath . Note that the groups
    listed in (j)-(q) are all irreducible.

    1.  See part (1) of Theorem 1.1 of [ 3 ] .

    2.  See part (3) of Theorem 1.1 and Lemma 6.1 of [ 3 ] .

    3.  See part (2) of Theorem 1.1 of [ 3 ] .

    4.  See part (4) of Theorem 1.1 and Lemma 6.2 of [ 3 ] .

    5.  and (o) See part (5) of Theorem 1.1 and Lemma 6.3 of [ 3 ] .
        Note that the map given in Lemma 6.3 of [ 3 ] is defined
        incorrectly. The map we give comes from the symmetric square
        representation of Chapter 1 §6 of [ 28 ] .

    6.  Suppose that the characteristic of @xmath is @xmath . Let @xmath
        , where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We have @xmath ,

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        By Lemma 6.6 of [ 3 ] , any subgroup of @xmath isomorphic to
        @xmath is conjugate to @xmath .

        If @xmath , let @xmath be the element of @xmath obtained by
        applying the map @xmath to the entries of @xmath . We need to
        show that @xmath .

        Write

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        So @xmath . Let

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . It follows that
        @xmath . Note that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        So

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        @xmath

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        @xmath

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        @xmath

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        By Lemma 6.6 of [ 3 ] , @xmath has index @xmath in @xmath and
        every subgroup isomorphic to @xmath is conjugate to @xmath and
        is generated by @xmath and @xmath .

        By Lemma 6.6 of [ 3 ] , every subgroup isomorphic to @xmath in
        @xmath , is conjugate to @xmath .

    7.  By parts (6) and (7) of Theorem 1.1 of [ 3 ] , there exists one
        conjugacy class each of groups isomorphic to @xmath and @xmath .
        One can verify directly that the generators for @xmath and
        @xmath satisfy the necessary relations as generators for the
        groups. For the last two types of groups, see parts (1) and (2)
        of Theorem 7.1 of [ 3 ] .

    8.  and (s) Let @xmath be a finite subgroup of @xmath that is not
        @xmath -conjugate to any of the groups listed earlier in this
        Lemma. For any subgroup @xmath let @xmath be the isomorphism
        given by @xmath , where @xmath is the image in @xmath of the
        inverse transpose of any lift of @xmath . It follows from the
        argument given in §7 of [ 3 ] and from Theorem 7.1 of [ 3 ] ,
        that up to conjugation and/or isomorphism by @xmath , the group
        @xmath consists entirely of elements of the form

          -- -------- -- -----
             @xmath      (I)
          -- -------- -- -----

        and that @xmath contains an elementary abelian subgroup @xmath
        consists entirely of elements of the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        The subgroup @xmath is the kernel of the homomorphism @xmath
        given by

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        After conjugating by an element of the form (I) we may assume
        that the image @xmath of @xmath in @xmath is one of the
        subgroups listed in Lemma 9.1 .

        First suppose that @xmath is one of the groups given in Lemma
        9.1  (a) or (f). Conjugating @xmath by the element

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        we obtain a group that consists of elements of the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Let @xmath be the Sylow- @xmath group of @xmath . The group
        @xmath consists entirely of elements of the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Define @xmath by

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and let @xmath be the image of @xmath . Then the sequence

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        is split exact by Hall’s Theorem. Let @xmath be a section that
        is a homomorphism. It can be deduced from Theorem @xmath of §96
        of [ 20 ] that @xmath is conjugate to subgroup @xmath ,
        generated by the images of diagonal matrices, via a lower
        triangular matrix @xmath . The group @xmath consists entirely of
        elements of the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        So we obtain the a group of the type given in (s).

        From now on we will assume that @xmath is one of the groups
        given in Lemma 9.1 not equal to a group given by Lemma 9.1  (a)
        or (f).

        If the order of @xmath is prime to @xmath , then by Hall’s
        Theorem the sequence

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        is split exact. Let @xmath be a section that is a homomorphism.
        Then by part (a) of this lemma, @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to
        and intransitive group @xmath . Let @xmath and suppose that
        @xmath . Since @xmath is one of the groups given in Lemma 9.1
        not equal to a group given by Lemma 9.1  (a) or (f), and since
        @xmath consists of elements of the form ( I ), it can be
        verified that @xmath fixes exactly one point of @xmath , the
        point @xmath . It can be verified that @xmath is the only point
        of @xmath fixed by @xmath . It follows that @xmath must also fix
        @xmath . So @xmath must be of the form ( I ). Then @xmath is of
        the form ( @xmath ). So @xmath is @xmath conjugate to a group of
        the desired form.

        If @xmath divides the order of @xmath then @xmath is one of the
        groups given in Lemma 9.1  (g) or (h), then by Theorem 3.4(5) of
        [ 3 ] , @xmath contains the element

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        After conjugating @xmath by an element of the form ( I ), we may
        assume that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Then for any

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        the element

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Then @xmath where

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        So @xmath is of the form @xmath and it is easily seen that the
        transpose inverse of @xmath is of the form @xmath .

∎

###### Lemma 10.8.

Let @xmath be one of the groups listed in Lemma 10.7 and let @xmath be
the normalizer of @xmath in @xmath . Then, using the notation of Lemma
10.7 ,

1.   suppose that @xmath is a group of type @xmath . So @xmath is
    generated by the element @xmath and a diagonal subgroup @xmath . Let
    @xmath be the largest power of @xmath such that @xmath has an
    element of order @xmath and let @xmath be a primitive @xmath root of
    unity. Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then

    1.   if @xmath then @xmath .

    2.   if @xmath and if @xmath , then @xmath .

    3.   if @xmath and if @xmath , then @xmath .

2.   suppose that @xmath is a group of type @xmath . So @xmath is
    generated by the elements @xmath , @xmath , and a diagonal subgroup
    @xmath . Then

    1.   if @xmath then @xmath .

    2.   if @xmath and if @xmath , then @xmath .

    3.   if @xmath and if @xmath , then @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

4.  @xmath .

5.  @xmath .

6.  @xmath .

7.  @xmath .

8.  @xmath .

9.  @xmath . Note that if @xmath , then @xmath . Otherwise, @xmath where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for some @xmath where @xmath .

10. @xmath .

11. @xmath . Note that if @xmath , then @xmath . Otherwise @xmath where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for some @xmath where @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath .

12. @xmath .

13. @xmath where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for any @xmath that is not a square.

14. @xmath .

15. @xmath and @xmath .

16. @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath is of type @xmath then @xmath where
    @xmath . If @xmath is of type @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  It can be deduced by Lemma 1.5 of [ 10 ] that any group that
    contains a diagonal element of order @xmath contains the element
    @xmath .

    1.  Suppose that @xmath . By §115 of [ 20 ] , @xmath and @xmath is
        generated by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Note that @xmath .
        One can verify that @xmath .

    2.  Suppose that @xmath and @xmath . By the Lemma of §108 of [ 20 ]
        , @xmath is a group generated by @xmath , @xmath , and the
        images in @xmath of diagonal matrices. Let @xmath be the image
        in @xmath of a diagonal matrix. A computation shows that if
        @xmath then @xmath . So if @xmath , then @xmath , where @xmath
        and @xmath is the image of a diagonal matrix of order a power of
        @xmath . By Lemma 1.5 of [ 10 ] we may assume that @xmath is a
        power of @xmath or @xmath . A computation shows that @xmath and
        that @xmath . It follows that @xmath .

    3.  Suppose that @xmath and @xmath . The proof is the same as for
        @xmath in (ii), except that @xmath must be a power of @xmath or
        @xmath and the final computation shows that @xmath and that
        @xmath .

2.  1.  Suppose that @xmath . By §115 of [ 20 ] , @xmath .

    2.  and iii. By assumption @xmath is generated by @xmath and a group
        @xmath of type @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath is a
        characteristic subgroup of @xmath . It follows that @xmath . The
        result follows from (b).

3.  By §115 of [ 20 ] , @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath
    has index @xmath in @xmath it is normal in @xmath . Since @xmath has
    prime index in @xmath , we must have @xmath .

4.  By §115 of [ 20 ] , @xmath . A computation shows that @xmath is
    closed under conjugation by @xmath , so @xmath . Since @xmath has
    order @xmath , @xmath .

5.  By §115 of [ 20 ] , @xmath .

6.  By §124 of [ 20 ] , @xmath .

7.  By §124 of [ 20 ] , @xmath .

8.  By §124 of [ 20 ] , @xmath .

9.  and (l) Clear by Lemmas 6.1 and  6.2 of [ 3 ] .

10. and (m) Let @xmath be equal to @xmath or @xmath and let @xmath be
    equal to @xmath or @xmath respectively. By Theorem 1.1 of [ 3 ] ,
    @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath of index @xmath or @xmath . We
    show that @xmath is a characteristic subgroup of @xmath , so in
    particular @xmath . Then our result follows from (j) and (l).

    Let @xmath be an automorphism of @xmath and let @xmath . Then since
    @xmath and @xmath are normal subgroups of @xmath , the group @xmath
    is a normal subgroup of @xmath . By Theorem 5.14 of [ 3 ] , @xmath
    is a simple group. So @xmath or @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . So
    @xmath . By page 208 of [ 21 ] , @xmath . (Mitchell calls @xmath and
    @xmath , LF @xmath and HO @xmath respectively.) Since @xmath ,
    @xmath . This is a contradiction. Therefore @xmath and so @xmath is
    a characteristic subgroup of @xmath .

11. This is clear by Lemma 6.3 of [ 3 ] .

12. This follows from the fact that @xmath is a characteristic subgroup
    of @xmath and part (n) of this Lemma.

13. By Lemma 6.6 of [ 3 ] , @xmath . By Lemma 6.7 of [ 3 ] , @xmath .

14. By Lemma 6.4 of [ 3 ] , @xmath . By Lemma 6.5 of [ 3 ] , @xmath .
    The last two statement follow from simple computations very similar
    to the ones in the proofs of part (b) and (c).

∎

###### Lemma 10.9.

Let @xmath be a finite intransitive group. Suppose that the image @xmath
of @xmath in @xmath is one of the groups listed in Lemma 9.1 which is
not equal to one of the groups given by Lemma 9.1 (a) or (f). Then
@xmath has an element of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where both @xmath and @xmath are roots of unity not equal to @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath is one of the groups given in Lemma 9.1 (g) or (h), then by
Theorem 3.4(5) of [ 3 ] , @xmath contains the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the other cases, after looking at the generators for the groups
listed in Lemma 9.1 , one can deduce that @xmath contains a dihedral
subgroup generated by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity for some @xmath . Then
@xmath contains the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a some root of unity. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is of the desired form unless @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath
contains the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a some root of unity. One of @xmath or @xmath is of the
desired form, for if @xmath is not then @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is of the desired form since @xmath implies that @xmath is a primitive
root of unity for some @xmath . ∎

## Chapter \thechapter Isomorphisms of hyperelliptic and plane curves

### 11 Isomorphisms of hyperelliptic curves

Throughout this section let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic
not equal to @xmath , let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath , and
let @xmath be a hyperelliptic curve over @xmath . In particular, @xmath
admits a degree- @xmath morphism to @xmath and the genus of @xmath is at
least @xmath . Each element of Aut( @xmath ) induces an automorphism of
@xmath fixing the branch points. The number of branch points is @xmath
(in fact @xmath ), so @xmath is finite. We get a homomorphism @xmath
with kernel generated by the hyperelliptic involution @xmath . Let
@xmath be the image of this homomorphism. Replacing the original map
@xmath by its composition with an automorphism @xmath has the effect of
changing @xmath to @xmath , so we may assume that @xmath is one of the
groups listed in Lemma 9.1 . Fix an equation @xmath for @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath . So the function field @xmath equals @xmath .

###### Proposition 11.1.

Let @xmath be a hyperelliptic curve over @xmath given by @xmath , where
@xmath is another squarefree polynomial in @xmath . Every isomorphism
@xmath is given by an expression of the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath and @xmath . The pair @xmath is unique up to replacement
by @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is another isomorphism, given by @xmath
, then the composition @xmath is given by @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Proposition 2.1 in [ 2 ] . ∎

Throughout the rest of this section assume that @xmath is the field of
moduli of @xmath relative to the extension @xmath and let @xmath .

###### Lemma 11.2.

Suppose @xmath and suppose that the isomorphism @xmath is given by
@xmath . Let @xmath be the image of @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath then
@xmath is in the normalizer @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath then
@xmath is an upper triangular matrix.

###### Proof.

Since Aut @xmath , the group of automorphisms of @xmath induced by Aut(
@xmath is @xmath .

Let @xmath be an automorphism of @xmath given by @xmath . Since @xmath
is an automorphism, @xmath is a lift of some element @xmath . Then
@xmath is an automorphism of @xmath given by @xmath . We have @xmath .
It follows that @xmath If @xmath , by Lemma 9.1 , @xmath . So @xmath .
If @xmath , then since @xmath has an elementary abelian subgroup of the
same form as @xmath , a simple computation shows that @xmath is an upper
triangular matrix. ∎

###### Lemma 11.3.

Suppose that for every @xmath there exists an isomorphism @xmath given
by @xmath where @xmath . Then @xmath can be defined over @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath is given by an equation of the form @xmath where
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the hyperelliptic branch points of @xmath . Let @xmath .
The isomorphism @xmath induces an isomorphism on the canonical images
@xmath which is given by @xmath . Write @xmath . The hypothesis @xmath
implies that @xmath maps @xmath to itself; since it also maps @xmath to
@xmath , we get @xmath . So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath can be defined over @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 11.4.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath can be defined over @xmath
.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 9.1 , @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemma 11.2 , any
isomorphism @xmath is given by @xmath where @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 11.5.

Suppose there exists an automorphism @xmath of @xmath such that for all
@xmath the automorphism @xmath lifts to an isomorphism @xmath . Then
@xmath lifts to an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath -model of @xmath is given by an equation of the
form @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the hyperelliptic branch points of @xmath . By assumption
@xmath is the smooth projective model of @xmath , where @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Suppose @xmath . Writing @xmath , we have by assumption

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the hyperelliptic curve over @xmath given by @xmath . The
hyperelliptic branch points of @xmath are @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a zero of @xmath , then either @xmath is a zero of @xmath
with @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath is a zero of
@xmath , then the degree of @xmath is @xmath . In this case @xmath is a
branch point of @xmath so we must have @xmath for some hyperelliptic
branch point of @xmath of @xmath . Then since @xmath , @xmath is a zero
of @xmath . So @xmath .

Conversely, let @xmath be a zero of @xmath . Clearly, if @xmath then
@xmath is a zero of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then the degree of
@xmath is @xmath and @xmath must divide @xmath . Also, since @xmath we
must have @xmath and @xmath . So @xmath is a zero of @xmath . So @xmath
and we must have @xmath for some @xmath . By Proposition 11.1 , it
follows that there exists @xmath such that @xmath gives an isomorphism
@xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

### 12 Isomorphisms of plane curves

Throughout this section let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of
characteristic not equal to @xmath .

###### Theorem 12.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be smooth plane curves of degree @xmath over
@xmath . Then any isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath is induced by a
linear transformation of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 8 ] . ∎

###### Lemma 12.2.

Let @xmath be a subfield of @xmath such that @xmath is Galois and let
@xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve over @xmath of degree @xmath
. Let @xmath be the automorphism group of @xmath and let @xmath be the
normalizer of @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath and suppose that there
exists an isomorphism @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath is given by an
element @xmath in the normalizer @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and suppose that @xmath is an isomorphism. By Theorem 12.1 ,
@xmath is given by @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath , we must have
@xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 12.3.

Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve over @xmath and suppose that the
automorphism group @xmath of @xmath is given by @xmath , one of the
groups listed in Lemma 10.7 . Let @xmath be a subfield of @xmath such
that @xmath is Galois and let @xmath . Let @xmath and suppose that
@xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath . Then @xmath unless

1.  @xmath is intransitive where @xmath is one of the groups in Lemma
    9.1 . If @xmath is not a group given in Lemma 9.1  (a) or (f), then
    @xmath is an element of an intransitive group @xmath containing
    @xmath with @xmath equal to the normalizer of @xmath in @xmath .

2.  @xmath . Then @xmath if and only if @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath
    where @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  @xmath is a group given in Lemma 10.7 (r), where @xmath is an
    elementary abelian @xmath -group and @xmath is an intransitive
    group. Then @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is an element of an
    intransitive group @xmath containing @xmath with @xmath equal to the
    normalizer of @xmath in @xmath .

4.  @xmath is a group given in Lemma 10.7 (s), where is @xmath a
    nontrivial @xmath -group consisting entirely of elements of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and where @xmath is a finite diagonal subgroup of @xmath .

###### Proof.

In all but the four cases listed, it is easily verified that @xmath and
so by Lemma 12.2 , @xmath is in @xmath . We now consider the other four
cases.

1.  Any intransitive group, whose image in @xmath is given by one of the
    groups of Lemma 9.1 that is not equal to a group given in (a)
    or (f), fixes exactly one point of @xmath , the point @xmath . Since
    @xmath is also intransitive and since @xmath is a group of the same
    type as @xmath , @xmath must also fix only the point @xmath . It
    follows that @xmath must also fix @xmath , so @xmath must be of the
    form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Let @xmath be the inverse transpose isomorphism of @xmath defined in
    the proof of Lemma 10.7 (r). Then both @xmath and @xmath fix only
    the point @xmath . So

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    must also fix @xmath . So @xmath . This implies that @xmath is a
    scalar multiple of both @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is
    invertible @xmath . So we must have @xmath . Therefore @xmath must
    be of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath , the element @xmath must be in the normalizer of
    @xmath in @xmath .

2.  If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath must be in the normalizer @xmath
    of @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 , @xmath .

    Suppose that @xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath . A computation
    shows that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So @xmath . Then since

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    we must have @xmath . It follows that @xmath for some @xmath .

3.  Suppose that @xmath is a group given by Lemma 10.7 (r), where @xmath
    is an elementary abelian @xmath -group consisting of elements of the
    form ( @xmath ) with @xmath and where @xmath is an intransitive
    group whose image @xmath is one of the groups listed in Lemma 9.1
    not equal to a group given in Lemma 9.1  (a) or (f). Let @xmath be
    the inverse transpose isomorphism of @xmath defined in proof of
    Lemma 10.7 (r). There exists an intransitive element @xmath so that
    @xmath , is a group given by Lemma 10.7 (r) where @xmath is an
    elementary abelian @xmath -group consisting of elements of the
    form ( @xmath ) with @xmath . Let @xmath be the automorphism of
    @xmath defined by @xmath . Note that the image of an intransitive
    element under @xmath is intransitive and that @xmath and that @xmath
    for all @xmath . Since we will show that @xmath implies that @xmath
    , with @xmath and where @xmath is an element of an intransitive
    group @xmath containing @xmath with @xmath equal to the normalizer
    of @xmath , we may assume without loss of generality that @xmath .

    For convenience, we will write an element @xmath as @xmath where
    @xmath is a @xmath matrix and where @xmath is in @xmath . That is,
    if

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then we will write @xmath where @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Let @xmath , @xmath be in @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Now suppose that @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath . Let @xmath be
    coordinate functions on @xmath . The unique line fixed by @xmath is
    @xmath . So the unique line fixed by @xmath is @xmath . The unique
    line fixed by @xmath must be the image of the line @xmath under
    @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath must fix the line @xmath . So we can
    write @xmath . We have @xmath . Let @xmath be in @xmath . Then
    @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We see that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then for all @xmath we must have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    By Lemma 10.9 , @xmath has an element of the form @xmath , where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and where both @xmath and @xmath roots of unity are not equal to
    @xmath . Then there exists @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath and
    @xmath are zeros of @xmath . Choose @xmath so that @xmath . Since
    @xmath for some @xmath , the element

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So @xmath is in @xmath . Since @xmath by part (a) of this lemma we
    must have @xmath , so @xmath in an element of an intransitive group
    @xmath where @xmath is the normalizer of @xmath in @xmath . Then
    @xmath is of the desired form.

4.  In this case it may not be true that @xmath so @xmath may not be in
    the normalizer of @xmath .

∎

## Chapter \thechapter Hyperelliptic curves definable over their fields
of moduli

Let @xmath be a perfect field, let @xmath be an algebraic closure of
@xmath , and let @xmath . Let @xmath be a hyperelliptic curve over
@xmath and let @xmath be the canonical @xmath -model of @xmath given in
Theorem 6.5 . In the proof of Theorem 6.5 , Dèbes and Emsalem show the
canonical model exists by using the following argument. For all @xmath
there exists an isomorphism @xmath defined over @xmath . Each induces an
isomorphism @xmath that makes the following diagram commute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Composing @xmath with the canonical isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The family @xmath satisfy Weil’s cocycle condition @xmath given in
Theorem 6.3 . This shows that @xmath exists.

Let @xmath be the function field of @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath for
some element @xmath . We use @xmath as a coordinate on @xmath . Suppose
@xmath and suppose that @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can verify that @xmath for all @xmath . So we get a homomorphism
@xmath , @xmath . The curve @xmath is the variety over @xmath
corresponding to the fixed field of @xmath . The following lemma and
corollary will be of use.

###### Lemma 12.4.

Let @xmath be a curve of genus @xmath over @xmath and suppose that
@xmath has a divisor @xmath rational over @xmath of odd degree. Then
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a canonical divisor on @xmath . Since @xmath , we can take
a linear combination of @xmath and @xmath to obtain a divisor @xmath of
degree @xmath . Since @xmath , by the Riemann-Roch theorem @xmath . So
there exists an effective divisor @xmath linearly equivalent to @xmath
rational over @xmath . Since @xmath is effective and of degree 1 it
consists of a point in @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 12.5.

Let @xmath be a separable field extension of odd degree. Let @xmath be a
curve of genus @xmath defined over @xmath and suppose that @xmath . Then
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and let @xmath . Let @xmath be the distinct embeddings of
@xmath into an algebraic closure of @xmath . Then @xmath is a divisor of
degree @xmath defined over @xmath . By Lemma 12.4 , @xmath .

∎

### 13 The main result for hyperelliptic curves

###### Theorem 13.1.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic not equal to @xmath and
let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
hyperelliptic curve over @xmath and let @xmath where @xmath is the
hyperelliptic involution of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is not cyclic
or that @xmath is cyclic of order divisible by the characteristic of
@xmath . Then @xmath can be defined over its field of moduli relative to
the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . By Proposition 6.2 we may assume that @xmath is the field
of moduli of @xmath . By Proposition 11.1 we may assume that @xmath is
given by one of the groups in Lemma 9.1 . Fix an equation @xmath for
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath . So the function field @xmath equals
@xmath . There are eight cases.

1.  @xmath . The element @xmath is fixed by @xmath and is a rational
    function of degree @xmath in @xmath . So the function field of
    @xmath equals @xmath . We use @xmath as a coordinate on @xmath . The
    map @xmath is given by @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemmas 11.2 and 9.3
    , @xmath is given by @xmath where @xmath . A computation shows that
    @xmath is one of the following:

    1.  @xmath

    2.  @xmath

    3.  @xmath

    4.  @xmath

    5.  @xmath

    6.  @xmath .

    Since @xmath is defined over @xmath for all @xmath , we have @xmath
    for all @xmath . The fractional linear transformations i through vi
    form a group under composition isomorphic to @xmath . The map @xmath
    defines a homomorphism from @xmath to this group. The kernel of this
    homomorphism is @xmath . So @xmath or @xmath .

    1.  @xmath . In this case the fixed field of @xmath is @xmath and
        @xmath .

    2.  @xmath . Let @xmath be a representative of the nontrivial coset.
        There are three cases.

        1.  @xmath . Then @xmath corresponds to a point @xmath .

        2.  @xmath . Then @xmath corresponds to a point @xmath .

        3.  @xmath . Then @xmath corresponds to a point @xmath .

    3.  @xmath . Since the fixed field of @xmath is @xmath , @xmath has
        a @xmath -rational point. By Corollary 12.5 , since @xmath is
        odd, @xmath has a @xmath -rational point.

    4.  @xmath . Let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath
        such that @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath of order @xmath . By
        Case 2, @xmath has a @xmath rational point. Since @xmath is odd,
        by Corollary 12.5 , @xmath has a @xmath -rational point.

2.  @xmath , @xmath . The function field of @xmath equals the subfield
    of @xmath fixed by @xmath acting by fractional linear
    transformations. Then @xmath is fixed by @xmath and is a rational
    function of degree @xmath in @xmath , so the function field of
    @xmath equals @xmath . Therefore we use @xmath as coordinate on
    @xmath . The map @xmath is given by @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemmas
    11.2 and 9.3 , @xmath is given by @xmath where @xmath . Then the map
    @xmath is given by @xmath . So @xmath . The curve @xmath corresponds
    to the fixed field of @xmath under @xmath . Then @xmath corresponds
    to a point @xmath .

3.  @xmath . The element @xmath is fixed by the normal subgroup @xmath .
    From (c), we see that the element

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is fixed by @xmath and is a rational function of degree @xmath in
    @xmath . So the function field of @xmath equals @xmath . We use
    @xmath as coordinate on @xmath . The map @xmath is given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Let @xmath . By Lemmas 11.2 and 9.3 , @xmath is given by @xmath
    where @xmath . A computation shows that @xmath . Then @xmath
    corresponds to a point @xmath .

4.  @xmath . By Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . So by Corollary 11.4 , @xmath can
    be defined over @xmath .

5.  @xmath . By Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . So by Corollary 11.4 , @xmath can
    be defined over @xmath .

6.  @xmath . Let @xmath be the order of @xmath and let @xmath . Then
    @xmath is a rational function of degree @xmath fixed by @xmath
    acting by fractional linear transformations. So the function field
    of @xmath equals @xmath . We use @xmath as a coordinate function of
    @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemma 11.2 , @xmath is given by @xmath
    where @xmath is an upper diagonal matrix. So @xmath for some @xmath
    and @xmath . Let @xmath be the point of @xmath corresponding to
    @xmath . Then since @xmath , @xmath corresponds to a point in @xmath
    .

7.  @xmath . It can be deduced from Theorem 6.21 on page 409 of [ 32 ]
    that @xmath is generated by the image in @xmath of the following
    matrices

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    One can verify that @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Since @xmath
    is a rational function of @xmath of degree @xmath , the function
    field of @xmath is @xmath where @xmath . We use @xmath as a
    coordinate function on @xmath . The map @xmath is given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Let @xmath . By Lemmas 11.2 and 9.3 , @xmath is given by @xmath
    where @xmath . A computation shows that @xmath . Then @xmath
    corresponds to a point @xmath .

8.  @xmath . By Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . So by Corollary 11.4 , @xmath can
    be defined over @xmath .

∎

###### Theorem 13.2.

Let @xmath be a field of characteristic not equal to @xmath , let @xmath
be a hyperelliptic curve over @xmath and let @xmath where @xmath is the
hyperelliptic involution of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is not cyclic
or that @xmath is cyclic of order divisible by the characteristic of
@xmath . Then @xmath is definable over its field of moduli.

###### Proof.

This follows from Theorem 13.1 and Theorem 6.9 . ∎

### 14 A note about defining equations

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic not equal to @xmath and
let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
hyperelliptic @xmath curve over @xmath with field of moduli @xmath and
let @xmath be the hyperelliptic involution of @xmath . By Theorem 13.1 ,
@xmath is definable over @xmath . In this section we show that @xmath is
given by an equation of the form @xmath , with @xmath .

###### Lemma 14.1.

Let @xmath be a hyperelliptic curve of even genus @xmath defined over a
field @xmath of characteristic not equal to @xmath . Then @xmath is
@xmath -isomorphic to a hyperelliptic curve given by an equation of the
form @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

The canonical morphism factors as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -curve of genus @xmath . On @xmath
we have the invertible sheaf @xmath and @xmath is an invertible sheaf on
@xmath . Since @xmath is a canonical divisor @xmath on @xmath , we have
@xmath . So @xmath is odd. By Lemma 12.5 , @xmath has a @xmath -rational
point. So @xmath . So the function field of @xmath of @xmath is a
quadratic extension of @xmath . By Kummer theory @xmath where @xmath for
some @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 14.2.

Let @xmath be as in Theorem 13.1 . Then @xmath has a @xmath -model given
by an equation of the form @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is the
field of moduli of @xmath relative to the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

Throughout this proof we use the same notation and make the same
assumptions as in the proof of Theorem 13.1 . So, for example, we assume
that @xmath .

In cases (b1), (b2), (c), and (g) we construct a family of automorphisms
@xmath of @xmath that satisfy Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3
and such that each automorphism @xmath lifts to an isomorphism @xmath .
Let @xmath be the @xmath -model of @xmath corresponding to @xmath . We
then show that @xmath has a @xmath -rational point, so @xmath is
isomorphic over @xmath to @xmath . Then by Theorem 6.3 there exists an
automorphism @xmath of @xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath .
By Lemma 11.5 , @xmath has a @xmath -model @xmath given by @xmath .

If @xmath then for each @xmath we have @xmath . So the map @xmath
defines a homomorphism from @xmath to a group of fractional linear
transformations of @xmath whose kernel is @xmath . If @xmath let @xmath
, and if @xmath let @xmath . By Lemma 11.3 , we may assume that @xmath .

There are eight cases.

1.  @xmath , @xmath . In this case @xmath is equal to @xmath or @xmath .
    If @xmath there is nothing to prove so assume @xmath . So @xmath for
    some @xmath .

    Let @xmath . By Lemma 11.2 , if @xmath is an isomorphism given by
    @xmath , then the image of @xmath in @xmath is an element of @xmath
    . If @xmath , then @xmath so @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath so
    @xmath . Composing @xmath with any automorphism of @xmath gives
    another isomorphism @xmath , so any element in the same coset as
    @xmath in @xmath will lift to an isomorphism @xmath .

    Choose @xmath satisfying @xmath . For @xmath define @xmath by @xmath
    . If @xmath , then @xmath is an @xmath root of unity. If @xmath ,
    then @xmath is a @xmath root of unity that is not an @xmath root of
    unity. So @xmath lifts to a map @xmath for all @xmath . The family
    @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition and the point @xmath
    corresponds to a point @xmath .

2.  @xmath . Let @xmath . In this case @xmath is equal to @xmath or
    @xmath . We first show that if @xmath divides @xmath , then we may
    assume that there exists an element @xmath such that @xmath . So
    suppose that @xmath divides @xmath and let @xmath be such that
    @xmath has order @xmath . As shown in the proof of Theorem 13.1 (c),
    @xmath is equal to one of the following:

    1.  @xmath

    2.  @xmath

    3.  @xmath .

    If @xmath , then there is an isomorphism @xmath with @xmath equal to
    the image of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    in @xmath . Let @xmath be the image of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    in @xmath . Since @xmath and since @xmath is given by the image in
    @xmath of either

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    or

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    replacing @xmath with @xmath we may assume that @xmath . Similarly,
    if @xmath , replacing @xmath with @xmath , we may assume that @xmath
    .

    1.  @xmath . Clear.

    2.  @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath . Choose @xmath so that
        @xmath . For @xmath define @xmath by @xmath . Then as in (b),
        each automorphism @xmath lifts to an isomorphism @xmath and the
        family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition. The point
        @xmath corresponds to a point @xmath .

    3.  @xmath . Let @xmath be the hyperelliptic branch points of @xmath
        . The group @xmath acting by linear transformation permutes
        these points. By Proposition 2.1 and Lemma 2.2 of [ 4 ] , @xmath
        must be a scalar multiple of a polynomial of one of the forms:

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        for some @xmath where

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Let @xmath , suppose that @xmath has order @xmath , and let
        @xmath be an isomorphism given by @xmath . By Lemmas 11.2 and
        9.3 , @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath . Note that @xmath .
        Replacing @xmath with @xmath if necessary and composing @xmath
        with an automorphism of @xmath if necessary, by Lemma 9.3 , we
        may assume that @xmath is given by the image in @xmath of the
        matrix

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Then, writing @xmath , the hyperelliptic branch points @xmath of
        @xmath are

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        So if @xmath and @xmath are branch points of @xmath , then
        @xmath and @xmath must be branch points of @xmath . In this
        case, since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath must also be branch
        points of @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath must be branch points
        of both @xmath and @xmath . It follows that if @xmath , then
        @xmath . Similarly, one can show that if @xmath then @xmath .

        So without any loss of generality we may assume that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        If @xmath , since @xmath where @xmath is the genus of @xmath ,
        @xmath is even. By Theorem 13.1 , @xmath is definable over
        @xmath . By Lemma 14.1 , @xmath has a @xmath -model given by an
        equation of the form @xmath where @xmath .

        Assume that @xmath and let @xmath be the hyperelliptic curve
        over @xmath given by @xmath . So the hyperelliptic branch points
        of @xmath are @xmath . Let @xmath . Suppose that @xmath gives an
        isomorphism @xmath . Suppose that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        By Lemmas 11.2 and 9.3 , @xmath . The hyperelliptic branch
        points of @xmath are

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Since @xmath and the roots of @xmath are permuted by any element
        of @xmath , it is easily verified that there exist @xmath such
        that @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath . Similarly, given an
        isomorphism @xmath given by @xmath , there exists @xmath such
        that @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath .

        By the above there exists a @xmath -model @xmath of @xmath given
        by @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be an isomorphism given by
        @xmath . Suppose that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Define @xmath by @xmath . Then for all @xmath in @xmath , @xmath
        lifts to an isomorphism @xmath . By Lemma 11.5 , @xmath has a
        @xmath -model given by an equation of the form @xmath where
        @xmath .

3.  @xmath . The proof is identical to the proof of Case 1 and Case 2
    of (b2).

4.  @xmath . Clear since @xmath .

5.  @xmath . Clear since @xmath .

6.  @xmath . By Theorem 13.1 , @xmath is definable over @xmath . Let
    @xmath be a family of isomorphisms @xmath given by @xmath satisfying
    Weil’s cocycle condition. Let @xmath be the corresponding @xmath
    -model of @xmath . By Lemma 11.2 the induced automorphisms of @xmath
    , given by the images in @xmath of @xmath , fix @xmath . It follows
    that the function field @xmath is a quadratic extension of @xmath .
    By Kummer theory, @xmath is given by an equation of the form @xmath
    with @xmath .

7.  @xmath . The proof is identical to the proof of (b1).

8.  @xmath . Clear since @xmath .

∎

## Chapter \thechapter Hyperelliptic curves not definable over their
fields of moduli

By Theorem 22 of [ 7 ] , a curve of genus @xmath defined over an
algebraic closure @xmath of a perfect field @xmath of characteristic
@xmath can be defined over its field of moduli relative to @xmath . So
by Theorem 6.9 , any curve of genus @xmath over a field of
characteristic @xmath can be defined over its field of moduli. Let
@xmath be a hyperelliptic curve over a field @xmath and let @xmath be
the hyperelliptic involution of @xmath . By Theorem 13.2 , and the
results of [ 7 ] , if @xmath is not definable over its field of moduli
then the characteristic of @xmath is not @xmath and @xmath is a cyclic
group of order not equal to the characteristic of @xmath .

The first examples of curves not definable over their fields of moduli
were discovered by Shimura. These curves are hyperelliptic @xmath
-curves with automorphism groups isomorphic to @xmath and are given on
page 177 of [ 31 ] .

The authors of [ 6 ] have attempted to classify all hyperelliptic @xmath
-curves with fields of moduli @xmath relative to @xmath but not
definable over @xmath . Due to some errors in their paper, some curves
are missing from their list and many curves on their list are, in fact,
definable over @xmath . We give the full and correct list in this
section.

Suppose @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Assume that @xmath , and
that @xmath is even. Assume also that if @xmath is odd, then @xmath is
also odd. Let @xmath be the complex conjugate of @xmath for any @xmath .
Suppose @xmath . Consider the polynomials @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Assume that @xmath and @xmath both have no repeated zeros and that both
are not polynomials in @xmath . Assume that the map @xmath does not map
the zero set of @xmath into itself and does not map the set of nonzero
zeros of @xmath to itself. For any root of unity @xmath , assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lastly, if @xmath assume that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

does not map the zero set of @xmath into itself, and if @xmath assume
that @xmath is not a zero of @xmath .

###### Remark 14.3.

Here we discuss the errors in [ 6 ] .

Due to an error in their paper on page 5, the curves isomorphic to those
given by @xmath with @xmath odd are missing. We describe their error
here. Suppose @xmath , @xmath and that @xmath is an integer. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So in the notation of page 5 of [ 6 ] , @xmath has presentation (i). In
the second to last paragraph of page 5 of [ 6 ] the authors state that
there does not exist a surjective homomorphism @xmath . This is false
since if @xmath and @xmath are both odd a surjective homomorphism is
given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . With an easy adjustment of their
proof we can show the existence of such curves.

Due to an error on page 10, the curves isomorphic to the curves given by
@xmath with @xmath odd are missing. For @xmath odd, the authors give
equations of curves that are actually definable over @xmath . These are
curves given by equation (11) of [ 6 ] on page 10:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with certain conditions on @xmath and where @xmath is even. Let @xmath
be a hyperelliptic curve given by such an equation. Then the map @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives an isomorphism @xmath . Note that @xmath , so we must have @xmath
. A computation shows that @xmath . Thus by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is
definable over @xmath . This error can be explained as follows.

We follow the notation of [ 6 ] . On page 10, the authors assume that
@xmath is an element such that @xmath , where @xmath is a primitive
@xmath root of unity. They assume that their curve @xmath has an
equation of the form @xmath and they consider anticonformal
automorphisms of the field @xmath and the anticonformal automorphisms
induced by these on the field of meromorphic functions @xmath on the
Riemann sphere. In particular, they state that the anticonformal map
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath has no fixed points. Note that @xmath and
that @xmath is conformal. By “fixed point” of @xmath they mean an
element of the form @xmath , with @xmath , such that the determinant of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is nonzero, and such that @xmath . By Proposition 1 of [ 6 ] , if an
induced anticonformal map of the Riemann sphere of order @xmath with
fixed points exists, then the corresponding hyperelliptic curve can be
defined over @xmath . In writing their defining equation they make the
assumption, although not explicitly stated, that @xmath . So since
@xmath is odd, the element @xmath is an @xmath root of unity. Composing
@xmath with an appropriate power of @xmath we get an anticonformal map
@xmath of order @xmath defined by @xmath , @xmath . Clearly the point
@xmath is a fixed point.

Our equations @xmath and @xmath are obtained in the same method as in [
6 ] . For @xmath , we follow the argument on page 7 but we use the
anticonformal automorphism @xmath defined by @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity. For @xmath , we follow the
argument on page 10 but we use the anticonformal automorphism @xmath
defined by @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is a primitive @xmath root
of unity. In both cases it can be verified that @xmath contains no
anticonformal automorphism of order @xmath .

###### Lemma 14.4.

Following the notation above, let @xmath be the hyperelliptic curve over
@xmath given by @xmath and let @xmath be the hyperelliptic curve over
@xmath given by @xmath . Let @xmath be the hyperelliptic involution of
@xmath and let @xmath be the hyperelliptic involution of @xmath . Then
@xmath and @xmath . We have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, an isomorphism @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and an isomorphism @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity, @xmath is a primitive
@xmath root of unity,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It is clear that @xmath and @xmath give the equations of hyperelliptic
curves. The claims about the automorphism groups follow from Lemma 3.1
and Corollary 3.2 of [ 6 ] . Two very simple computations show that the
maps above give isomorphisms @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 14.5.

We follow the notation above. Let @xmath be a hyperelliptic curve over
@xmath with field of moduli @xmath relative to @xmath . Then @xmath is
not definable over @xmath if and only if @xmath is isomorphic to a curve
given by an equation of the form @xmath or @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath satisfy all of the conditions given above.

###### Proof.

This follows easily from the arguments given in [ 6 ] after fixing the
errors of [ 6 ] mentioned in Remark 14.3 . We note that it is also quite
easy to show that Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3 cannot be
satisfied in either case. ∎

Note that from Proposition 14.5 , we can easily construct curves over
@xmath with fields of moduli equal to @xmath but not definable over
@xmath . We simply need to take @xmath or @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath
be such a curve. Let @xmath be the algebraic closure of @xmath contained
in @xmath . It is easy to see that the field of moduli of @xmath is
@xmath . The curve @xmath cannot be definable over @xmath because that
would imply that the curve @xmath is definable over @xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter Plane curves definable over their fields of
moduli

### 15 Invariant forms

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of characteristic @xmath .
Let @xmath be two forms, i.e. two homogeneous polynomials. We define an
equivalence relation on the set of forms by @xmath if @xmath for some
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the equivalence class of @xmath . Suppose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define a right action of @xmath on the set of equivalence classes of
forms by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath .
We say that a form @xmath is @xmath -invariant if @xmath for all @xmath
. If @xmath , let @xmath denote the point

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 16 Invariant binary forms

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of characteristic @xmath .
Let @xmath be a binary form, i.e. a homogeneous polynomial in two
variables. Let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath
-invariant then @xmath , acting by linear transformation on @xmath ,
permutes the zero set of @xmath , and given a finite @xmath -invariant
subset of @xmath , we can construct a @xmath -invariant form. We will
call a @xmath -invariant form @xmath -minimal if its zeros are given by
the @xmath -orbit of a single point and if each zero occurs with
multiplicity @xmath . It is easy to see that a binary form is @xmath
-invariant if and only if it is a product of @xmath -minimal forms.

###### Lemma 16.1.

Suppose that @xmath is one of groups given in Lemma 9.1 . Let @xmath .
Then the orbit of @xmath under the action of @xmath is of size @xmath
unless @xmath is a zero of one of the following @xmath -minimal forms.

1.  @xmath , @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  @xmath , @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.  @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

6.  @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and if @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

7.   and (h) @xmath or @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The @xmath -minimal forms listed in parts (b)-(e) are called
“Grundformen” by Weber in [ 35 ] . See §70 of [ 35 ] for a discussion of
“Grundformen.” See §71, §72, §73, and §76 of [ 35 ] for the proofs of
(a)-(e).

Let @xmath and suppose that the orbit of @xmath under the action of
@xmath contains less than @xmath points. It follows that for some @xmath
, @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath . So any element in @xmath which is
conjugate to @xmath fixes a point in the orbit of @xmath under the
action of @xmath .

We now prove part (f). A computation shows that any nonidentity element
in @xmath is conjugate to an element in the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the multiplicative order of @xmath . An element of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

fixes the points @xmath and @xmath . An element in of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

fixes the point @xmath . Our result follows.

To prove parts (g) and (h), let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath
, let @xmath and note that @xmath acts by fractional linear
transformation on @xmath . As shown in the proof of Theorem 13.1 , the
fixed field @xmath of @xmath under the action of @xmath is @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath .

The primes that ramify in @xmath correspond to the points of @xmath that
have orbits of size less that @xmath . That is, if @xmath is a prime of
@xmath that ramifies in @xmath with ramification index @xmath , say

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the @xmath correspond to the element of an orbit under the action
of @xmath that has @xmath elements. By Theorem 1 of [ 33 ] , @xmath has
@xmath primes that ramify in @xmath with ramification degrees @xmath and
@xmath . These primes correspond to @xmath and @xmath respectively. Our
result follows. ∎

### 17 Useful equations of hyperelliptic curves

The following lemmas will be used to prove part of our main result for
plane curves.

###### Lemma 17.1.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of characteristic not equal
to @xmath . Let @xmath be a finite subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath acts
by fractional linear transformation on the field @xmath . Using the
notation of Lemma 9.1 , suppose that @xmath . Then the subfield of
@xmath fixed by the action of @xmath is @xmath where

1.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath .

2.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath .

3.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is shown in the proof of Theorem 13.1 . ∎

###### Lemma 17.2.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of characteristic not equal
to @xmath . Let @xmath be as in Lemma 17.1 . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives the equation of a hyperelliptic curve @xmath defined over @xmath ,
with @xmath where @xmath is the hyperelliptic involution of @xmath and

1.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath .

2.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath . If @xmath , assume also that @xmath . If @xmath , assume
    also that @xmath .

3.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath . If the characteristic of @xmath is not @xmath , assume
    also that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a zero of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the homogenization of @xmath with even degree. For
example, if @xmath , then let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be deduced from Lemmas 17.1 and 16.1 that @xmath is a squarefree
@xmath -invariant form. Then @xmath is squarefree and the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives the equation of a hyperelliptic curve @xmath .

Let @xmath be the hyperelliptic involution of @xmath . As discussed in
Chapter 3, @xmath is given by a finite subgroup of @xmath . Let @xmath .
Observe that @xmath . From our choice of @xmath , it is clear that
@xmath . We need to show @xmath . There are four cases.

1.  @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then by Lemma 9.4 (a), @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath where @xmath , or
    @xmath for some finite field @xmath .

    A computation shows that @xmath is not @xmath -invariant, so @xmath
    .

    By Lemma 16.1 , if @xmath then @xmath -minimal forms have degrees
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . So a product of @xmath
    -minimal forms can never have degree equal to @xmath . Since the
    degree of @xmath is @xmath , @xmath .

    If @xmath , then by Lemma 16.1 , the degree of @xmath must be
    greater than or equal to @xmath . So since the degree of @xmath is
    @xmath , @xmath .

    By Lemma 16.1 , @xmath -minimal forms have degrees @xmath , @xmath ,
    or @xmath if @xmath and have degrees @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath if
    @xmath . Since the degree of @xmath is @xmath , one can show that
    the cases @xmath where @xmath , and @xmath for odd @xmath cannot
    occur.

    Assume that @xmath with @xmath . Then there is an element @xmath of
    order @xmath with @xmath equal to one of the elements of @xmath . A
    computation shows that for any

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with @xmath the form @xmath is equal to @xmath for some @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since all elements of order @xmath in @xmath are conjugate by an
    element of @xmath , after replacing @xmath with @xmath where @xmath
    is an appropriate element of @xmath such that @xmath , we may assume
    that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath is of order @xmath and commutes with @xmath , a
    computation shows that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a @xmath root of unity. It can be verified
    immediately that @xmath is not @xmath -invariant, so we get a
    contradiction.

    Therefore @xmath .

2.  @xmath , @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath is given by one
    of the groups listed in Lemma 9.4 (b)-(e).

    Since @xmath , it can be shown with a computation that @xmath is not
    of the form @xmath for any @xmath .

    Suppose that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath or @xmath where @xmath .
    By Lemma 16.1 , @xmath -minimal forms have degrees @xmath , @xmath ,
    or @xmath if @xmath and have degrees @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath if
    @xmath . Since @xmath is squarefree, the degree of @xmath is @xmath
    , and since @xmath is strictly less than @xmath , @xmath , and
    @xmath , by Lemma 16.1 we must have @xmath . Write @xmath , with
    @xmath . Then @xmath . This is a contradiction since we are assuming
    that @xmath .

    By Lemma 9.4 , the only possibilities left are: @xmath and @xmath or
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath .

    If @xmath and @xmath , a direct computation shows that @xmath is
    @xmath -invariant if and only if @xmath . Since we are assuming
    @xmath when @xmath , @xmath is not @xmath -invariant.

    If @xmath and @xmath , then by Lemma 16.1 , any @xmath -invariant
    form has degree greater than or equal to @xmath . So we get a
    contradiction.

    Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath has degree @xmath . By Lemma 16.1
    , it cannot be an @xmath -invariant form if @xmath . Suppose that
    @xmath . The group @xmath acts on @xmath by fractional linear
    transformation. The zeros of @xmath consist of the @xmath -orbit
    @xmath of a point @xmath . Write

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity. By Lemma 16.1 ,
    there is exactly one orbit @xmath of @xmath under the action of
    @xmath of size @xmath . One can verify that for any element @xmath
    of order @xmath , there exists an element @xmath of order @xmath and
    @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

    Write

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and note that @xmath has order @xmath . Since @xmath is conjugate to
    @xmath there exists @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath . We must
    have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Let @xmath be an element of order @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath with
    @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
    Replacing @xmath with @xmath , we may assume that @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , and @xmath , for some @xmath with @xmath . Any element of
    order @xmath in @xmath is conjugate to the image of the matrix

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and so fixes exactly @xmath points of @xmath and is the image of a
    matrix with trace @xmath . Since @xmath does not fix @xmath , @xmath
    is the image in @xmath of a matrix of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Write @xmath . Solving

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath and @xmath we see that @xmath is the image in @xmath of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Substituting @xmath , we obtain

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    A computation shows that the resultant of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath is a zero of @xmath , we must have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It follows that @xmath . So we get a contradiction.

    Therefore @xmath .

3.  @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then by Lemma 9.4 , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , or @xmath for some finite field @xmath .

    Since @xmath , a computation shows that @xmath .

    Suppose that @xmath . Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a zero of @xmath . A computation shows that @xmath .
    By Lemma 9.1 , there exists @xmath such that @xmath . Since all
    subgroups of @xmath isomorphic to @xmath are conjugate in @xmath ,
    we may assume without loss of generality that @xmath . So @xmath is
    in @xmath . By Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . So @xmath , with @xmath . By
    Lemma 16.1 , any @xmath -invariant form of degree @xmath is a scalar
    multiple of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath , we must have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and so

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath is in @xmath , a computation shows that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Another computation shows that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    This implies that @xmath , which is a contradiction by our choice of
    @xmath .

    Suppose that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath or @xmath . By Lemma
    16.1 , @xmath -minimal forms have degrees @xmath , @xmath , or
    @xmath if @xmath and have degrees @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath if
    @xmath . As in Lemma 9.1 , the @xmath case presumes that the
    characteristic of @xmath is greater than @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    implies that @xmath . So @xmath must be isomorphic to @xmath or
    @xmath .

    Using Magma, one can show that any subgroup of @xmath isomorphic to
    @xmath is contained in a subgroup of @xmath isomorphic to @xmath .
    It follows from the above argument showing @xmath , that we get a
    contradiction.

    Therefore, @xmath .

4.  @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then by Lemma 9.1 , @xmath or @xmath
    for some @xmath . It is easily deduced that @xmath . Write @xmath ,
    @xmath . The degree of @xmath is @xmath . By Lemma 16.1 , @xmath
    -minimal forms have degrees @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath if @xmath
    and have degrees @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath if @xmath . Since
    @xmath with @xmath has no solution, we get a contradiction.

    Therefore, @xmath .

∎

### 18 The main result for plane curves

###### Lemma 18.1.

Let @xmath be a perfect field, let @xmath be an algebraic closure of
@xmath , and let @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve of degree
@xmath given by an equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and defined over @xmath with @xmath as field of moduli relative to
@xmath . Suppose there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath there
exists an isomorphism @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Then @xmath can be defined over @xmath .

###### Proof.

After a permutation of coordinates, we may assume that for all @xmath ,
there exists an isomorphism @xmath given by an element of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where, for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a form of degree @xmath . For
all @xmath with @xmath , write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume also that the @xmath were chosen in such a way that @xmath for
some @xmath . Let @xmath be the greatest @xmath such that @xmath . Then
after multiplying @xmath by @xmath we may assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for @xmath .

For each @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . Since for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by our choice of the @xmath we must have @xmath for all @xmath . So
since @xmath , for each @xmath we must have @xmath . So for each @xmath
, @xmath for all @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be the greatest common
divisor of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then there exists @xmath in the multiplicative group generated by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath for all @xmath . Note that if @xmath is an @xmath root
of unity then @xmath . Let @xmath be a primitive @xmath root of unity.
So the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an automorphism of @xmath . Choose @xmath so that @xmath . Then for
all @xmath we have @xmath for some @xmath . For each @xmath define an
isomorphism @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then it is easily verified that the family @xmath satisfies Weil’s
cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3 . So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is
definable over @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 18.2.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic @xmath and let @xmath be
an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve of
degree @xmath defined over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a group of
the type given in Lemma 10.7 (r) or an intransitive group whose image in
@xmath is not equal to one of the groups listed in Lemma 9.1 (a) or (f)
(so we allow @xmath .) Then @xmath can be defined over its field of
moduli relative to the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 6.2 , we may assume that @xmath is the field of moduli of
@xmath relative to the extension @xmath . By Corollary 6.6 , we may
assume that @xmath is infinite. Let @xmath .

Fix an equation @xmath for @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where for @xmath , @xmath is a form of degree @xmath . Let @xmath be in
@xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then since @xmath gives an automorphism of @xmath , we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . So we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Since @xmath is an arbitrary element of @xmath , it
follows that for all @xmath , @xmath is an @xmath -invariant form.

The function field @xmath of @xmath is given by @xmath with the relation
@xmath . The inclusion @xmath corresponds to a map @xmath . If @xmath is
an automorphism of @xmath then @xmath gives an automorphism of @xmath
fixing @xmath and the restriction of @xmath to @xmath induces an
automorphism of @xmath , fixing @xmath , given by the image @xmath of
@xmath in @xmath .

By Lemma 12.3 (a) and (r), for all @xmath there exists an isomorphism
@xmath given by @xmath where @xmath is an element of an intransitive
group @xmath with @xmath , the normalizer of @xmath in @xmath . From now
on, unless otherwise stated, when an isomorphism @xmath is mentioned, we
will assume that it is given by a lift to @xmath of an element of @xmath
.

Suppose that @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath . Then @xmath induces an
automorphism of @xmath given by the image @xmath of @xmath in @xmath .
We show that there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath , @xmath lifts
to an element of @xmath that gives an isomorphism @xmath .

If @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some finite field @xmath then by
Lemma 9.3 , @xmath . So for all @xmath , the identity lifts to an
isomorphism @xmath . So if @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some finite
field @xmath , then we may take @xmath . So assume @xmath is in @xmath .
Let @xmath be as in Lemma 17.1 . So the subfield of @xmath fixed by
@xmath acting by fractional linear transformation on @xmath is @xmath .

Then the inclusion @xmath corresponds to a map @xmath , where @xmath is
a curve of genus @xmath . An isomorphism @xmath given by @xmath with
@xmath induces an isomorphism @xmath that makes the following diagram
commute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any @xmath , any two isomorphisms from @xmath to @xmath , given by
@xmath , @xmath , are equal up to multiplication by an element of @xmath
. This implies that for each @xmath there exists a unique isomorphism
@xmath making the above diagram commute. Then the family @xmath satisfy
Weil’s cocycle condition @xmath given in Theorem 6.3 . Let @xmath be the
@xmath -model associated with @xmath and let @xmath be an isomorphism
such that @xmath .

It can be verified by the proof of Theorem 13.1 that @xmath has a @xmath
-rational point. Since @xmath has genus @xmath and since @xmath is
infinite, @xmath has infinitely many rational points. As shown in
Chapter 4, we have a homomorphism @xmath given by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The curve @xmath is the variety over @xmath corresponding to the fixed
field of @xmath .

Since @xmath , we can identify @xmath with @xmath . Note that @xmath if
and only if for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a point of @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath -rational
point of @xmath , such that @xmath if and only if @xmath , and such that
@xmath , where @xmath is given in Lemma 17.2 , gives the equation of a
hyperelliptic curve @xmath with @xmath . Then the function field of
@xmath , @xmath is a quadratic extension of @xmath and the function
field of @xmath is equal to @xmath . For all @xmath , the curve @xmath
is given by the equation @xmath . It is easily verified that if @xmath
is in @xmath and if @xmath is in @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath ,
then @xmath lifts to an isomorphism @xmath . So @xmath is the field of
moduli of @xmath relative to the extension @xmath . By Proposition 14.2
, there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath , @xmath lifts to an
isomorphism @xmath . By construction, @xmath lifts to an isomorphism
@xmath .

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be any lift of @xmath . So for each @xmath then there exists

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath . Let @xmath be the plane
curve given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath . So for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives an isomorphism @xmath .

By Lemma 18.1 , @xmath can be defined over @xmath . Therefore, @xmath
can be defined over @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 18.3.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic @xmath , let @xmath be
an algebraic closure of @xmath , and let @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth
plane curve of degree @xmath defined over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
is given by a group @xmath listed in Lemma 10.7 . Suppose that for all
@xmath , @xmath , the normalizer @xmath of @xmath in @xmath is of the
form @xmath for some subgroup @xmath , and that @xmath for all @xmath .
Then @xmath can be defined over its field of moduli relative to the
extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 6.2 , we may assume that @xmath is the field of moduli of
@xmath relative to the extension @xmath . By Lemma 12.2 , for all @xmath
any isomorphism @xmath is given by an element of @xmath . Since any two
isomorphisms are equal up to composition with an element of @xmath , for
each @xmath there is exactly one element of @xmath that gives an
isomorphism @xmath .

For each @xmath , let @xmath be the isomorphism @xmath given by an
element of @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath , we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath .

So the family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition given in Theorem
6.3 . By Theorem 6.3 , @xmath can be defined over @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 18.4.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic @xmath and let @xmath be
an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve of
degree @xmath defined over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a group of
the type @xmath given in Lemma 10.7 (b). Then @xmath can be defined over
its field of moduli relative to the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 6.2 , we may assume that @xmath is the field of moduli of
@xmath relative to the extension @xmath . Let @xmath . Let @xmath . We
follow the notation used in Lemma 10.8 . There are three cases.

1.  Suppose @xmath . By Lemma 12.3 , for all @xmath , any isomorphism
    @xmath is given by an element of @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 , @xmath .
    One can verify that for all @xmath , @xmath . So by Lemma 18.3 ,
    @xmath can be defined over @xmath .

2.  Suppose @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 12.3 and Lemma 10.8 , for all
    @xmath , any isomorphism @xmath is given by an element of @xmath .
    Suppose that @xmath is in @xmath . Since @xmath is normal in @xmath
    , every element of @xmath can be written as an element of @xmath
    times an element of @xmath . Any element of @xmath fixes @xmath .
    For all @xmath we have @xmath . Thus for all @xmath , any
    isomorphism @xmath maps the point @xmath into the @xmath -orbit of
    @xmath . So if the point @xmath is in @xmath , it will map to a
    rational point of the canonical @xmath -model of @xmath given in
    Theorem 6.5 . So in this case, by Corollary 6.8 , @xmath can be
    defined over @xmath .

    From now on we assume that @xmath is not in @xmath . Recall that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity where
    @xmath with @xmath . Define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So @xmath . We have @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , so we have a
    surjection @xmath , where @xmath is the symmetric group on @xmath
    letters. This surjection is an isomorphism, since every nontrivial
    normal subgroup of @xmath contains @xmath , but @xmath . It follows
    that for any @xmath , an isomorphism @xmath is given by @xmath , for
    some @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, it
    follows that for @xmath and @xmath the element @xmath is an
    automorphism of @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath . Thus
    @xmath and @xmath are uniquely determined by @xmath .

    Fix an equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath . Since @xmath is not in @xmath , after multiplying
    @xmath by an element of @xmath we may assume that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a form of degree @xmath . For all @xmath , write

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since the elements

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    are automorphisms of @xmath , for all @xmath with @xmath , we must
    have @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is not an isomorphism of
    @xmath , there exists @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and such
    that @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath . Note that since @xmath ,
    we have @xmath and since @xmath we have @xmath . So @xmath is a
    primitive cube root of unity. Note that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Suppose that @xmath , say @xmath where @xmath . It is shown in the
    proof of Lemma 10.8  (b) that @xmath . So @xmath . If necessary,
    after replacing @xmath with @xmath with an appropriate @xmath , we
    may assume that if @xmath .

    Fix @xmath and suppose an isomorphism @xmath is given by @xmath ,
    where @xmath and @xmath .

    We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for some @xmath . Since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we must have @xmath . So

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    For all @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    If @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    . If @xmath then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    There are three cases to consider.

    Suppose that @xmath . As shown earlier, we have @xmath . Since
    @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity, we must have @xmath .
    Since @xmath is arbitrary, this implies that any isomorphism @xmath
    with @xmath is given by an element of @xmath . For @xmath define
    @xmath by @xmath if @xmath and by @xmath if @xmath . The family
    @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3 . So by
    Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

    Now suppose that @xmath and that @xmath . Write @xmath where @xmath
    and @xmath . Choose @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath ,
    then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It follows that @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath .

    If @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It follows that @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath . Recall that
    @xmath . For some @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    For each @xmath , define @xmath by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then for each @xmath , @xmath is an isomorphism @xmath . It can be
    verified that family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition of
    Theorem 6.3 . So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

    Now assume that @xmath . Since @xmath , we must have @xmath . Since
    @xmath is arbitrary, this implies that any isomorphism @xmath with
    @xmath is given by @xmath where @xmath . Let @xmath be defined as in
    the case where @xmath and @xmath . For some @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    For each @xmath , define @xmath by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath and it can be verified that
    family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3 . So
    by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

3.  Suppose @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 12.3 and Lemma 10.8 , for all
    @xmath , any isomorphism @xmath is given by an element of @xmath .
    Suppose that @xmath is in @xmath . Then for all @xmath , any
    isomorphism @xmath maps the point @xmath into the @xmath -orbit of
    @xmath . So if the point @xmath is in @xmath , it will correspond to
    a rational point of the canonical @xmath -model of @xmath given in
    Theorem 6.5 . So in this case, by Corollary 6.8 , @xmath can be
    defined over @xmath .

    From now on we assume that @xmath is not in @xmath . Fix an equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath . Let @xmath be the smooth plane curve defined over
    @xmath given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So an isomorphism @xmath is given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and @xmath is given by @xmath . It is enough to show that @xmath is
    definable over @xmath . We see that @xmath is not in @xmath .

    For all @xmath , if @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    gives an isomorphism @xmath . For any @xmath there exists an
    isomorphism @xmath given by @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . A
    computation shows that @xmath and another computation shows that
    @xmath where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So for any @xmath there exists an isomorphism @xmath given by @xmath
    with @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, it is easily verified that for
    @xmath and @xmath the element @xmath gives and automorphism of
    @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath are
    uniquely determined by @xmath .

    Let @xmath . After multiplying @xmath by an element of @xmath , we
    may assume that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where, for @xmath , @xmath is in @xmath and @xmath is a form of
    degree @xmath . For all @xmath , write

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Assume also that the @xmath are chosen in such a way that @xmath for
    some @xmath with @xmath odd if possible. Note that this is possible
    when @xmath . Since @xmath is not an automorphism of @xmath , @xmath
    is not an automorphism of @xmath , so this is possible for at least
    one @xmath . Also note that @xmath if and only if @xmath .

    Recall that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity with @xmath and
    that @xmath is in @xmath . Since @xmath , the element @xmath gives
    an automorphism of @xmath . Also, since @xmath does not give an
    automorphism of @xmath , @xmath does not give an automorphism of
    @xmath .

    Fix @xmath and suppose an isomorphism @xmath is given by @xmath ,
    with @xmath and @xmath . We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for some @xmath . Since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we must have @xmath . So

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then we must have @xmath . Note that since @xmath gives an
    automorphism of @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath with @xmath . Since
    @xmath does not give an automorphism of @xmath , we can choose
    @xmath so that @xmath and so that @xmath is a primitive cube root of
    unity. So we can write @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . Choose
    @xmath so that @xmath . Note that our choice of @xmath is
    independent of @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath , we must have @xmath for some @xmath . Choose @xmath
    so that @xmath and so that @xmath . Let @xmath . Note that our
    choice of @xmath is independent of @xmath . Then @xmath . Thus there
    exists @xmath so that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Note that @xmath .

    For all @xmath define an isomorphism @xmath by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3
    . So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

∎

###### Proposition 18.5.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic @xmath and let @xmath be
an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve of
degree @xmath defined over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a group of
the type @xmath given in Lemma 10.7 (c) and that @xmath is not given by
@xmath . Then @xmath can be defined over its field of moduli relative to
the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 6.2 , we may assume that @xmath is the field of moduli of
@xmath relative to the extension @xmath . Let @xmath . Let @xmath . We
follow the notation used in Lemma 10.8 . There are two cases.

1.  Suppose @xmath and @xmath . Since our argument is so similar the
    argument shown in the proof of Proposition 18.4 ii, we omit some
    details. Suppose that @xmath is in @xmath . By Lemma 12.3 and Lemma
    10.8 , for all @xmath , any isomorphism @xmath is given by an
    element of @xmath . Since @xmath is normal in @xmath , every element
    of @xmath can be written as an element of @xmath times an element of
    @xmath . Any element of @xmath fixes @xmath . For all @xmath we have
    @xmath . Thus for all @xmath , any isomorphism @xmath maps the point
    @xmath into the @xmath -orbit of @xmath . So if the point @xmath is
    in @xmath , it will map to a rational point of the canonical @xmath
    -model of @xmath given in Theorem 6.5 . So in this case, by
    Corollary 6.8 , @xmath can be defined over @xmath .

    From now on assume that @xmath is not in @xmath . Let @xmath . So
    @xmath . We have @xmath , so for all @xmath an isomorphism @xmath is
    given by an element of the form @xmath with @xmath . It is easy to
    see that an element @xmath uniquely determines @xmath . Fix an
    equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath . Since @xmath is not in @xmath , after multiplying
    @xmath by an element of @xmath we may assume that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a form of degree @xmath . For all @xmath , write

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since the elements @xmath and @xmath in the proof of Lemma 18.4 ii
    are automorphisms of @xmath , for all @xmath with @xmath , we must
    have @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is not an automorphism of
    @xmath , there exists @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and such
    that @xmath . Let @xmath . Write @xmath where @xmath and @xmath .
    Choose @xmath such that @xmath . For each @xmath , define @xmath by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath and it can be verified that
    family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3 . So
    by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

2.  Suppose @xmath and @xmath . Then by Lemma 12.2 , any isomorphism
    @xmath is given by an element of @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 , @xmath .
    By Lemma 18.1 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

∎

###### Proposition 18.6.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic @xmath and let @xmath be
an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve of
degree @xmath defined over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is given by the
group @xmath of Lemma 10.7 (n). Then @xmath can be defined over its
field of moduli relative to the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 6.2 , we may assume that @xmath is the field of moduli of
@xmath relative to the extension @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemmas 12.2
and 10.8 , for all @xmath any isomorphism @xmath is given by an element
of

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath that is not a square. If @xmath is not a square then we
may take @xmath . In this case @xmath can be defined over @xmath by
Lemma 18.1 , or by Lemma 18.3 . So assume that @xmath is a square in
@xmath . Since @xmath , and since if @xmath is not a square in @xmath
and if @xmath is in @xmath then @xmath is also not a square, the
subgroup

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a normal subgroup of @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath there is nothing to prove so assume that @xmath . Let @xmath
be the subfield of @xmath fixed by @xmath . Then there exists @xmath
with @xmath and we have @xmath . For any @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be in @xmath and suppose that @xmath is not a square in
@xmath . Let @xmath be the smallest integer such that @xmath . Replacing
@xmath with @xmath if necessary, we may assume that @xmath is even.
Choose @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be in @xmath . Then @xmath for
some @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath and so @xmath . Since @xmath is
the smallest integer such that @xmath , we must have @xmath . It follows
that @xmath and so @xmath is a square in @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives an automorphism of @xmath . Similarly, if @xmath , then @xmath and
so @xmath . Since @xmath is the smallest integer such that @xmath , we
must have @xmath and so @xmath is not a square in @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives an isomorphism @xmath .

Then for each @xmath the map @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives an isomorphism @xmath . The family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle
condition of Theorem 6.3 . So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over
@xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 18.7.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic @xmath and let @xmath be
an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane curve of
degree @xmath defined over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is given by the
group @xmath of Lemma 10.7 (p). Then @xmath can be defined over its
field of moduli relative to the extension @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 6.2 , we may assume that @xmath is the field of moduli of
@xmath relative to the extension @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemmas 12.2
and 10.7 (p), for all @xmath any isomorphism @xmath is given by an
element of @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and where @xmath . By Lemma 10.7 , @xmath .

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath gives an automorphism of @xmath we must have @xmath . So
@xmath must be a normal subgroup of @xmath . If @xmath , then clearly
@xmath is definable over its field of moduli. So assume @xmath . Let
@xmath be the subfield of @xmath fixed by @xmath . Write @xmath with
@xmath . There are three cases.

1.  I: @xmath . Choose @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath is the splitting
    field of the polynomial @xmath over @xmath . Suppose @xmath and
    suppose that @xmath generates @xmath ), say

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    For each @xmath the map @xmath given by @xmath if @xmath , gives an
    isomorphism @xmath . Since @xmath is defined over @xmath for all
    @xmath , and since @xmath has order @xmath , it is easily verified
    that the family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem
    6.3 . So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

2.  II: @xmath . For each @xmath the map @xmath given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    gives an isomorphism @xmath . Note that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    From this, it is clear that the family @xmath satisfies Weil’s
    cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3 . So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is
    definable over @xmath .

3.  III: @xmath . Choose @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath is the
    splitting field of the polynomials

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    over @xmath . Kummer theory shows that @xmath where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The elements @xmath and @xmath satisfy the relations

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Following the notation of Lemma 10.7 (p), let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Note that @xmath , and that @xmath . Note also that if @xmath is in
    @xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

    For all @xmath define @xmath , by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath .

    Let @xmath and @xmath be in @xmath and suppose that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which equals the isomorphism @xmath .

    So the family @xmath satisfies Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem
    6.3 . So by Theorem 6.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

∎

###### Theorem 18.8.

Let @xmath be a perfect field of characteristic @xmath where @xmath or
@xmath and let @xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be
a smooth plane curve of degree @xmath over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
is not @xmath -conjugate to a diagonal subgroup of @xmath or to one of
the groups @xmath , @xmath , or a group given by Lemma 10.7 (s). Then
@xmath can be defined over its field of moduli relative to the extension
@xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 6.2 , we may assume that @xmath is the field of moduli of
@xmath relative to the extension @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemma 10.7 ,
we may assume that @xmath is one of the groups in Lemma 10.7 that is not
a diagonal group, @xmath , @xmath , or a group given by Lemma 10.7 (s).
Let @xmath . We follow the notation of Lemma 10.7 . There are seventeen
cases.

1.  @xmath is an intransitive group whose image @xmath in @xmath is
    equal to one of the groups in Lemma 9.1 Case I (b)-(e). Then @xmath
    is definable over @xmath by Proposition 18.2 .

2.  @xmath is a group of type @xmath . Then @xmath is definable over
    @xmath by Proposition 18.4 .

3.  @xmath and @xmath is a group of type @xmath . Then @xmath is
    definable over @xmath by Proposition 18.5 .

4.  @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath , by Proposition 18.3 ,
    @xmath is definable over @xmath .

5.  @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath . By Proposition 18.3 , @xmath is definable over
    @xmath .

6.  @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath . By Proposition 18.3 , @xmath is definable over
    @xmath .

7.  @xmath . By Lemma 12.3 , any isomorphism @xmath , with @xmath is
    given by an element of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath . So by Lemma 18.1 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

8.  @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath . By Proposition 18.3 , @xmath is definable over
    @xmath .

9.  @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath , where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with @xmath if @xmath and with @xmath if @xmath . By Lemma 12.2 , if
    @xmath , any isomorphism @xmath is given by an element of @xmath .
    So by Lemma 18.1 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

10. @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath . So by Lemma 18.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

11. @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath , where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with @xmath if @xmath , with @xmath if @xmath , and with @xmath if
    @xmath . By Lemma 12.2 , if @xmath , any isomorphism @xmath is given
    by an element of @xmath . So by Lemma 18.1 , @xmath is definable
    over @xmath .

12. @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath . So by Lemma 18.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

13. @xmath . By Proposition 18.6 , @xmath can be defined over @xmath .

14. @xmath . It is easily verified that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma
    10.8 , @xmath . So by Lemma 18.3 , @xmath is definable over @xmath .

15. @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . In each case, it is easily verified
    that @xmath for all @xmath . If @xmath , then by Proposition 18.7 ,
    @xmath can be defined over @xmath .

    If @xmath , then by Lemma 10.8 , @xmath . So by Lemma 18.3 , @xmath
    is definable over @xmath .

16. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is a group of type @xmath or @xmath is a
    group of type @xmath . In each case, it is easily verified that
    @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 , if @xmath is a group of type
    @xmath then @xmath where @xmath , and in all other cases @xmath .
    Note that @xmath for all @xmath . So by Lemma 18.3 , @xmath is
    definable over @xmath .

17. @xmath is a group given in Lemma 10.7 (r). By proposition 18.2 ,
    @xmath is definable over @xmath .

∎

###### Theorem 18.9.

Let @xmath be a field of characteristic not equal to @xmath and let
@xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth plane
curve of degree @xmath over @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is not @xmath
-conjugate to a diagonal subgroup of @xmath or to one of the groups
@xmath , @xmath , or a group given by Lemma 10.7 (s). Then @xmath can be
defined over its field of moduli.

###### Proof.

This follows from Theorem 18.8 and Theorem 6.9 . ∎

## Chapter \thechapter Plane curves not definable over their fields of
moduli

Let @xmath be a field of characteristic not equal to @xmath , let @xmath
be an algebraic closure of @xmath , and let @xmath be a smooth plane
curve over @xmath . By Theorem 18.9 , @xmath can be defined over its
field of moduli if @xmath is not @xmath -conjugate to an intransitive
group whose image in @xmath is cyclic, not @xmath -conjugate to @xmath ,
not @xmath -conjugate to @xmath , and not @xmath -conjugate to a group
of the type listed in Lemma 10.7 (s). We now construct smooth plane
curves not definable over their field of moduli with automorphism groups
conjugate to all but the last type of group.

### 19 Plane curves with diagonal automorphism groups

We now construct smooth planes curves with diagonal automorphism groups
not definable over their fields of moduli. These examples are easily
obtained from adjusting the examples of hyperelliptic curves not
definable over their fields of moduli. We will construct examples using
the polynomial @xmath given in Chapter 5. Note that we could just as
easily work with the polynomial @xmath given in Chapter 5.

Suppose @xmath , @xmath . Assume that @xmath . Assume also that if
@xmath is odd, then @xmath is also odd. Let @xmath be the complex
conjugate of @xmath for any @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Consider the form
@xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume that @xmath has no repeated zeros and that it is not a form in
@xmath . Assume that the map @xmath does not map the zero set of @xmath
into itself. For any root of unity @xmath , assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lastly, if @xmath assume that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

does not map the zero set of @xmath into itself. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 19.1.

Following the above notation, @xmath gives the equation of a smooth
plane curve @xmath with @xmath given by a diagonal group generated by
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and where @xmath and @xmath are primitive @xmath and @xmath roots of
unity, respectively.

###### Proof.

We first show that @xmath gives the equation of a smooth plane curve.
Since @xmath has @xmath distinct zeros, it is clear that no zero of
@xmath can be a zero of @xmath . We have @xmath and @xmath . So @xmath
if and only if @xmath . Since @xmath is square free, @xmath and @xmath
have no common zeros. It follows that @xmath gives the equation of a
smooth plane curve @xmath .

Since the degree of @xmath is greater than @xmath , the genus of @xmath
is larger than @xmath , so @xmath is finite. Since @xmath is a smooth
plane curve of degree larger than @xmath , by Theorem 12.1 @xmath is
@xmath -conjugate to one of the group listed in Lemma 10.7 Case I. We
now show that @xmath . It is clear that @xmath .

The element @xmath has order equal to @xmath . The only groups listed in
Lemma 10.7 Case I that have elements of even order larger than @xmath
are the groups of type (a)-(c) or @xmath . The orders of the element of
@xmath are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . Using Magma,
one can verify that @xmath has two conjugacy classes of elements of
order @xmath . Representatives for each class are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity. Any matrix in @xmath
mapping to either @xmath or @xmath in @xmath has three distinct
eigenvalues, so @xmath and @xmath are not @xmath -conjugate to @xmath .
It follows that @xmath is not @xmath -conjugate to @xmath . So @xmath is
@xmath -conjugate to a group of type (a)-(c) of Lemma 10.7 .

Recall that an intransitive element of @xmath is an element of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A computation shows that the normalizer of @xmath in @xmath is equal the
subgroup of intransitive elements of @xmath . Note that @xmath is one of
the hyperelliptic curves given in Lemma 14.4 , and that an intransitive
element of @xmath that gives an automorphism of @xmath induces an
automorphism of the hyperelliptic curve @xmath . By Lemma 14.4 , we have
@xmath . Observe that @xmath . It follows that the normalizer of @xmath
in @xmath is equal to @xmath .

Suppose @xmath and that @xmath is a group of type (a), (b), or (c) of
Lemma 10.7 . Write @xmath .

First suppose that @xmath is a group of type (b) or (c). Then, following
the notation of Lemma 10.7 , any element of @xmath can be written as
@xmath , with @xmath and @xmath and where @xmath is the image in @xmath
of a diagonal matrix. A computation shows that for @xmath , an element
of the form @xmath has order @xmath . Another computation shows that for
@xmath , an element of the form @xmath is the image in @xmath of a
matrix with only @xmath distinct eigenvalues only if it has order @xmath
. It follows that @xmath must be the image in @xmath of a diagonal
matrix. Note that @xmath is an element of order @xmath that commutes
with @xmath and that @xmath . It follows that there exist an element
@xmath of order @xmath in the normalizer of @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath . This is a contradiction since if @xmath has order @xmath , then
@xmath .

Lastly, suppose that @xmath is a group of type (a). Then there exists an
intransitive element @xmath such that @xmath is the image in @xmath of a
diagonal matrix with only two distinct eigenvalues. Since @xmath is an
intransitive group, there exists a natural map @xmath . It is easy to
see that either @xmath is in the kernel of @xmath or @xmath has order
@xmath . If @xmath has order @xmath , then since @xmath , by Lemma 9.1 ,
@xmath is either a cyclic or dihedral group. In any case, @xmath is a
normal subgroup of @xmath . Since the kernel of @xmath is contained in
the center of @xmath , it must be true that @xmath is a normal subgroup
of @xmath . So @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath . It follows from
that @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 19.2.

Following the above notation, let @xmath by the smooth plane curve over
@xmath given by @xmath . Then the field of moduli of @xmath relative to
the extension @xmath is @xmath and is not a field of definition for
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We follow the notation of Lemma 19.1 . There exists an isomorphism
@xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity. In particular, the field
of moduli of @xmath relative to @xmath is @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
is definable over @xmath . Then by Theorem 6.3 , there exists an
isomorphism @xmath that satisfies Weil’s cocyle condition. Since @xmath
is a @xmath root of unity not equal to @xmath for any @xmath root of
unity @xmath , since @xmath for any @xmath root of unity @xmath , and
since @xmath , we may assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath root of unity not equal to @xmath and where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath . Note that @xmath , so @xmath . So we must have @xmath . This
is a contradiction. Therefore, @xmath is not definable over @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 19.3.

An alternate and slightly longer proof of Proposition 19.2 shows that
the definability of @xmath over @xmath implies the definability of the
hyperelliptic curve @xmath over @xmath , contradicting Proposition 14.5
.

### 20 Plane curves with automorphism groups given by @xmath

We now construct plane curves with automorphism groups given by @xmath
that are not definable over their fields of moduli. All other examples
of curves not definable over their fields of moduli in this thesis are
of curves over @xmath with field of moduli @xmath relative to @xmath but
not definable over @xmath . It is not too hard to show that a plane
curve @xmath over @xmath with @xmath is always definable over its field
of moduli relative to @xmath . So our examples in this section are
somewhat different from the others.

###### Lemma 20.1.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of characteristic @xmath or
of characteristic greater than @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Then the orbit
@xmath of @xmath under the action of @xmath has @xmath points unless
@xmath is in the orbit of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a primitive cube root of unity and where @xmath . We
have @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

We follow the notation of Lemma 10.7 . Let @xmath be in @xmath and
suppose that the orbit of @xmath under the action of @xmath has less
than @xmath points. It follows that for some @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath
is in @xmath , then @xmath . So any element in @xmath which is conjugate
to @xmath fixes a point in the orbit of @xmath under the action of
@xmath . It is easily shown that any non identity element of @xmath is
@xmath -conjugate to one of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or
@xmath .

A computation shows the following. If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are not both zero. Note
that if @xmath then @xmath , and if @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath ,
then @xmath , where @xmath .

A simple computation shows that each of these points is in the orbit of
one of the points listed in the lemma. Another computation using the
stabilizers of each point proves the last statement of the lemma. ∎

###### Definition 20.2.

Let @xmath be a field. A quaternion extension of @xmath is a Galois
extension @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is isomorphic to the
quaternion group of order @xmath .

The following lemma will be helpful in constructing examples of smooth
plane curves with automorphism groups isomorphic to @xmath and not
definable over their fields of moduli.

###### Lemma 20.3.

Let @xmath be a field of level @xmath : the element @xmath is not a
square in @xmath but it is a sum of two squares in @xmath . Let @xmath
be such that @xmath . Then @xmath is embeddable into a quaternion
extension of @xmath if and only if @xmath is a norm from @xmath to
@xmath , that is if @xmath for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from Theorem I.3.3 on page 166 and Proposition I.1.6 on
page 160 of [ 16 ] . ∎

Throughout the rest of this section let @xmath where @xmath is a
primitive cube root of unity.

###### Remark 20.4.

Note that @xmath is of level @xmath since @xmath and @xmath . So we can
use Lemma 20.3 to see if @xmath extensions of @xmath are embeddable into
quaternion extensions of @xmath . For example, let @xmath . It is easily
shown that both @xmath and @xmath are not norms from @xmath to @xmath .
So by Lemma 20.3 , neither @xmath nor @xmath are not embeddable into
quaternion extensions of @xmath .

We define the following:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Suppose @xmath and suppose that @xmath is a @xmath extension of @xmath
that cannot be embedded into a quaternion extension of @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Assume also that @xmath is squarefree. (This is possible: for example if
@xmath for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , a computation using gp shows
that the resultant of @xmath and @xmath is nonzero.)

For the rest of this section, fix @xmath and @xmath as above and let
@xmath be an algebraic closure of @xmath containing @xmath .

###### Lemma 20.5.

Following the above notation, @xmath gives the equation of a smooth
plane curve @xmath over @xmath with @xmath given by @xmath .
Furthermore, the field of moduli of @xmath is equal to @xmath and any
isomorphism @xmath with @xmath is given by an element of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We now show that @xmath gives the equation of a smooth plane curve. We
first show that if @xmath is a form of positive degree and if @xmath
then @xmath . Suppose there exists a form @xmath of positive degree such
that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . By Bézout’s Theorem, @xmath and
@xmath have a nonempty intersection. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The zeros of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the zeros of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath share a common zero, it must be @xmath where @xmath
. So @xmath . If we let @xmath , then @xmath . So @xmath , contradicting
the definition of @xmath .

We will say that @xmath is of type @xmath if @xmath can be factored into
irreducible forms of positive degrees @xmath of degrees @xmath
respectively, where @xmath if @xmath . Suppose @xmath is of type @xmath
. Note that since the degree of @xmath is @xmath , @xmath . Write @xmath
where @xmath has degree @xmath . Let @xmath be the arithmetic genus of
the curve given by @xmath . We will make use of the fact that a
geometrically integral curve of arithmetic genus @xmath has at most
@xmath singularities. Let @xmath be in @xmath . Then @xmath if and only
if @xmath is a singular point of a curve given by @xmath for some @xmath
or if @xmath is an intersection point of two or more of the @xmath .
Using Bézout’s Theorem we obtain a bound @xmath for the number of points
@xmath such that @xmath , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Checking each partition of deg @xmath shows that @xmath . Another
computation shows that if @xmath then @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath ,
if @xmath then @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath ,
and if @xmath then @xmath . It follows that @xmath .

Let @xmath be in @xmath and suppose that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that @xmath is @xmath -invariant. So for any @xmath we
must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the orbit of @xmath under the action of @xmath . By
Lemma 20.1 , @xmath must have size @xmath , or @xmath . Since @xmath is
squarefree, by Lemma 20.1 , the orbit of @xmath under the action of
@xmath must have size @xmath . One can verify directly that @xmath if
@xmath . So no such @xmath exists. It follows that @xmath gives the
equation of a smooth plane curve @xmath .

Since the degree of @xmath is @xmath , the genus of @xmath is @xmath ,
so @xmath is finite. Since @xmath is a smooth plane curve of degree
larger than @xmath , by Theorem 12.1 , @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to
one of the groups listed in Lemma 10.7 . We now show that @xmath . It
can be deduced from Lemma 10.7 that @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to
either a group of type @xmath , a subgroup of @xmath , both a group of
type @xmath and a subgroup of @xmath , or a subgroup of @xmath .

For @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, @xmath and we have @xmath , where @xmath is given in Lemma 10.7 .
Recall that @xmath . A computation shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , where @xmath is the orbit of @xmath under the action of
@xmath , and that @xmath cyclically permutes these three orbits. Note
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the orbit of @xmath under the action of @xmath . By
looking at the coefficients of the @xmath , we see that for all @xmath
and all @xmath , we have @xmath if and only if @xmath . We also see by
looking at the coefficients of the @xmath that for all @xmath , we have
@xmath if and only if @xmath for some @xmath .

Suppose @xmath and suppose that @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath . Then
since @xmath , we have @xmath . According to Magma, @xmath has two
conjugacy classes of subgroups of order @xmath , one consisting of the
group @xmath and the other containing @xmath conjugate subgroups of
order @xmath . It is easy to see that the subgroup @xmath has order
@xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to an intransitive subgroup
of @xmath and @xmath is not, @xmath and @xmath are not @xmath
-conjugate. It follows that @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 , @xmath . So @xmath
must be a subgroup of @xmath . By the previous paragraph, the subgroup
of @xmath consisting of elements that stabilize @xmath equals @xmath .
Thus if @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to a subgroup of @xmath then @xmath
.

Suppose that @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to a group of type @xmath . We
will call the union of @xmath lines in @xmath a triangle. By §113 of [
20 ] , a group of type @xmath containing @xmath but not equal to @xmath
fixes exactly one triangle in @xmath : the triangle given by @xmath . By
§113 of [ 20 ] , the group @xmath fixes four triangles in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to a group of type
@xmath and since @xmath , @xmath must fix at least one of the four
@xmath -invariant triangles. By §115 of [ 20 ] , the four invariant
triangles of @xmath are permuted transitively by @xmath . So for some
@xmath , the group @xmath must fix the triangle @xmath . Following the
notation of Lemma 10.7 , it can easily be deduced that a finite subgroup
@xmath that fixes the triangle @xmath is a group of type @xmath if and
only if @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 , @xmath . So @xmath . In particular we
must have @xmath . So @xmath is a group of type @xmath . Choose @xmath
so that @xmath and let @xmath be the curve given by @xmath . We have
just seen that @xmath if and only if and if @xmath for some @xmath . So
every element of @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath for some @xmath . So
by Lemma 12.3 , we must have @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 , a subgroup @xmath
of type @xmath has @xmath if and only if @xmath . Hence @xmath . Since
@xmath , we must have @xmath . Thus if @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to a
group of type @xmath , then @xmath .

Lastly, let @xmath and suppose that @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath .
According to Magma, the maximal subgroups of @xmath are isomorphic to
@xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . Of these three groups, only @xmath has a
subgroup isomorphic to @xmath , and such a subgroup of @xmath must be
normal in @xmath since it is of index @xmath . So if @xmath , we must
have @xmath . It follows that @xmath . But we have just seen that @xmath
for any @xmath . Therefore we must have @xmath .

By Lemma 12.3 , any isomorphism @xmath with @xmath is given by an
element of @xmath . We have seen that for @xmath , we have already
@xmath for some @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 20.6.

Let @xmath be as above and let @xmath be the smooth plane curve over
@xmath given by @xmath . Then @xmath is not definable over its field of
moduli.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 20.5 , the field of moduli of @xmath is @xmath . Also by Lemma
20.5 , any isomorphism @xmath , with @xmath , is given by an element of
@xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is definable over @xmath . Recall that @xmath . Then
there exists a finite Galois extension field @xmath of @xmath and a
collection of isomorphisms @xmath that satisfy Weil’s cocycle condition.
Without loss of generality we may assume that @xmath . Note that if
@xmath and @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath is finite and since @xmath . If @xmath , let @xmath be the
element of @xmath that gives the corresponding isomorphism @xmath . Then
we have a homomorphism @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lemma 20.5 shows that @xmath . Thus @xmath induces an injection @xmath ,
which because of orders must be an isomorphism. According to Magma,
@xmath has a unique subgroup of order @xmath which, by Lemma 10.7 , must
be @xmath . Also according to Magma, @xmath has three conjugacy classes
of elements of order @xmath , each consisting of @xmath elements.
Following the notation of Lemma 10.7 , since @xmath has no elements of
order @xmath and is normal in @xmath , since @xmath , and since @xmath
has order @xmath in @xmath , these conjugacy classes are given by @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath . So any subgroup of @xmath which surjects onto
@xmath must contain an element from each conjugacy class of order @xmath
. According to Magma, the proper subgroups of @xmath which contain an
element from each conjugacy class of order @xmath are maximal and of
order @xmath . Thus, any subgroup of @xmath which surjects onto @xmath
must also surject onto @xmath . In particular, the image of @xmath must
surject onto @xmath . Let @xmath be the subfield of @xmath fixed by the
normal subgroup @xmath of @xmath . Then @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath ,
which is a quaternion group. Since @xmath we have @xmath , so @xmath
contains @xmath . This is a contradiction, since by assumption @xmath
cannot be embedded into a quaternion extension of @xmath . Therefore, no
such @xmath exists and @xmath is not definable over @xmath . ∎

### 21 Plane curves with automorphism groups given by @xmath

###### Lemma 21.1.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field of characteristic @xmath or
of characteristic greater than @xmath . Let @xmath be in @xmath . Then
the orbit @xmath of @xmath under the action of @xmath has @xmath points
unless @xmath is in the orbit of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . We have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

We follow the notation of Lemma 10.7 . Let @xmath be in @xmath and
suppose that the orbit of @xmath under the action of @xmath has less
than @xmath points. It follows that for some @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath
is in @xmath , then @xmath . So any element in @xmath which is conjugate
to @xmath fixes a point in the orbit of @xmath under the action of
@xmath . It is easily shown that any non identity element of @xmath is
@xmath -conjugate to one of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or
@xmath .

A computation shows the following. If @xmath or @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath or @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are not both zero. Note
that if @xmath then @xmath , if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath , and if
@xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

A simple computation shows that each of these points is in the orbit of
one of the points listed in the lemma. Another computation using the
stabilizers of each point proves the last statement of the lemma. ∎

We define the following:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be in @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 21.2.

Following the above notation, write @xmath , where @xmath with @xmath .
Then @xmath gives the equation of a smooth plane curve @xmath defined
over @xmath with @xmath given by @xmath .

###### Proof.

We show that @xmath gives the equation of a smooth curve @xmath . We
first now show that if @xmath is a form of positive degree and if @xmath
then @xmath . Suppose there exists a form @xmath of positive degree such
that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . By Bézout’s Theorem, @xmath and
@xmath have a nonempty intersection. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The zeros of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the zeros of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath share a common zero we must have @xmath . So
@xmath . Then @xmath . This implies @xmath which contradicts our choice
of @xmath .

Since @xmath is of degree @xmath , by an argument identical to one given
in the proof of Lemma 20.5 , a bound for the number of points @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is @xmath . Let @xmath be in @xmath and suppose that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simple computation shows that @xmath is @xmath -invariant. So for any
@xmath we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 21.1 , the orbit of @xmath under the action of @xmath must have
size @xmath , or @xmath . One can verify directly that @xmath if @xmath
and that @xmath if @xmath . It follows that @xmath gives the equation of
a smooth plane curve @xmath .

Since the degree of @xmath is @xmath , the genus of @xmath is @xmath ,
so @xmath is finite. Since @xmath is a smooth plane curve of degree
larger than @xmath , by Theorem 12.1 , @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to
one of the groups listed in Lemma 10.7 . We now show that @xmath . We
use the notation of Lemma 10.7 . According to Magma, any subgroup of
@xmath of order @xmath is maximal. Since @xmath , Lemma 2.3.7 implies
that @xmath equals @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath for some @xmath
.

Suppose @xmath . Since @xmath is contained in @xmath , @xmath is
contained in @xmath . Magma shows that the only subgroup of @xmath
isomorphic to @xmath is @xmath itself, so @xmath . Thus @xmath , so
@xmath . Similarly, if @xmath , the same argument shows that @xmath , so
@xmath . Following the notation of Lemma 10.7 , in both cases we must
have @xmath . A computation shows that @xmath . So we cannot have @xmath
, nor can we have @xmath .

Lastly, suppose that @xmath is @xmath -conjugate to @xmath . Recall that
@xmath and that @xmath . Define @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . By §123 of [ 20 ] , @xmath is @xmath -conjugate
to @xmath . According to Magma, @xmath has two conjugacy classes of
subgroups of order @xmath . Note that the subgroups @xmath and @xmath
both have order @xmath and are not @xmath -conjugate, since @xmath is
@xmath -conjugate to an intransitive subgroup and @xmath is not. Choose
@xmath so that @xmath . The subgroups @xmath and @xmath of @xmath must
be in distinct conjugacy classes under @xmath . Since @xmath and since
@xmath is not @xmath -conjugate to @xmath , @xmath is in the same
conjugacy class as @xmath under @xmath . So without loss of generality
we may assume that @xmath . By Lemma 10.8 (c), @xmath . Thus @xmath . So
@xmath . A computation shows that @xmath , so we get a contradiction.
Therefore, we must have @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 21.3.

Let @xmath be as above where @xmath with @xmath and let @xmath be the
smooth plane curve defined over @xmath given by @xmath . Then the field
of moduli of @xmath relative to the extension @xmath is @xmath and is
not a field of definition for @xmath .

###### Proof.

We follow the notation of Lemma 10.7 . Let @xmath . By Lemmas 12.2 and
10.8 , any isomorphism @xmath is given by and element of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A computation shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath gives an isomorphism @xmath . A computation using gp shows
that for all @xmath in the nontrivial coset of @xmath , @xmath .
Therefore, Weil’s cocycle condition of Theorem 6.3 does not hold. It
follows that @xmath cannot be defined over @xmath . ∎