The field of moduli @xmath of a curve @xmath over a field @xmath is the
intersection over all fields of definition of @xmath , where @xmath is
the base extension of @xmath to a curve over an algebraic closure @xmath
of @xmath . It has the property that for all @xmath , we have @xmath if
and only if @xmath is equal to the identity. In this thesis we determine
conditions that guarantee that a hyperelliptic or plane curve over a
field of characteristic not equal to @xmath can be defined over its
field of moduli. We also give new examples of curves not definable over
their fields of moduli.

In Chapter 1, we define the notion of “field of moduli,” we compare our
definition with definitions given by others, and we show in what ways
they are equivalent.

In Chapter 2, we list all of the finite subgroups of the two and three
dimensional projective general linear groups. We will use these
classifications to prove our main results.

In Chapter 3, we discuss isomorphisms of plane and hyperelliptic curves.
We will later use the classification of automorphism groups of
hyperelliptic and plane curves to determine whether a plane curve or a
hyperelliptic curve can be defined over its field of moduli.

In Chapter 4, we give our main result in the case of hyperelliptic
curves. We show that hyperelliptic curves with certain automorphism
groups can always be defined over their fields of moduli.

In Chapter 5, we list examples of hyperelliptic curves not definable
over their fields of moduli.

In Chapter 6, we give our main result in the case of plane curves. We
show that plane curves with certain automorphism groups can always be
defined over their fields of moduli.

In Chapter 7, we give new examples of plane curves not definable over
their fields of moduli.

\abstractsignature

\diagramstyle

[labelstyle= ] \setrightmargin 1.2 in

\degreesemester

Fall \degreeyear 2005 \degree Doctor of Philosophy \chair Professor
Bjorn Poonen \othermembers Professor Kenneth Ribet
Professor Michael Jansson \numberofmembers 3 \prevdegrees B.S.
(University of California, Los Angeles) 1998 \field Mathematics \campus
Berkeley \approvalpage \copyrightpage {dedication}

To my family
