In recent years entanglement has been recognised as a useful resource in
quantum information and computation. This applies primarily to pure
state entanglement which is, due to interaction with the environment,
rarely available. Decoherence provides the main motivation for the study
of entanglement distillation. A remarkable effect in the context of
distillation is the existence of bound entangled states, states from
which no pure state entanglement can be distilled. The concept of
entanglement distillation also relates to a canonical way of
theoretically quantifying mixed state entanglement.

This thesis is, apart from a review chapter on distillation, mainly a
theoretical study of bound entanglement and the two major open problems
in their classification. The first of these is the classification of PPT
bound entanglement (separability problem). After having reviewed known
tools we study in detail the multipartite permutation criteria, for
which we present new results in their classification. We solve an open
problem on the existence of certain PPT states. The Schmidt number of a
quantum state is a largely unvalued concept, we analyse it in detail and
introduce the Schmidt robustness. The notion of Schmidt number is
exploited in the study of the second major problem, that of the
existence of NPT bound entanglement. We reformulate this existence
problem as particular instance of the separability problem, present a
uniform treatment of distillability and numerically demonstrate that
bound entanglement is primarily found in low dimensional systems.
