# Acknowledgments

I am very grateful to my advisor Prof. Dr. Dirk Rischke who suggested
the topic for my thesis. He introduced me to quantum field theory and
color superconductivity. I learnt a lot in his lectures and in private
communication. I thank him for his suggestions and advices. I am very
thankful to Prof. Dr. Igor Shovkovy. I thank him for the excellent
cooperation, the discussions, suggestions, and advices. I am grateful to
our colleagues Verena Werth and PD Dr. Michael Buballa from the Institut
für Kernphysik at the Technische Universität Darmstadt for the teamwork.
I thank Hossein Malekzadeh for the cooperation concerning the spin-zero
A-phase of color-superconducting quark matter.

I am grateful to HD PD Dr. Jürgen Schaffner-Bielich. I learnt a lot in
his lectures, seminars, and in our astro group meetings. I also thank
him and Matthias Hempel for the cooperation and discussions concerning
the outer crust of nonaccreting cold neutron stars.

I am grateful to the computer trouble team for removing computer
problems. I am thankful for using the Center for Scientific Computing
(CSC) of the Johann Wolfgang Goethe - Universität.

I am very grateful to my parents who supported me during the whole time
of my study.

###### Contents

-    Abstract
-    Acknowledgments
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 The phase diagram of strongly interacting matter
    -    1.2 Color superconductivity
        -    1.2.1 The 2SC phase
        -    1.2.2 The CFL phase
        -    1.2.3 Spin-one color superconductivity
    -    1.3 Stellar evolution
        -    1.3.1 The formation of stars
        -    1.3.2 Main sequence stars
        -    1.3.3 Red giants and red super giants
        -    1.3.4 Compact stars
    -    1.4 Neutron stars
        -    1.4.1 Pulsars
        -    1.4.2 Structure of neutron stars
        -    1.4.3 Properties of neutron star matter
        -    1.4.4 Toy models of neutral normal quark matter
    -    1.5 Color superconductivity in neutron stars
        -    1.5.1 Toy models of neutral color-superconducting quark
            matter
-    2 The phase diagram of neutral quark matter
    -    2.1 The phase diagram of massless quarks
        -    2.1.1 Quantum chromodynamics
        -    2.1.2 The effective action of quarks
        -    2.1.3 Propagators and self-energies in projector
            representation
        -    2.1.4 The potential part of the effective action of quarks
        -    2.1.5 The kinetic part of the effective action of quarks
        -    2.1.6 The pressure of color-superconducting quark matter
        -    2.1.7 Results at zero temperature
        -    2.1.8 Results at nonzero temperature
    -    2.2 The phase diagram with a self-consistent treatment of quark
        masses
        -    2.2.1 Model
        -    2.2.2 Results
    -    2.3 The phase diagram with the effect of neutrino trapping
        -    2.3.1 Model
        -    2.3.2 Simplified considerations
        -    2.3.3 Results
-    3 Conclusions
    -    3.1 Summary and discussion
    -    3.2 Open questions and outlook
-    A Definitions of matrices
    -    A.1 The Pauli matrices
        -    A.1.1 Spin projectors
    -    A.2 Matrices in Dirac space
        -    A.2.1 Projectors in Dirac space
    -    A.3 The generators of the SU  (3) group
-    B Useful formulae
    -    B.1 Non-interacting massless fermions and antifermions at
        nonzero temperature
    -    B.2 The inverse Dirac propagator
    -    B.3 The tree-level quark propagator
    -    B.4 The Feynman gauged gluon propagator
    -    B.5 The determinant of the inverse quark propagator
    -    B.6 The logarithm of the determinant
    -    B.7 The Dirac trace
    -    B.8 The trace of the logarithm
    -    B.9 Cubic equations
    -    B.10 Summation over the fermionic Matsubara frequencies
-    C Zusammenfassung
-    Lebenslauf

###### List of Figures

-    1.1 The knowledge about the phase diagram of strongly interacting
    matter in 2003.
-    1.2 The one-gluon exchange interaction between two quarks in QCD.
-    1.3 The Hertzsprung-Russell diagram.
-    1.4 The proton-proton cycles.
-    1.5 The carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycles.
-    1.6 The evolution of neutron stars.
-    1.7 A schematic representation of a pulsar.
-    1.8 Cross-sections of neutron stars.
-    1.9 The quark-hadron phase transition in neutron stars.
-    1.10 The low-energy part of the dispersion relations.
-    2.1 The sunset-type diagram, and the double-bubble diagram.
-    2.2 The gap parameters as a function of @xmath .
-    2.3 The chemical potentials of electric and color charge as a
    function of @xmath .
-    2.4 The gap parameters as a function of the quark chemical
    potential.
-    2.5 The quark number densities as a function of the quark chemical
    potential.
-    2.6 The quasiparticle dispersion relations.
-    2.7 The temperature dependence of the gaps for a small strange
    quark mass.
-    2.8 The near-critical temperature dependence of the gaps for a
    small @xmath .
-    2.9 The temperature dependence of the gaps for a large strange
    quark mass.
-    2.10 The temperature dependence of the electrical and color
    chemical potentials.
-    2.11 The phase diagram of massless neutral three-flavor quark
    matter.
-    2.12 The phase diagram of neutral quark matter without neutrinos
    for @xmath .
-    2.13 The phase diagram of neutral quark matter without neutrinos
    for @xmath .
-    2.14 Quark masses, gap parameters, and chemical potentials at
    @xmath .
-    2.15 Quark masses, gap parameters, and chemical potentials at
    @xmath .
-    2.16 The number densities of quarks and electrons at @xmath and
    @xmath .
-    2.17 The number densities of quarks, electrons, and muons at @xmath
    and @xmath .
-    2.18 The pressures of different phases of neutral
    color-superconducting quark matter.
-    2.19 Ratio of down and up quark chemical potentials as a function
    of @xmath .
-    2.20 The three-dimensional phase diagram of neutral three-flavor
    quark matter.
-    2.21 The phase diagram of neutral quark matter at @xmath MeV.
-    2.22 The phase diagram of neutral quark matter at @xmath MeV.
-    2.23 Quark masses, gap parameters, and chemical potentials at
    @xmath MeV.
-    2.24 Quark masses, gap parameters, and chemical potentials at
    @xmath MeV.
-    2.25 The dependence of the electron family lepton fraction @xmath
    on @xmath .
-    2.26 The phase diagram of the outer stellar core.
-    2.27 The phase diagram of the inner stellar core.
-    2.28 Quark masses, gap parameters, and chemical potentials in the
    outer stellar core.
-    2.29 Quark masses, gap parameters, and chemical potentials in the
    inner stellar core.
-    3.1 The knowledge about the phase diagram of strongly interacting
    matter in 2005.
-    B.1 Integration over the fermionic poles.

###### List of Tables

-    1.1 The masses and electric charges of the quark flavors.
-    1.2 Values for the critical mass of interstellar clouds.
-    1.3 Burning period of hydrogen in the cores of main sequence stars.
-    1.4 The masses, electric charges, and degeneracy factors of the
    leptons.
-    2.1 The classification of eight color-superconducting quark phases.
-    2.2 The classification of gapless phases in color-superconducting
    quark matter.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

The phase diagram of neutral quark matter was poorly understood as I
began with the research on this topic in 2003. The task of my thesis was
therefore to illuminate the phase structure of neutral quark matter. A
phase diagram is a two-dimensional diagram with axes representing the
temperature and the chemical potential, the density, or other similar
quantities. Therefore, phase diagrams tell us in which state is a system
for a given temperature and a given chemical potential. Besides, they
contain the information at which temperatures and which chemical
potentials transitions to other phases occur. Such phase transitions can
be of first or second order, or simply crossovers. This depends on the
order parameter of the system. If it changes discontinuously, then a
first, otherwise a second-order phase transition or a crossover appears.

In Sec. 1.1 , I show the status of knowledge of the phase diagram of
strongly interacting matter before I began with my research for this
thesis in 2003. As one can see, the phase diagram of neutral quark
matter was indeed poorly understood at that time. In Sec. 1.2 , I
discuss the behavior of sufficiently cold and dense quark matter, namely
that quark matter is color-superconducting and that
color-superconducting quark matter appears in several phases. The most
important color-superconducting phases are presented in Sec. 1.2 . In
Sec. 1.3 , I give a short but comprehensive introduction into stellar
evolution because the cores of neutron stars are the only places in
nature where one expects neutral color-superconducting quark matter.
Thereby, it will become clear what a star is, how it is formed, which
processes happen in a star, and what are the final stages of stellar
evolution. In Sec. 1.4 , I focus on neutron stars. It is explained how
neutron stars are formed, of which matter they consist, and I present
the structure of neutron stars. In Sec. 1.5 , it is argued why neutral
color-superconducting quark matter is expected to occur in neutron star
cores.

In Chapter 2 , I present the calculations to obtain the pressure for
neutral color-superconducting quark matter, and I show the phase diagram
of neutral quark matter. With this one can predict in which state
neutral quark matter is in the cores of neutron stars.

In Chapter 3 , I summarize the results and conclude my thesis.

Important definitions and useful formulae can be found in the Appendix.

### 1.1 The phase diagram of strongly interacting matter

The fundamental theory of the strong interaction is called quantum
chromodynamics (QCD). The participants of the strong interaction are the
elements of hadronic matter, the quarks and gluons. Quarks interact via
gluons because both particle species carry so-called color charges (red,
green, and blue) which are responsible for the interaction. In our
everyday life, we do not see quarks or gluons because they are confined
into hadrons. This is because the quark interaction caused by gluons is
so strong that they cannot exist as free particles. QCD is an
asymptotically free theory [ 1 ] . At high temperatures or densities,
the quarks are deconfined because their mutual distances decrease and
the exchanged momenta increase so that the interaction becomes
sufficiently weak [ 2 ] . The state of deconfined quarks is called the
quark-gluon plasma (QGP). Such a phase certainly existed in the early
universe which was very hot, but close to net-baryon free. Nowadays, the
only place in nature where a QGP may exist is in the interior of neutron
stars. Here, the density is extremely high and the temperature low. The
third place where an artificially created QGP could appear is in
heavy-ion collisions. The temperatures and densities which are reached
by the collisions depend on the bombarding energies.

In Fig. 1.1 , I show the status of knowledge of the phase diagram of
strongly interacting matter in the plane of temperature @xmath and quark
chemical potential @xmath before I began with the research for my thesis
in 2003 [ 3 ] . There is a phase transition at the point @xmath MeV
which separates the gaseous nuclear phase at lower @xmath from the
liquid nuclear phase at higher @xmath . The nuclear liquid-gas
transition [ 4 ] which is a first-order phase transition starts from
this point and disappears in a critical endpoint at @xmath MeV and
slightly lower quark chemical potential. In this endpoint, the
transition is of second order. Above the endpoint, there is no
distinction between these two phases. The transition point at zero
temperature is easily found because nucleons of infinite and
isospin-symmetric nuclear matter in the ground state at normal nuclear
density @xmath fm @xmath are bound by 16 MeV (if one neglects the
repulsive Coulomb forces). The energy per baryon or the energy density
per baryon density respectively is given by @xmath MeV where @xmath MeV
is the rest mass of the baryon. By using the thermodynamic relation
@xmath , one obtains for the ground state of nuclear matter where the
pressure @xmath that the baryon chemical potential is identical to the
energy per baryon @xmath MeV. Since a baryon contains three quarks, the
quark chemical potential is one third of the baryon chemical potential,
@xmath . This leads to the result @xmath MeV for the transition point at
zero temperature.

Nuclear matter consists of droplets which is the most energetically
preferred form for nuclear matter in the low-density and low-temperature
regime of the phase diagram. In the gaseous phase at low density and
nonzero temperature, nucleons will be evaporated from the surface of the
droplets so that there is a mixture of droplets and nucleons. As soon as
the chemical potential exceeds the one corresponding to the nuclear
liquid-gas phase transition, only droplets of nuclear matter but no
evaporated nucleons will appear.

At low quark chemical potentials, strongly interacting matter is in the
hadronic phase. At nonzero temperature, nuclear matter not only consists
of nucleons but also of thermally excited hadrons. Therefore, at low
quark chemical potentials, a large amount of pions can be found. By
increasing the temperature, the system passes the quark-hadron
transition line and enters the regime of the QGP. The critical endpoint
of the transition line at @xmath MeV obtained by lattice QCD
calculations [ 5 ] depends on the value of the quark masses and is of
second order. For smaller quark chemical potentials, the transition
becomes a crossover, and there is no real distinction between hadronic
matter and the QGP. For larger quark chemical potentials, the transition
is a line of first-order phase transitions that separates the hadronic
phase from the QGP. But it is not known whether the line of first-order
phase transitions goes all the way down to zero temperature. If so, also
the precise value of the quark chemical potential for the phase
transition at zero temperature is unknown. One should mention that these
lattice QCD calculations are not very reliable at nonzero quark chemical
potential. In addition, these calculations are done with probably
unrealistic large quark masses and on fairly small lattice sizes. For
smaller quark masses, the endpoint should move towards the temperature
axis. By increasing the quark chemical potential, the nucleons will be
packed denser and denser until the quark-hadron phase transition is
reached. As soon as the quark chemical potential exceeds this transition
line, the system becomes a color superconductor at low temperatures or a
QGP which is in the normal conducting phase (NQ) at high temperatures.

At large quark chemical potentials and low temperatures, quark matter
becomes a color superconductor. In this thesis, I shall focus on this
part of the phase diagram and its transitions to the hadronic phase and
to normal quark matter. The reader will see that there exist various
color-superconducting phases and that this thesis will update the phase
diagram of strongly interacting matter in the quark regime.

### 1.2 Color superconductivity

Quarks are spin- @xmath fermions and therefore obey the Pauli principle
which requires that one quantum state is occupied by only one fermion.
At zero temperature, non-interacting quarks occupy all available quantum
states with lowest possible energies. This behavior is expressed with
the Fermi-Dirac distribution function for zero temperature,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy of a free massive quark. All states with
momenta @xmath which are less than the Fermi momentum @xmath are
occupied. The states with momenta larger than the Fermi momentum are
empty. The pressure for massive non-interacting quarks at zero
temperature is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the degeneracy factor in which @xmath is the number of
colors, and @xmath the number of flavors. The factor two comes because
of spin degeneracy. The bag constant @xmath assigns a nonzero
contribution to the vacuum pressure and, in this way, provides the
simplest modelling of quark confinement in QCD [ 6 ] . A typical value
for the bag pressure is @xmath GeV which is used in Refs. [ 7 , 8 ] . In
the limit of zero mass and zero temperature, the pressure of
non-interacting quarks reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the case of non-interacting quarks. What happens when the quark
interaction is switched on?

At asymptotically large quark chemical potentials, the strong coupling
constant becomes small so that the dominant interaction between quarks
is given by single-gluon exchange. The quark-quark scattering amplitude
in the one-gluon exchange approximation is proportional to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are the colors of the incoming, and @xmath ,
@xmath those of the outgoing channel. The first term in this equation is
antisymmetric and corresponds to the antitriplet channel which is
responsible for the dominant attractive interaction while the second
term is symmetric and corresponds to the sextet channel which is
responsible for the repulsive interaction, see Fig. 1.2 .

Therefore, the antitriplet channel with its dominant attractive
interaction ensures that quarks with large momenta (quarks near the
Fermi surface) form bosonic quark Cooper pairs [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] . This
state is called a color superconductor in analogy to superconductivity
of electrons [ 13 ] . The arguments how color superconductivity is
created hold rigorously at asymptotically large densities. The highest
densities of nuclear matter that can be achieved in colliders or that
occur in nature in the cores of neutron stars are of the order of ten
times the nuclear matter ground state density at which the quark
chemical potential approximately amounts to @xmath MeV. Nevertheless,
calculations in the framework of an NJL model [ 14 ] show that color
superconductivity also occurs at moderate densities and is not limited
to asymptotically large densities [ 15 ] .

As a consequence of (color) superconductivity, there exists at least one
gap in the quasiparticle spectra. Such a color-superconducting gap
(parameter) @xmath is a diquark condensate which is defined as an
expectation value,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the operator,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

acts on the quark spinor field @xmath in color, flavor, and Dirac space.
The color-superconducting gap parameters @xmath are zero in normal quark
matter and nonzero ( @xmath MeV) in color-superconducting quark matter,
and they are equal to one half of the binding energy of a quark Cooper
pair. The values of the gap parameters can be obtained by solving the
gap equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the pressure of color-superconducting quark matter.

In ordinary superconductors, the @xmath gauge symmetry is broken so that
the photons become massive. (Throughout this thesis, I indicate local,
i.e., gauged, symmetries by square brackets.) This leads to the
so-called Meissner effect, the expulsion of magnetic fields from the
superconducting region. In a color superconductor, the @xmath color
gauge symmetry is broken so that some of the eight types of gluons
become massive. In an ordinary superconductor as well as in a color
superconductor, thermal motion will break up Cooper pairs and therefore
destroy the (color-)superconducting state. In a color superconductor,
this transition is of second order and happens at the critical
temperature

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the color-superconducting gap at zero temperature, and
@xmath the Euler-Mascheroni constant.

But there are also differences when one compares superconductivity with
color superconductivity: the electrons in superconductors first have to
overcome their repulsive Coulomb forces in order to form Cooper pairs
while in color superconductors, the formation of quark Cooper pairs is
much simpler because there already exists the attractive interaction in
the antitriplet channel. Quarks, unlike electrons, come in various
flavors, see Table 1.1 , and carry color charges. Because of this latter
quark property, superconductivity of quarks is called color
superconductivity.

The quarks in color-superconducting quark matter are called
quasiparticles or quasiquarks, respectively. One only needs to consider
the lightest quarks (up, down, and strange) for color-superconducting
quark matter, because the heavy quarks (charm, bottom, and top) are so
massive that their occurrence in quark matter is extremely unlikely for
the densities and temperatures under consideration.

The color and flavor structure of the condensate of quark Cooper pairs
which is also called the color-flavor gap matrix depends on which quark
flavors participate in pairing and which total spin @xmath the Cooper
pairs have. For @xmath , the spin part of the quark Cooper pair
wavefunction is antisymmetric, and therefore the color-flavor part has
to be symmetric in order to fulfill the requirement of overall
antisymmetry. Since quarks pair in the antisymmetric color-antitriplet
channel, the flavor part of the wavefunction also has to be
antisymmetric.

#### 1.2.1 The 2SC phase

In order to fulfill the symmetry requirements, at least two quarks of
different flavor are needed for the @xmath case. Therefore, the simplest
ansatz for the color-flavor gap matrix has the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the order parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

conventionally points in anti-blue color direction. Together with the
Dirac part, the gap matrix reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the so-called 2SC phase which is an abbreviation for 2 -flavor
color s uper c onductor. The color indices @xmath and @xmath run from
one to the number of colors @xmath which is equal to three. The flavor
indices @xmath and @xmath run from one to the number of flavors @xmath
participating in pairing which is equal to two in the 2SC phase. In this
phase, red up quarks pair with green down quarks, and red down quarks
pair with green up quarks, and form anti-blue quark Cooper pairs.

The blue quarks remain unpaired and therefore cause gapless
quasiparticles. These quasiparticles give dominant contributions to the
specific heat and to the electrical and heat conductivities. They are
also responsible for a large neutrino emissivity produced by the @xmath
processes @xmath and @xmath . The other four quasiparticles and
quasiantiparticles fulfill the dispersion relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gap, and @xmath stands for quasiparticles and
quasiantiparticles, respectively. At small temperatures ( @xmath ) , the
contributions of these quasiparticles to all transport and many
thermodynamic quantities are suppressed by the exponentially small
factor @xmath [ 9 ] . The gluons are bosons and therefore, their number
density is small at low temperature. In the 2SC phase, the @xmath gauge
symmetry is broken to @xmath . Consequently, there are @xmath broken
generators. They represent five gluons which are gapped because of the
color Meissner mass. Therefore, gluons have only tiny influence on the
properties of quark matter in the 2SC phase. The unpaired blue quarks
are responsible for the absence of baryon superfluidity. Only the
anti-blue quasiparticles carry a nonzero baryon number. This can be seen
by the generator of baryon number conservation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the eighth generator of the @xmath group. The
electromagnetic generator of the unbroken @xmath gauge symmetry in the
2SC phase is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the electromagnetic generator of the @xmath gauge
symmetry in vacuum. The gauge boson of @xmath is the medium photon.
Therefore, there exists no electromagnetic Meissner effect in the 2SC
phase and that is the reason why a magnetic field would not be expelled
from the color-superconducting region. The 2SC phase is a so-called
@xmath -conductor because its electrical conductivity is large. The
@xmath charge of the blue up quasiparticle is responsible for this
behavior, see Eq. ( 1.14 ).

At weak coupling, the difference of the color-superconducting pressure
to the pressure of normal-conducting quark matter for massless
non-interacting quarks at zero temperature ( 1.3 ) amounts to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

per each gapped quasiparticle [ 17 ] . In the 2SC phase without strange
quarks, there are six quarks from which four of them are gapped so that
the pressure for color-superconducting quark matter in the 2SC phase at
zero temperature approximately reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.2.2 The CFL phase

If the strange quark chemical potential exceeds the mass of strange
quarks, then there are also strange quarks in quark matter at zero
temperature, see Eq. ( 1.1 ). Therefore, it is possible that also the
strange quarks participate in pairing. Since the spin part of the quark
Cooper pair wavefunction is antisymmetric for @xmath and quarks pair in
the antisymmetric color-antitriplet channel, also the flavor part has to
be antisymmetric in order to fulfill the requirement of overall
antisymmetry. This leads to the following color-flavor gap matrix in the
three-flavor case:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the order parameter is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Together with the Dirac part, the gap matrix reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is one difference in comparison to the 2SC phase: the
antisymmetric tensor in Eq. ( 1.17 ) now possesses three instead of two
flavor indices because three instead of two quarks participate in
pairing, @xmath . The condensate breaks @xmath to the vectorial subgroup
@xmath and is still invariant under vector transformations in color and
flavor space. This means that a transformation in color requires a
simultaneous transformation in flavor to preserve the invariance of the
condensate. Therefore, the discoverers [ 18 ] of this three-flavor
color-superconducting quark state termed it the CFL phase which is an
abbreviation for c olor– f lavor- l ocked phase. The CFL phase is the
true ground state of quark matter because all quarks are paired which
leads to the highest pressure of all color-superconducting phases.

In contrast to the 2SC phase, the CFL phase also has gaps in the
repulsive sextet channel. The color-flavor gap matrix ( 1.17 ) can be
extended by the (small) symmetric sextet gaps,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the antitriplet and @xmath is the sextet gap. This can
be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . By introducing the color-flavor projectors [
19 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which fulfill the properties of completeness, @xmath , and
orthogonality, @xmath , the color-flavor gap matrix assumes the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The singlet gap @xmath and the octet gap @xmath appear in
the spectra of quasiparticles and quasiantiparticles,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and all quarks are treated as massless for simplicity. By
neglecting the small repulsive sextet gap, one finds that @xmath .

In the CFL phase, there are no gapless quasiparticles. At small
temperatures ( @xmath ), the contributions of the quark quasiparticles
to all transport and many thermodynamic quantities are suppressed by the
small exponential factor @xmath [ 9 ] . The influence of the gluons on
the CFL phase is negligible because all of them are massive because of
the color Meissner effect. In contrast to the 2SC phase, the CFL phase
is superfluid because the @xmath baryon number symmetry is broken, but
it has an unbroken @xmath gauge symmetry and therefore it is, like the
2SC phase, not an electromagnetic superconductor. This is the reason why
the CFL phase does not expell a magnetic field from its
color-superconducting interior. The electromagnetic generator of the CFL
phase reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The CFL phase is a @xmath -insulator because all quarks are gapped and
there is no remaining electric charge as in the 2SC phase. Therefore,
the CFL phase is electrically charge neutral. At zero temperature, there
are no electrons present [ 20 ] . At small temperatures, the electrical
conductivity of the CFL phase is dominated by thermally excited
electrons and positrons [ 21 ] and becomes transparent to light [ 21 ,
22 ] .

As in the case of chiral perturbation theory in vacuum QCD [ 23 ] , one
could write down an effective low-energy theory in the CFL phase. From
the symmetry breaking pattern, it is known that there are nine
Nambu-Goldstone bosons and one pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone boson in the
low-energy spectrum of the theory [ 24 ] . Eight of the Nambu-Goldstone
bosons are similar to those in vacuum QCD: three pions ( @xmath and
@xmath ), four kaons ( @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ) and the eta-meson
( @xmath ). The additional Nambu-Goldstone boson ( @xmath ) comes from
breaking the @xmath baryon symmetry. In absence of gapless quark
quasiparticles, this Nambu-Goldstone boson turns out to play an
important role in many transport properties of cold CFL matter [ 21 , 25
] . Finally, the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone boson ( @xmath ) results from
breaking of the approximate axial @xmath symmetry. A possible phase
transition to the CFL phase with a meson (e.g., kaon or eta) condensate
could happen if @xmath [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] , where @xmath is the
up and @xmath the strange quark mass.

In the CFL phase, there are nine quarks, and all of them are gapped: one
quasiparticle with gap @xmath and eight quasiparticles with gap @xmath .
Therefore, the pressure of the CFL phase for massless quarks at zero
temperature approximately is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where Eqs. ( 1.3 ), ( 1.15 ), and @xmath are used.

#### 1.2.3 Spin-one color superconductivity

Since quarks pair in the antisymmetric color-antitriplet channel and the
spin part of the quark Cooper pair wavefunction is antisymmetric for
@xmath , condensation with only one flavor is forbidden by the Pauli
principle, but it is possible for the @xmath channel, where the spin
part of the wavefunction is symmetric. Thus, the Cooper pair
wavefunction is, as required, overall antisymmetric. Spin-one color
superconductivity [ 12 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 ] is much
weaker than spin-zero color superconductivity. The gap in spin-one
color-superconducting systems is of the order of 100 keV. Such a small
gap will not have big influences on the transport and many thermodynamic
properties of the quark matter [ 9 ] . Spin-one color superconductivity
is less favored than spin-zero color superconductivity since the latter
has a higher pressure because of the larger gap. This is why one does
not expect that spin-one color-superconducting quark phases dominate in
the phase diagram of neutral quark matter. But they could be favored if
it is not possible to form a spin-zero color-superconducting state
because of a too large mismatch between the Fermi surfaces of different
quark flavors [ 38 ] .

The general structure of the gap matrix for spin-one
color-superconducting systems reads [ 36 , 37 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is the momentum vector, and @xmath its
absolute value. Spin-one color-superconducting phases are called
longitudinal if @xmath and transverse if @xmath . Many different
spin-one color-superconducting phases can be constructed by choosing
various specific @xmath -matrices @xmath . The most important of them
are the A-phase, the c olor– s pin- l ocked (CSL) phase, the polar
phase, and the planar phase [ 36 , 37 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.28)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which are characterized by different symmetries of their ground state.

The original group @xmath breaks down as follows [ 36 , 37 ] :

  A-phase:  

    @xmath

  CSL:  

    @xmath

  Polar:  

    @xmath

  Planar:  

    @xmath

In spin-one color superconductors, there can exist an electromagnetic
Meissner effect in contrast to spin-zero color superconductors. If so,
magnetic fields will be expelled from the color-superconducting region.
This is, for example, the case in the CSL phase. The most energetically
preferred spin-one color-superconducting quark phase is the transverse
CSL phase because it has the highest pressure [ 39 ] .

### 1.3 Stellar evolution

Stars begin their life as objects which are formed out of contracted
interstellar gas clouds in galaxies. They are nuclear burning factories:
light nuclei, such as hydrogen, will be burned to heavier nuclei by
fusion reactions. After all fusion reactions are completed, stars end
their life as compact stars: white dwarfs, neutron stars, or black
holes.

#### 1.3.1 The formation of stars

Interstellar clouds which mainly consist of hydrogen contract if their
gravitation exceeds the pressure from inside caused by turbulence and
temperature. In order to obtain such a large gravitation, interstellar
clouds have to possess big masses. The so-called Jeans criterion has to
be fulfilled so that an interstellar cloud is able to contract [ 40 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the temperature in Kelvin and @xmath the central density
of the interstellar cloud in cm @xmath . The critical mass @xmath is
obtained in units of the solar mass. In Table 1.2 , some values for the
critical mass are shown.

By the contraction of the interstellar cloud, first stars of spectral
type O are created in its center. Their ultraviolet radiation ionizes
the hydrogen gas around them so that it becomes hot and is shining. This
so-called H II region has a temperature @xmath K and expands into the
cool outer regions of the interstellar cloud which consist of cold
hydrogen gas, so-called H I regions which have a temperature @xmath K.
Wavy bays and globules are created by this expansion. The globules have
diameters of up to one parsec (pc) and masses of up to 70 @xmath .
Within 500000 years, they fragment and collapse to protostars which emit
only infrared radiation because there are dense dust clouds around them
which fall on them within several million years. In the meantime, the
contraction of the star continues until the pressure from inside becomes
as large as the gravitation. Then, the star is on the main sequence in
the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram (HRD), see Fig. 1.3 .

The massive and bright stars are in the upper and the darker stars with
lower mass are on the lower part of the HRD. Hot blue stars are in the
left and cooler red stars are in the right part of the HRD. During the
contraction of gas balls to stars, their rotation becomes faster and
faster because of angular momentum conservation. This could lead to a
splitting of the gas balls because of large centrifugal forces so that
gravitationally bound narrow double, multi-star, or solar systems will
be formed. Wider gravitationally bound double or multi-star systems are
formed if the stars of the interstellar cloud come close to each other
by their movement and by gravitational forces. In this way, many stars
and star systems are created inside interstellar clouds so that finally
there exists an open cluster in their center from which an O
association, a star cluster with hundreds of stars of spectral type O
until B2, expands into the outer regions.

#### 1.3.2 Main sequence stars

During the contraction, the central temperature @xmath of the stars
becomes higher and higher. At @xmath K, hydrogen burning is initiated in
the cores of the stars. For producing such large temperatures in the
cores, the stars need at least a mass @xmath @xmath . Otherwise brown
dwarfs will be created in which hydrogen burning never occurs.
Hydrogen-burning stars are on the main sequence of the HRD. The
contraction is finished because the pressure is as large as the
gravitational attraction. There are two possibilities to burn hydrogen
into helium by fusion reactions [ 41 , 42 ] : these are the
proton-proton cycles (pp cycles), see Fig. 1.4 , and the
carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycles (CNO cycles), see Fig. 1.5 .

The main difference between these two possibilities is that in the pp
cycles protons fuse directly with each other while in the CNO cycles,
they are always burnt into helium by using carbon, nitrogen, oxygen,
etc. as catalysts. In cooler yellow and red stars, where @xmath K, only
the pp cycles are present. The CNO cycles are initiated not until @xmath
K, but they are dominant in hot blue and white stars where @xmath K. The
energy production of the CNO cycles is then much larger as the energy
production of the pp cycles. The larger the mass of a (main sequence)
star the higher is its central temperature. Stars with big masses use
the CNO cycles to burn hydrogen into helium. But only twelve percent of
the total hydrogen is in the core of a main sequence star which can be
burnt into helium. Because of the much higher central temperatures, blue
and white stars with large masses burn the hydrogen in their cores much
faster into helium as cold yellow and red stars with low masses, see
Table 1.3 .

#### 1.3.3 Red giants and red super giants

When the hydrogen in the core is used up, gravitation becomes dominant
so that the star contracts because there are no fusion reactions any
more which can maintain the pressure from inside. This leads to higher
central temperatures, @xmath million Kelvin. Such high temperatures are
needed to initiate helium burning in the core of a star,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

To produce such high temperatures in the core, a star needs at least a
mass @xmath @xmath . Otherwise the star is only able to burn hydrogen
and then ends as a white dwarf. Helium burning happens in a process of
two stages, a so-called Salpeter process [ 46 ] : two helium nuclei form
an intermediate stage, a @xmath Be nucleus which is unstable and is
therefore marked by a star in the fusion reaction ( 1.30 ). It reacts
with a third helium nucleus to produce @xmath C. The Salpeter process of
helium burning is called triple- @xmath process, and it is much more
likely as a direct reaction of three helium nuclei to form carbon. A
further reaction of @xmath C with a helium nucleus produces @xmath O.

Above the core of helium burning, there remains a shell of hydrogen
burning which expands until it reaches the star surface. The star blows
up because of the high pressure caused by helium burning. Its diameter
and luminosity are much larger as in the period of a main sequence star
but the surface temperature is colder so that the star appears red. It
has become a red giant. When hydrogen burning ends and helium burning is
initiated, the stars go from the main sequence into the giant region in
the HRD. Red giants are not as stable as main sequence stars because the
pressure from inside is in imbalance with the gravity of the star. This
leads to oscillations of red giants: the star contracts, the radius
becomes smaller and the star whitens a little. The interior pressure
increases, the star expands, the radius becomes larger and the star
becomes a little more red. This procedure repeats again and again. When
the helium in the core is used up, the red giant contracts. If its mass
exceeds eight solar masses, the central temperature is hot enough to
burn carbon in the core of the star,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

otherwise the red giant ends up as a white dwarf. By carbon burning, the
red giant blows up to a red super giant because the interior pressure
becomes very high. If all carbon is used up, the red super giant
contracts. If the mass of the red super giant exceeds ten solar masses,
its central temperature becomes high enough so that neon, oxygen, and
silicon will be burnt in the core,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath               (1.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

otherwise the fusion reactions end with the fusion of carbon. After all
carbon is used up in the core of the red super giant and its mass is
lower than ten solar masses so that the red super giant is not able to
proceed with further fusion reactions, it finally explodes by a
supernova of type II and forms a neutron star. But if the mass of the
red super giant exceeds ten solar masses, fusion reactions can happen
until nuclei with mass number @xmath are produced. These are iron and
nickel. For larger @xmath , fusion reactions would need energy to
produce heavier nuclei. So, there is no other way for a massive red
super giant with an iron core as to collapse because of the missing
interior pressure. It will cause a supernova of type II and form a
neutron star. If the mass is even larger than approximately twenty solar
masses, the star will collapse into a black hole.

#### 1.3.4 Compact stars

If the mass of a star is smaller than approximately @xmath @xmath ,
hydrogen burning is never initiated and the star will end up as a brown
dwarf. Otherwise, if the mass is larger, the star will end up as a
compact star: a white dwarf, a neutron star, or a black hole. If the
mass is larger than approximately @xmath @xmath but does not exceed
eight solar masses, the star will end up as a white dwarf. The outer
shells of red giants are blown away and form a planetary nebula. There
are no fusion reactions any more so that the core of the red giant
collapses to a white dwarf in the center of the planetary nebula. Only
the pressure of degenerate electrons is able to stop the collapse which
is caused by gravity. White dwarfs have densities of about one million
grams per cubic centimeter, radii of a few thousand kilometers, and cool
approximately within ten billion years to black dwarfs and become
invisible.

If a star A is a star with a small mass in a narrow binary system,
matter from its massive companion star B is accreted by star A if star B
exceeds its Roche volume when it becomes a red giant. This phenomenon
has a big influence on the evolution of stars in narrow binary or
multi-star systems: star A becomes much more massive than star B. If
star A is a white dwarf and star B is a red giant, the white dwarf
accretes matter which can be seen as nova bursts because the accreted
matter causes nuclear reactions. If the mass of the white dwarf exceeds
the Chandrasekhar mass which is approximately 1.44 @xmath , the white
dwarf explodes in a supernova of type I because its gravity becomes so
large that the degenerate electron pressure is not able to stabilize the
star any more. Expanding gas shreds are the only remnants of the white
dwarf.

If the mass of the red super giant is larger than eight solar masses and
there are no further fusion processes in the star, the pressure of
degenerate electrons is not able to stop the collapse any more. Such red
super giants collapse in supernova explosions of type II to neutron
stars. More details about neutron stars will be presented in Sec. 1.4 .

A black hole will be formed if the progenitor star, a red super giant,
possesses a mass of about 20–25 solar masses. No internal force is able
to stop the collapse of the red super giant because of the huge
gravitation. A black hole is defined as a region of space-time which
cannot communicate with the external universe which means that there is
no chance for a particle or even for light to escape from a black hole
if it has reached the region beyond its event horizon. The event horizon
is the boundary of a black hole at which gravity is so strong that
nothing has a chance to escape. The radius of the event horizon for a
spherical mass is called the Schwarzschild radius, @xmath .

### 1.4 Neutron stars

At the end of its life, a red super giant with a mass larger than eight
solar masses consists of many shells of different nuclei which are
created by fusion processes. They are arranged like onion shells: the
surface shell of the red super giant consists of the lightest nucleus,
hydrogen. Towards the center, the nuclei which were created by fusion
processes get heavier. In the center of red super giants with masses
larger than ten solar masses, there are iron nuclei. If all fusion
processes are finished, the red super giant will collapse. Since gravity
of such massive stars is so dominant, not even the pressure of
degenerate electrons is able to stop the collapse. The iron nuclei in
the center of the star break up because of the high pressure and
temperature. This process is called photo dissociation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

costs energy, and the thermal pressure from inside reduces so that the
star collapses in approximately @xmath seconds. Electrons are captured
by protons so that matter in the core mostly consists of neutrons,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pressure of these degenerate neutrons stops the collapse. The
process ( 1.36 ) is called inverse @xmath decay in which a huge amount
of neutrinos is produced. These neutrinos are trapped for a while in the
collapsed hot star core which is called a protoneutron star. The outer
shells fall down on this protoneutron star, bounce back and thereby
produce an outgoing shock wave which is seen as a supernova explosion of
type II in which nuclei with mass numbers @xmath are formed.

The evolution of protoneutron stars goes through several stages [ 47 ,
48 , 49 ] as is shown in Fig. 1.6 . During the supernova explosion,
there goes a shock through the outer mantle of the protoneutron star.
The outer mantle is of low density and high entropy, accretes matter and
loses energy by @xmath decays and neutrino emission. The core has a mass
of about 0.7 @xmath in which neutrinos are trapped. The lepton to baryon
fraction is @xmath . The whole protoneutron star in this first stage of
evolution has an approximate radius of about 200 kilometers. After
approximately five seconds, accretion becomes less important. The mantle
collapses because of the loss of lepton pressure caused by
deleptonization. In this stage of evolution, the lepton to baryon
fraction is in the range @xmath , and the radius amounts to
approximately 20 kilometers. If a lot of matter accretes onto the
protoneutron star so that it exceeds its maximum mass then the
protoneutron star collapses to a black hole. At approximately 15 seconds
after the supernova explosion, the protoneutron star is dominated by
neutrino diffusion causing deleptonization and heating of the
protoneutron star. In this stage of evolution, the lepton to baryon
fraction is @xmath , the radius of the protoneutron star is
approximately 15 kilometers, and its temperature is heating up to 30 MeV
@xmath 60 MeV. There is also the possibility of forming a black hole by
deleptonization. Fifty seconds after the supernova explosion, the
protoneutron star becomes transparent to neutrinos so that the inner
part of the star cools down. But the crust remains warm because of its
lower neutrino emissivity, @xmath K. After 50–100 years, also the crust
cools down by neutrino emission and the star becomes isothermal. In
later stages, the star cools down by direct URCA processes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

or modified URCA processes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

neutrino and photo emission. A cold neutron star has been formed.

#### 1.4.1 Pulsars

Before neutron stars were discovered, theorists speculated about the
existence of neutron stars. In 1932, Landau called them weird stars. In
1934, Baade and Zwicky realized that there is a connection between
supernovae of type II and neutron stars. The first neutron star
calculations were done by Tolman, Oppenheimer, and Volkoff in 1939 who
created mass-radius diagrams of neutron stars [ 50 ] . Further work has
been done by Wheeler et al. (1960–1966) and Pacini (1967).

In the summer of 1967 in Cambridge/England, Jocelyn Bell, a student of
Anthony Hewish who got the Nobel prize in 1974, detected a neutron star
as a pulsar for the first time. Neutron stars can be observed as pulsars
which are pulsa ting sources of r adiation because they can be
identified by their very precise radio pulses. Pulsars possess a strong
magnetic field of about 10 @xmath G in which highly energetic electrons
gyrate and thereby produce synchroton radiation which is emitted at the
magnetic poles of the pulsar, see Fig. 1.7 . Usually, the rotation axis
of a pulsar is inclined to the axis of the magnetic field. Thereby, the
cone of the synchroton radiation can be detected only once in a rotation
period of the pulsar. This is the pulsation phenomenon of pulsars which
is also called the lighthouse effect.

From observations with radio telescopes one knows that pulsars have
periods in the range of 1.6 milliseconds to several seconds. They rotate
so fast because of angular-momentum conservation. In Sec. 1.3.1 , it was
mentioned that stars (gas balls) rotate. This rotation is kept during
the life of the stars. When red super giants collapse to pulsars, the
rotation velocity increases very much. The pulsar periods are very
stable and therefore increase not much in time. The Crab pulsar for
example has a rotation period of 33 milliseconds and this changes only
about 0.036% per year. From the present pulsar period @xmath and its
time derivative one is able to determine the characteristic age @xmath
of a pulsar. Because of the rapid rotation, a pulsar has an oblate shape
and therefore is not exactly spherically symmetric. Observations like
gravitational redshift measurements and mass determinations in binary
systems as well as theoretical calculations show that the masses of
neutron stars or pulsars, respectively, approximately amount to 1.5
@xmath , and that they have radii of about ten kilometers. Therefore
such compressed, massive objects have an unbelievable mass density which
is of about 10 @xmath g/cm @xmath . A further observation in pulsars are
so-called glitches, sudden small jumps in the rotation period of
pulsars. They are most probably caused by vortices and rearrangements in
the crust of the pulsar. Because of that, it comes to a decrease of the
angular momentum in the superfluid and an increase of the angular
momentum in the crust [ 51 ] . Pulsars show proper motions which
originate in so-called pulsar kicks. A possible explanation is that they
are created if neutrinos emit asymmetrically during the supernova
explosion which leads to a propulsion of the pulsar. Another observation
in pulsars of binary systems are x-ray emissions and bursts: mass is
transferred from companion stars onto the accretion disc of the pulsars.
Because of the strong magnetic fields of the pulsars, matter from the
accretion disc is diverted to the poles of the magnetic field. At this
places, nuclear fusion processes are initiated, which emit x-rays.

#### 1.4.2 Structure of neutron stars

In Sec. 1.4 , it was shown that neutron stars consist of neutrons
because of inverse @xmath decays ( 1.36 ). This does not mean that
neutron stars only consist of neutrons. For different mass densities,
there are different phases of matter inside neutron stars, see Fig. 1.8
.

Neutron stars consist of an atmosphere of electrons, nuclei, and atoms.
Only a fraction of the electrons are bound to nuclei. The equation of
state was calculated by Feynman, Metropolis, and Teller [ 52 ] . They
found out that the nuclei in this regime, where the mass density @xmath
g/cm @xmath , are mainly @xmath Fe.

In neutron stars with temperatures above typically 100 eV, between the
atmosphere and the solid crust a layer is present, where nuclei and
electrons are in a liquid phase called the ocean [ 53 ] .

One assumes complete ionization of the atoms, when the spacing between
the nuclei becomes small compared to the Thomas-Fermi radius @xmath of
an isolated neutral atom. In this equation, @xmath is the Bohr radius
and @xmath the charge number. The mass density approximately amounts to
@xmath , where @xmath is the mass number, @xmath the atomic mass unit,
and @xmath the number density of nuclei, which depends on the radius of
a spherical nucleus whose volume is the average volume per nucleus [ 54
] , @xmath . By combining the last three equations, one finds that the
outer crust of cold neutron stars begins when @xmath g/cm @xmath @xmath
g/cm @xmath . This shell consists of nuclei and free electrons. The
equation of state was originally calculated by Baym, Pethick, and
Sutherland (BPS) [ 55 ] and improved in Refs. [ 56 , 57 ] using up to
date nuclear data. The BPS model is valid for zero temperature which is
a good approximation for the crust of nonaccreting cold neutron stars.
The outer crust of nonaccreting cold neutron stars contains nuclei and
free electrons. The latter become relativistic above @xmath g/cm @xmath
. The nuclei are arranged in a b ody- c entered c ubic (bcc) lattice.
The contribution of the lattice has a small effect on the equation of
state but it changes the equilibrium nucleus to a larger mass number and
lowers the total energy of the system because it will minimize the
Coulomb interaction energy of the nuclei. The latter are stabilized
against @xmath decay by the filled electron sea. At @xmath g/cm @xmath ,
@xmath Fe is the true ground state. With increasing mass density, it is
not the true ground state any more because the nuclei capture electrons,
emit neutrinos and become neutron richer. When the mass density @xmath
g/cm @xmath , the so-called neutron drip line is reached. Neutrons begin
to drip out of the nuclei and become free. This happens because the
equilibrium nuclei become more and more neutron-rich, and finally no
more neutrons can be bound to nuclei. At the neutron drip point, the
inner crust of neutron stars begins. At @xmath g/cm @xmath nuclei do not
exist anymore, signalling the end of the neutron star crust.

The equation of state of the inner crust was calculated by Baym, Bethe,
and Pethick [ 59 ] and another equation of state for this regime was
derived by Negele and Vautherin [ 60 ] . Also a relativistic mean field
model has been used to describe the density regime of the neutron star
crust within the Thomas-Fermi approximation (see Ref. [ 61 ] and
references therein). For higher densities, the nuclei disintegrate and
their constituents, the protons and neutrons, become superfluid. Muons
also begin to appear in these shells. The equation of state of this
regime can be calculated by using non-relativistic many-body theories [
62 ] or relativistic nuclear field theories [ 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 ] . What
kind of matter exists in the cores of neutron stars depends on their
central densities. Neutron stars with lower central densities consist of
protons, neutrons, electrons, and muons while others with larger central
densities can consist of hyperons, a pion or kaon condensate. In neutron
stars with huge central densities, @xmath , even the protons, neutrons,
and hyperons can disintegrate into their constituents: quarks which are
deconfined. Such neutron stars contain a quark core [ 58 ] whose true
ground state is strange quark matter [ 67 ] so that not only the light
up and down quarks but also the strange quarks occur if their mass is
low compared to the strange quark chemical potential. The remaining
three quark flavors are too heavy to participate in the quark matter of
neutron stars. Because of the dominant attractive interaction in the
antitriplet channel, the true ground state of strange quark matter in
the cores of neutron stars is color-superconducting strange quark matter
[ 3 , 9 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ] .

In nature, phase transitions can take place either through sharp
boundaries between pure phases which are located next to each other or
through mixed-phase regions. Thus, it does not necessarily mean that the
phase transitions in neutron stars have to take place as sudden as
represented in Fig. 1.8 . In Fig. 1.9 , one can see that the
quark-hadron phase transition is not separated into two distinct shells
but that there is a smooth transition from the hadronic phase into the
quark phase. This transition goes in several stages, and by the effects
of Coulomb forces and surface tensions, some interesting structures are
formed. Quarks at first appear in a structure of drops in a shell under
the pure hadronic phase in which the amount of hadrons exceeds the
amount of quarks. With increasing density, quarks form a structure of
rods, and finally a structure of slabs and are surrounded by hadronic
matter. At higher density, the amount of quarks exceeds the amount of
hadrons which form a structure of slabs. With increasing density,
hadrons form a structure of rods, and finally a structure of drops that
are surrounded by quark matter. Ultimately, the cores of neutron stars
with huge central densities consist of pure quark matter.

#### 1.4.3 Properties of neutron star matter

The matter in neutron stars is in its ground state. It is in nuclear
equilibrium which means that the energy cannot be lowered by strong,
weak, or electromagnetic interactions. When matter is in equilibrium
concerning weak interactions, one calls it @xmath -equilibrated matter
or one says that matter is in @xmath equilibrium. It means that the
reactions for (inverse) @xmath decay ( 1.36 ) or the reactions for weak
interactions, respectively, are in equilibrium for all lepton families,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this equilibrated reaction, @xmath . The leptons are listed in Table
1.4 . They are spin- @xmath particles, and therefore fermions.

Since the quark flavor content of protons and neutrons is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can express the reaction ( 1.39 ) in terms of quark flavors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

By weak interactions, also the transformation from up into strange
quarks is possible,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Neutrinos carry only lepton number. That is why the chemical potential
of each neutrino family is equal to the chemical potential of each
lepton family,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the equilibrated reactions ( 1.41 ) and ( 1.42 ), one can directly
write down the equation for the corresponding chemical potentials,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means that @xmath , a fact that directly comes out of the
equilibrated reactions ( 1.41 ) and ( 1.42 ). The last equation can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the chemical potential of electric charge. This means that electrons,
muons, and @xmath leptons carry both, lepton number and electric charge,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the quark content of the neutron ( 1.40 ), one can define the
baryon chemical potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quark chemical potential and @xmath the chemical
potential of neutrons. This relation together with the fact that @xmath
is used to solve the equation ( 1.45 ) for each quark flavor. One
obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the matrix of electric charge in flavor space.

With Eq. ( 1.49 ), one automatically satisfies @xmath equilibrium in
normal quark matter where the color symmetry @xmath is not broken. This
is not the case in color-superconducting quark matter. There, one has to
know the quark chemical potential of each quark color and flavor. In
order to satisfy @xmath equilibrium for each quark color and flavor, one
starts with the equation for @xmath equilibrium for each quark flavor (
1.49 ) and adds to it the terms for each color which consist of color
chemical potentials and the generators of the @xmath group [ 75 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this equation, the color indices @xmath and @xmath are superscripted
while the flavor indices @xmath and @xmath are subscripted. But not all
of the eight color chemical potentials are nonzero. This can be proven
by calculating the tadpoles and was done for the 2SC phase in Ref. [ 76
] where only a nonzero color chemical potential @xmath is present. I
extended this calculation for the color-superconducting phases which I
had to investigate for this thesis and got the result that there are
nonzero color chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the
chemical potential for each color and flavor can be simplified to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the purposes of this thesis. Later on, I omit the double color and
flavor indices of the quark chemical potential matrix ( 1.52 ) and
denote @xmath by @xmath because the quark chemical potential matrix (
1.52 ) is diagonal in color-flavor space. Later on, also the double
flavor indices of the matrix of electric charge ( 1.50 ) will be omitted
because it is diagonal in flavor space, e.g. @xmath is denoted by @xmath
. Also, the double color indices of the generators of the @xmath group,
@xmath and @xmath , can be omitted because they are diagonal in color
space, e.g. @xmath can be denoted by @xmath , and @xmath can be denoted
by @xmath .

Stars are bound by gravity and have to be electrically charge neutral,
otherwise they would be unstable and explode because of repulsive
Coulomb forces. The number density of electrically charged particles is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quark spinor, and @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are
the number densities of electrons, muons, and @xmath leptons,
respectively. The electrical charge neutrality condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

demands that the number density of electrically charged particles @xmath
, which can be calculated by taking the derivative of the pressure
@xmath with respect to the chemical potential of electric charge, is
equal to zero.

Stars without color-superconducting quark matter are automatically color
neutral because the @xmath color symmetry is not broken. This is not the
case in color-superconducting quark matter. If stars consist of
color-superconducting quark matter, then they have to be color neutral
because on the one hand, one is not able to observe color charges in
nature, on the other hand, stars will not be stable if they are not
color neutral. In the following, I show that the color number densities
@xmath and @xmath have to be equal to zero in order to fulfill color
neutrality.

The spinor of quark colors is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Herewith, the number densities of quarks read,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.57a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.57b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.57c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

I only need to consider the color number densities @xmath and @xmath
because there are only nonzero color chemical potentials @xmath and
@xmath in the color-superconducting phases which I had to investigate
for this thesis. In order to fulfill color neutrality, equal number
densities of red, green, and blue quarks are necessary,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

By inserting this into Eqs. ( 1.57 ), one obtains the conditions for
color neutrality,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The color neutrality conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

demand that the number densities of color charges @xmath and @xmath ,
which can be calculated by taking the derivative of the pressure @xmath
with respect to the corresponding color chemical potential, are equal to
zero.

In QCD, color neutrality is realized dynamically due to the generation
of gluon condensates @xmath and @xmath [ 76 , 77 , 78 ] . The appearance
of such condensates is equivalent to nonzero values of the corresponding
color chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath .

#### 1.4.4 Toy models of neutral normal quark matter

In this thesis, I present the phase diagram of neutral quark matter.
This will be done in Chapter 2 . For a better understanding of the
properties of neutral quark matter, it is advantageous to introduce some
simple toy models. Therefore, some formulae of thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics are needed [ 79 , 80 ] . The pressure for
non-interacting massive fermions and antifermions at nonzero temperature
@xmath reads [ 81 , 82 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the degeneracy factor, @xmath is the momentum, @xmath is
the relativistic total energy, @xmath is the mass, and @xmath is the
chemical potential of the fermions. The first term corresponds to the
pressure of fermions while the second one corresponds to the pressure of
antifermions. By integration by parts, one obtains,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. At zero temperature, the
Fermi-Dirac distribution function becomes a Heaviside function,
cf. Eq. ( 1.1 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that one has to integrate from @xmath up to the Fermi momentum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Herewith, one obtains from Eq. ( 1.62 ) the pressure of non-interacting
massive fermions for zero temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Only the contribution from fermions survives. The pressure of
non-interacting massive fermions for zero temperature can also be
obtained by using the equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result can be calculated directly from the pressure ( 1.61 ) by
using the relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

or by integration by parts of Eq. ( 1.66 ). The integrals in Eqs. ( 1.66
) and ( 1.67 ) have an analytical solution,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the integrals in Eqs. ( 1.61 ) and ( 1.62 ) can only be solved
numerically. In the limit of vanishing mass, one obtains from Eq. ( 1.62
) the pressure of non-interacting massless fermions and antifermions at
nonzero temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Details how to get this result are shown in Sec. B.1 in the Appendix. In
the limit of zero mass and zero temperature, the pressure of fermions
reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number density of non-interacting fermions can be obtained by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, in the case of massive fermions at nonzero temperature, leads to
the result,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term is the contribution of fermions while the second one is
the contribution of antifermions. The integral can only be solved
numerically, but in the case of zero temperature, one obtaines an
analytical result by using Eq. ( 1.64 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number density of massless fermions and antifermions at nonzero
temperature reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the number density of massless fermions at zero temperature is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

From these formulae of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics one is
able to construct simple toy models for quark matter. In the following,
I present toy models of non-interacting normal quark matter in neutron
stars. Toy models for color-superconducting quark matter will be
presented in Sec. 1.5.1 . If a protoneutron star consists of normal
quark matter, then one has to consider neutral @xmath -equilibrated
quark matter at nonzero temperature. Electrons and muons are present in
quark matter in protoneutron stars in order to make them electrically
neutral. Charm, bottom, and top quarks as well as @xmath leptons are too
heavy so that they do not exist in the cores of compact stars where the
quark chemical potential @xmath MeV. But in protoneutron stars,
neutrinos are trapped. They can be treated as massless in good
approximation. The pressure of a simple toy model of normal quark matter
in protoneutron stars reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the first line in this equation is the contribution of quarks, the
second line is the contribution of electrons and muons, and the third
line is the contribution of massless electron and muon neutrinos to the
pressure. In the third line, also the bag pressure is subtracted. The
relativistic energies of quarks, electrons, and muons are given by
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the masses of the quark
flavors ( @xmath ) and leptons ( @xmath ). The chemical potentials of
the quark flavors and the leptons are denoted by @xmath ( 1.49 ) or
@xmath , respectively, where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

cf. Eq. ( 1.46 ). Because of color symmetry and spin degeneracy, the
degeneracy factor of the quark contribution to the pressure is @xmath .
The degeneracy factor of electrons and muons is @xmath because of spin
degeneracy. For neutrinos the spin is always opposite the momentum and
this is referred to as left-handed, whereas the antineutrinos are always
right-handed. That is why the degeneracy factor of neutrinos is @xmath .
The chemical potential of muon neutrinos can be set equal to zero which
is a good approximation for matter in protoneutron stars. Electrical
neutrality can be achieved by using Eq. ( 1.54 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the net number density of each quark flavor, and

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.81)
  -- -- -- --------

is the number density of electrons or muons, respectively. As one
expects, the condition for electrical neutrality of non-interacting
normal quark matter in @xmath equilibrium ( 1.79 ) is of the form @xmath
, where @xmath is the electric charge of the particle species @xmath and
@xmath its number density. In order to have neutral quark matter, for a
given quark chemical potential @xmath , the chemical potential of
electric charge @xmath has to be found by solving for it in Eq. ( 1.79
).

A simple toy model for cold normal quark matter in neutron stars can be
obtained by taking the limit @xmath in the above simple toy model for
protoneutron stars. Also, neutrinos can be neglected because in cold
neutron stars, they are not trapped any more. Therefore, the pressure of
a simple toy model of cold normal quark matter in neutron stars reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Fermi momenta of the quark flavors
@xmath and leptons @xmath , respectively. Again, electrical neutrality
can be achieved by solving Eq. ( 1.79 ) for the chemical potential
@xmath for a given quark chemical potential @xmath . But for @xmath ,
the expressions for the number density of each quark flavor and for each
lepton respectively simplify to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit of zero temperature, zero up and down quark masses, and
massless electrons, and by neglecting the contribution of muons, one can
solve Eq. ( 1.79 ) for the chemical potential of electric charge [ 83 ]
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Taylor expansion of the strange quark Fermi momentum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

is used, and terms which are of higher order are neglected because their
contributions are small. If the contribution of the strange quarks is
neglected, one obtains,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into Eq. ( 1.49 ) and calculating the respective quark
flavor number densities ( 1.83 ) leads to the result that there are
nearly twice as many down quarks as up quarks. The simple results for
the chemical potential of charge ( 1.84 ) and ( 1.86 ) are a good
approximation for @xmath as one can see by comparing it with Fig. 5 in
Ref. [ 8 ] . One also realizes that strange quarks help neutralizing
quark matter and therefore less electrons are needed. For the ideal but
unrealistic case of zero strange quark mass, no electrons are present in
neutral normal quark matter.

### 1.5 Color superconductivity in neutron stars

From the statements made in Sec. 1.4.2 , one can expect strange quark
matter in the cores of neutron stars where the density is so large that
deconfined quark matter is able to exist. Because of the dominant
attractive interaction in the antitriplet channel, quarks form Cooper
pairs. The typical temperatures inside (proto)neutron stars are so low
that the diquark condensate is not melted. That is why one expects not
(only) normal strange quark matter but even color-superconducting
strange quark matter in the cores of neutron stars.

The color-superconducting gap affects the transport properties,
e.g. conductivities and viscosities which have an influence on the
cooling rates and on the rotation period of neutron stars. It also
modifies the thermodynamic properties, e.g. the specific heat and the
equation of state which have an influence on the mass-radius relation of
color-superconducting neutron stars [ 9 ] . In Ref. [ 8 ] , the effect
of color superconductivity on the mass and the radius of compact stars
made of pure quark matter is investigated. The authors confirmed the
result of Ref. [ 86 ] that color superconductivity does not alter the
mass and the radius of quark stars, if the diquark-coupling constant is
chosen to reproduce vacuum properties such as the pion-decay constant.
The reason is that color superconductivity in neutral quark matter has a
tiny effect on the equation of state, cf. Figs. 5.9 and 5.10 in Ref. [ 7
] . The color-superconducting gap has significant effects on the mass
and radius of quark stars only if the diquark-coupling constant is
artifically increased whereby the value of the gap itself artificially
increases. For gaps on the order of 300 MeV, the mass and radius of
quark stars are approximately twice as large as for normal-conducting
quark stars so that such quark stars are of the same size and mass as
ordinary neutron stars. Therefore, it is impossible to decide whether a
compact star consists of normal conducting or color-superconducting
quark matter, or simply of hadronic matter.

In some cases, color superconductivity is accompanied by baryon
superfluidity or the electromagnetic Meissner effect. Baryon
superfluidity causes rotational vortices while the electromagnetic
Meissner effect entails magnetic flux tubes in the cores of neutron
stars.

At large strange quark masses, neutral two-flavor quark matter in @xmath
equilibrium can have another rather unusual ground state called the
gapless two-flavor color superconductor (g2SC) [ 84 ] . While the
symmetry in the g2SC ground state is the same as that in the
conventional 2SC phase, the spectrum of the fermionic quasiparticles is
different, see Fig. 1.10 . The g2SC phase appears at intermediate values
of the diquark coupling constant while the 2SC phase appears in the
regime of strong diquark coupling. Gapless modes are created if the
mismatch between the Fermi momenta of the quarks which pair becomes
large. In the case of the g2SC phase, @xmath where @xmath . The
existence of gapless color-superconducting phases was confirmed in Refs.
[ 8 , 87 , 88 ] , and generalized to nonzero temperatures in Refs. [ 85
, 89 ] . It is also shown that a gapless CFL (gCFL) phase appears in
neutral strange quark matter [ 90 , 91 ] . But gapless
color-superconducting quark phases are unstable in some regions of the
phase diagram of neutral quark matter because of chromomagnetic
instabilities [ 92 ] so that another phase will be the preferred state.
Chromomagnetic instabilities occur even in regular color-superconducting
quark phases. The author of Ref. [ 93 ] shows that chromomagnetic
instabilities occur only at low temperatures in neutral
color-superconducting quark matter. The author of Ref. [ 94 ] points out
that the instabilities might be caused by using BCS theory in mean-field
approximation, where phase fluctuations have been neglected. With the
increase of the mismatch between the Fermi surfaces of paired fermions,
phase fluctuations play more and more an important role, and soften the
superconductor. Strong phase fluctuations will eventually
quantum-disorder the superconducting state, and turn the system into a
phase-decoherent pseudogap state. By using an effective theory of the
CFL state, the author of Ref. [ 95 ] demonstrates that the
chromomagnetic instability is resolved by the formation of an
inhomogeneous meson condensate. The authors of Ref. [ 96 ] describe a
new phase in neutral two-flavor quark matter within the framework of the
Ginzburg-Landau approach, in which gluonic degrees of freedom play a
crucial role. They call it a gluonic phase. In this phase, gluon
condensates cure a chromomagnetic instability in the 2SC solution and
lead to spontaneous breakdown of the color gauge symmetry, the @xmath
and the rotational @xmath group. In other words, the gluonic phase
describes an anisotropic medium in which color and electric
superconductivity coexist. In Ref. [ 97 ] , it was suggested that the
chromomagnetic instability in gapless color-superconducting phases
indicates the formation of the Larkin-Ovchinnikov-Fulde-Ferrell (LOFF)
phase [ 98 ] which is discussed in Ref. [ 99 ] in the context of quark
matter. Other possibilities could be the formation of a spin-one
color-superconducting quark phase, a mixed phase, or a completely new
state. The authors of Ref. [ 100 ] suggest that a mixed phase composed
of the 2SC phase and the normal quark phase may be more favored if the
surface tension is sufficiently small [ 101 ] . The authors of Ref. [
102 ] suggest a single first-order phase transition between CFL and
nuclear matter. Such a transition, in space, could take place either
through a mixed phase region or at a single sharp interface with
electron-free CFL and electron-rich nuclear matter in stable contact.
The authors of Ref. [ 102 ] constructed a model for such an interface.

#### 1.5.1 Toy models of neutral color-superconducting quark matter

In this subsection, I show some toy models for color-superconducting
quark matter. In these toy models, which are valid for zero temperature,
up and down quarks are treated as massless, and the strange quark mass
is incorporated via a shift in the strange quark chemical potential
which is a good approximation. Neutrinos are not present in cold quark
matter in neutron stars so that @xmath . Also, muons are not taken into
account in the following toy models but electrons which are treated as
massless for simplicity. In the equations which satisfy the neutrality
conditions of these toy models, terms of higher order will be neglected.
The pressure of the toy model for color-superconducting quark matter in
the 2SC phase reads [ 83 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.87)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the first line is the contribution of gapped quasiparticles, the
second line is the contribution of free blue up and free blue down
quarks as well as free strange quarks, and the third line is the
contribution of massless electrons, the pressure correction due to the
four gapped quasiparticles, and the bag pressure. The chemical potential
for each quark color and flavor is given by Eq. ( 1.52 ), and their
Fermi momenta by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

Up and down quarks are treated as massless in this toy model, and the
strange quark Fermi momenta for each color will be calculated by the
simplified expression,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

as mentioned above. All quarks which pair have the same common
(averaged) Fermi momenta,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the 2SC phase, the Fermi momenta @xmath and @xmath are equal.
Therefore, only one common Fermi momentum @xmath is used. The neutrality
conditions ( 1.54 ) and ( 1.60 ) require [ 83 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case without strange quarks, one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

These approximations are in good agreement with the exact results for
@xmath , cf. Figs. 5 and 6 in Ref. [ 8 ] . In this toy model, the
pressure difference of the 2SC phase to the normal quark phase reads [
83 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the 2SC phase is preferred to the normal quark phase when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pressure of the toy model for the CFL phase reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first term is the contribution of the nine gapped quarks, the
second term is the contribution of electrons, the third term is the
correction to the pressure due to the gap, and the fourth term is the
bag pressure. As in the 2SC phase, the quarks which pair have the same
Fermi momenta,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.96a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.96b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.96c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.96d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the CFL phase, the neutrality condition for @xmath , Eq. ( 1.60 ),
requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is very useful to know that in the CFL phase the following relation
is valid:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number density of electrons. Because of the
neutrality conditions, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath have to be equal to
zero so that one concludes from Eq. ( 1.98 ) that also @xmath and with
it @xmath have to be zero which is in agreement with the arguments made
in Ref. [ 20 ] . It means that in the CFL phase there are neither
electrons nor muons nor @xmath leptons allowed, otherwise the neutrality
conditions will be violated. That is why one obtains the simple result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to satisfy the neutrality condition for @xmath , Eq. ( 1.60 ),
one gets,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this toy model, the pressure difference of the CFL phase to the
normal quark phase reads [ 83 , 102 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the CFL phase is preferred to the normal quark phase when

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the same requirement as for the 2SC phase, and because the
pressure difference of the CFL phase to normal quark matter is three
times larger than the pressure difference of the 2SC phase to normal
quark matter, the authors of Ref. [ 83 ] claim that the 2SC phase is
absent and the CFL phase is the preferred state in compact stars. In
Chapter 2 , I shall show that this statement is not correct in general
so that these simple toy models cannot replace a thorough analysis of
the preferred quark phases by an NJL model [ 14 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106
] for example. That is why it is so important to construct the phase
diagram of neutral quark matter with a more precise model which is done
in Chapter 2 .

## Chapter 2 The phase diagram of neutral quark matter

At sufficiently high densities and sufficiently low temperatures quark
matter is a color superconductor [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] . This conclusion
follows naturally from arguments similar to those employed in the case
of ordinary low-temperature superconductivity in metals and alloys [ 13
] . Of course, the case of quark matter is more complicated because
quarks, unlike electrons, come in various flavors (e.g., up, down, and
strange) and carry non-Abelian color charges. This phenomenon was
studied in detail by various authors [ 15 , 18 , 19 , 32 , 33 , 35 , 36
, 99 , 107 , 108 , 109 ] . Many different phases were discovered, and
recent studies [ 84 , 85 , 87 , 88 , 89 , 90 , 91 , 110 , 111 , 112 ,
113 , 114 , 115 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 ] show that even more new phases
exist. (For reviews and lectures on color superconductivity see Refs. [
3 , 9 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ] .)

In nature, the most likely place where color superconductivity may occur
is the interior of neutron stars. Therefore, it is of great importance
to study the phases of dense matter under the conditions that are
typical for the interior of stars. For example, one should appreciate
that matter in the bulk of a star is neutral and @xmath -equilibrated.
By making use of rather general arguments, it was suggested in Ref. [ 83
] that such conditions favor the CFL phase and disfavor the 2SC phase.
In trying to refine the validity of this conclusion, it was recently
realized that, depending on the value of the constituent (medium
modified) strange quark mass, the ground state of neutral and @xmath
-equilibrated dense quark matter may be different from the CFL phase. In
particular, the g2SC phase [ 84 , 85 ] is likely to be the ground state
in the case of a large strange quark mass. On the other hand, in the
case of a moderately large strange quark mass, the CFL and gCFL phases [
90 ] are favored. At nonzero temperature, @xmath , some other phases
were proposed as well [ 111 ] .

I note that the analysis in this thesis is restricted to locally neutral
phases only. This automatically excludes, for example, crystalline [ 99
] and mixed [ 101 , 100 , 120 ] phases. Also, in the mean field
approximation utilized here, I cannot get any phases with meson
condensates [ 28 , 29 , 30 ] .

In this chapter, I present the phase diagram of neutral quark matter. In
Sec. 2.1 , I show the phase diagram of massless neutral three-flavor
quark matter. In Sec. 2.2 , quark masses are treated self-consistently
within the framework of a three-flavor NJL model [ 106 ] , and the phase
diagram with a self-consistent treatment of quark masses is presented.
In Sec. 2.3 , this NJL model is extended to nonzero neutrino chemical
potentials, and the influence of neutrinos on the phase diagram is
discussed.

I use the following conventions: I calculate in natural units, @xmath ,
and utilize the Dirac definition of the @xmath -matrices which are shown
in Sec. A.2 in the Appendix. Latin indices run from one to three while
Greek indices run from zero to three. Four-vectors are denoted by
capital Latin letters while three-vectors are written in the bold
upright font. The space-time vector is defined as @xmath , the
four-momentum vector is denoted as @xmath , and the metric tensor is
given by @xmath . Absolute values of vectors are denoted by italic Latin
letters, e.g. @xmath . The direction of a vector is indicated by the hat
symbol, e.g. @xmath . I use the imaginary-time formalism, i.e., the
space-time integration is defined as @xmath , where @xmath is the
Euclidean time coordinate and @xmath the three-volume of the system. The
delta function is defined as @xmath . Energy-momentum sums are written
as: @xmath , where the sum runs over the Matsubara frequencies @xmath
for bosons and @xmath for fermions, respectively.

### 2.1 The phase diagram of massless quarks

In this section, I study the phase diagram of massless neutral
three-flavor quark matter at zero and nonzero temperature as a function
of the strange quark mass as well as a function of the quark chemical
potential. I start with the QCD Lagrangian density in order to derive
the QCD grand partition function. Then, the Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis
(CJT) formalism [ 121 ] is used to calculate the QCD effective action.
The gluon-exchange interaction between quarks is approximated by a
point-like four-fermion coupling. From the effective action of quarks, I
derive the pressure of color-superconducting quark matter. In order to
allow for the most general ground state, I employ a nine-parameter
ansatz for the gap matrix [ 110 ] . The effects of the strange quark
mass are incorporated by a shift of the chemical potential of strange
quarks, @xmath , where @xmath is the color index, @xmath is the strange
quark mass, and @xmath is the quark chemical potential. This shift
reflects the reduction of the Fermi momenta of strange quarks due to
their mass. Such an approach is certainly reliable at small values of
the strange quark mass. I assume that it is also qualitatively correct
at large values of the strange quark mass. In order to draw the phase
diagram of massless neutral three-flavor quark matter, I solve nine gap
equations together with the conditions of electric and color charge
neutrality.

#### 2.1.1 Quantum chromodynamics

The QCD Lagrangian density is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath colors and @xmath flavors, @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional
spinor of quark fields, @xmath is the Dirac conjugate spinor, @xmath ,
where @xmath are the Dirac matrices, and @xmath is the quark-mass
matrix. The covariant derivative is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the strong-coupling constant, @xmath are the gluon
fields, and @xmath are the generators of the @xmath group. The gluon
field-strength tensor is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the structure constants of the @xmath group. The first
term in the QCD Lagrangian density ( 2.1 ) corresponds to interacting
quarks while the second one corresponds to the gluons. The term @xmath
comprises gauge fixing terms and the contribution from Faddeev-Popov
ghosts. Up to irrelevant constants, the grand partition function of QCD
is given by [ 122 , 123 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the QCD action. The conserved quantities,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

are the quark number density operator, the operator of electric charge
density of the quarks, and the operators of color charge densities of
the quarks, respectively. The QCD action can be split into the part of
interacting quarks, into the part of gluons, and into the part of gauge
fixing terms and Faddeev-Popov ghosts,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The inverse tree-level propagator for quarks and charge-conjugate
quarks, respectively, is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

see Sec. B.2 in the Appendix. The matrix of quark chemical potentials is
denoted by @xmath and is defined by Eq. ( 1.51 ). The covariant
derivative in the inverse tree-level propagator of quarks is given by
Eq. ( 2.2 ) while the charge-conjugate covariant derivative in the
inverse tree-level propagator of charge-conjugate quarks reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using the charge-conjugate spinors ( A.14 ) and by introducing the
Nambu-Gorkov basis with the @xmath -dimensional quark spinors,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.11)
  -- -- -- --------

one can rewrite the QCD action of interacting quarks,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the inverse tree-level propagator for Nambu-Gorkov quarks.

By adding a bilocal source term to the QCD action ( 2.7 ), one obtains [
3 , 37 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The four entries of @xmath are not independent. Due to
charge-conjugation invariance of the action, @xmath , and since the
action has to be real-valued, @xmath . In the presence of an external
source @xmath , the grand partition function of QCD, up to irrelevant
constants, reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The QCD effective action can be derived from the grand partition
function of QCD ( 2.16 ) by using the CJT formalism [ 3 , 8 , 37 , 121 ,
124 , 125 , 126 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The quantities @xmath and @xmath are the gluon and quark propagator,
respectively. The inverse tree-level quark propagator @xmath was
introduced in Eq. ( 2.13 ). Correspondingly, @xmath is the inverse
tree-level gluon propagator. The traces run over space-time,
Nambu-Gorkov, color-flavor, and Dirac indices. The factor @xmath in
front of the fermionic one-loop terms compensates the doubling of
degrees of freedom in the Nambu-Gorkov basis. The functional @xmath is
the sum of all two-particle irreducible (2PI) diagrams. It is impossible
to evaluate all 2PI diagrams exactly. However, the advantage of the QCD
effective action ( 2.17 ) is that truncating the sum @xmath after a
finite number of terms still provides a well-defined many-body
approximation. Later on, the gluon-exchange interaction between quarks
is approximated by a point-like four-fermion coupling. This effectively
removes dynamical gluon degrees of freedom, such that one does not need
to worry about gauge fixing or possible ghost degrees of freedom.
Therefore, the latter are already omitted in Eq. ( 2.17 ). The
stationary points of the effective action ( 2.17 ) determine the
expectation values of the one- and two-point functions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first two equations yield the Dirac equation for the quark fields
@xmath and @xmath in the presence of the gluon field @xmath . The third
equation is the Yang-Mills equation for the gluon field,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative in the adjoint representation.
The first two terms on the right-hand side are the contributions from
gluon and fermion tadpoles [ 76 ] .

The functional derivative with respect to @xmath acting on the trace is
nontrivial because of the dependence of the inverse tree-level
propagators @xmath and @xmath on the gluon field, cf. Eq. ( 2.13 ). The
last term is nonzero if @xmath contains 2PI diagrams with an explicit
dependence on @xmath . As shown in Ref. [ 76 ] , the solution of the
Yang-Mills equation in the 2SC phase is a constant background field
@xmath . This background field acts like a color chemical potential
@xmath and provides the color-charge neutrality of the 2SC phase [ 76 ]
. In this manner, also the color chemical potential @xmath is present in
three-flavor color superconductors where the color chemical potentials
@xmath and @xmath ensure color neutrality. Later on, I shall remove the
gluon degrees of freedom by approximating the non-local gluon exchange
with a point-like four-fermion coupling. The constant background field
@xmath then disappears from the treatment, and the color chemical
potentials @xmath and @xmath assume the role of the background field to
ensure color neutrality.

The fourth equation ( 2.18 ) is the Dyson-Schwinger equation for the
gluon propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the gluon self-energy. Since I shall approximate the gluon exchange
by a four-fermion coupling, I do not need to solve the Dyson-Schwinger
equation for the gluon propagator.

The fifth equation ( 2.18 ) is the Dyson-Schwinger equation for the
quark propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the quark self-energy. According to their definition, the
self-energies ( 2.21 ) and ( 2.23 ) are obtained from the set of 2PI
diagrams by opening one internal line. The quark self-energy is a @xmath
-matrix in Nambu-Gorkov space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the quantities @xmath are the regular self-energies, and @xmath
are the anomalous self-energies. For @xmath , also the term gap matrices
is used. The gap matrices in connection with the quark self-energy (
2.23 ) yield the so-called gap equations. By solving these gap
equations, one obtains the gap parameters. In space-time, @xmath @xmath
has a quark [charge-conjugate quark] entering at @xmath and another
quark [charge-conjugate quark] emerging at @xmath . The anomalous
self-energies have to be interpreted as follows: a quark
[charge-conjugate quark] enters @xmath @xmath at @xmath and, in contrast
to the regular self-energies, here, a charge-conjugate quark [an
ordinary quark] emerges at @xmath . This is typical for systems with a
fermion-fermion condensate in the ground state [ 127 ] . The
self-energies @xmath symbolize this condensate. This is why the crucial
quantities regarding color superconductivity are the gap matrices @xmath
. A nonzero value of @xmath is equivalent to Cooper pairing, or, in
other words, to a nonvanishing diquark expectation value. The
self-energies in Eq. ( 2.24 ) are related in the same way as the bilocal
sources in Eq. ( 2.15 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quark propagator in Nambu-Gorkov space can be determined from the
Dyson-Schwinger equation ( 2.22 ), see Sec. B.3 in the Appendix,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the propagator for quasiquarks or charge-conjugate quasiquarks,
respectively, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the anomalous propagators. These anomalous propagators are typical
for superconducting systems [ 127 ] and account for the possibility that
in the presence of a Cooper-pair condensate, symbolized by @xmath , a
fermion can always be absorbed in the condensate, while its
charge-conjugate counterpart is emitted from the condensate and
continues to propagate.

The QCD pressure is, up to a prefactor @xmath , equal to the QCD
effective action ( 2.17 ) determined at the stationary points ( 2.18 )
which is denoted by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the temperature and @xmath the volume of the system.

#### 2.1.2 The effective action of quarks

In this section, I investigate the phase diagram of massless neutral
three-flavor quark matter. The quark spinor has the following
color-flavor structure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since I approximate the gluon-exchange interaction between quarks by a
point-like four-fermion coupling, I only need to consider the
contributions of quarks to the QCD effective action ( 2.17 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the tree-level quark propagator @xmath ( 2.13 ), which occurs in
the QCD effective action ( 2.17 ), is replaced by the quark propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the massless inverse Dirac propagator for quarks and charge-conjugate
quarks, respectively, in which the constant background field @xmath
disappears from the treatment, and the color chemical potentials @xmath
and @xmath assume the role of the background field to ensure color
neutrality. The quark chemical potential matrix in color-flavor space is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the chemical potential of each quark is given by Eq. ( 1.52 )
because quark matter inside neutron stars is in @xmath equilibrium.

Since I shall present the phase diagram of massless neutral three-flavor
quark matter in this section, the mass term of the inverse Dirac
propagators ( 2.33 ) is omitted. At sufficiently large quark chemical
potential, there is no need to take into account the small up and down
quark masses because the dynamical effect of such masses around the
quark Fermi surfaces is negligible. Of course, the situation with the
strange quark is different because its mass is not very small as
compared to the quark chemical potential @xmath . The most important
effect of a nonzero strange quark mass is, however, a shift of the
strange quark chemical potential due to the reduction of the Fermi
momentum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

cf. Eq. ( 1.89 ). Here, I have approximated @xmath by @xmath in the
denominator. Quantitatively, this does not make a big difference.

For the sum of all 2PI diagrams I only include the sunset-type diagram,
which is shown in the left panel of Fig. 2.1 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The trace runs over Nambu-Gorkov, color-flavor, and Dirac indices. The
Nambu-Gorkov vertex is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The stationary point of the effective action of quarks ( 2.31 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Dyson-Schwinger equation for the quark propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the quark self-energy. The effective action at the stationary point
which is determined by the Dyson-Schwinger equation for the quark
propagator ( 2.39 ) reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

For translationally invariant systems, it is advantageous to work in
energy-momentum space instead of in space-time,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42a)
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.42b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where I assumed translational invariance of propagators and
self-energies, @xmath . In energy-momentum space, the Dyson-Schwinger
equation for the quarks reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inverse free quark propagator in energy-momentum space is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the massless inverse Dirac propagator for quarks and
charge-conjugate quarks, respectively, reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quark self-energy is obtained by

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.46)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the gap equations which are independent of @xmath because I
approximate the gluon-exchange interaction between quarks by a
point-like four-fermion coupling. The inverse quark propagator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The regular self-energies play an important role in the dynamics of
chiral symmetry breaking, but they are of less importance in
color-superconducting quark matter. (The effect of the regular
self-energies was studied in Ref. [ 107 ] .) Therefore, the regular
self-energies in Eq. ( 2.46 ) are omitted. The quark self-energy ( 2.46
) contains the Feynman gauged gluon propagator, see Sec. B.4 in the
Appendix,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which represents the gluon-exchange interaction between quarks by a
point-like four-fermion coupling. In this approximation, the sunset-type
diagram becomes a double-bubble diagram, which is shown in the right
panel of Fig. 2.1 .

The quark propagator may be obtained by inverting Eq. ( 2.48 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the propagator for quasiquarks or charge-conjugate quasiquarks,
respectively, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the anomalous propagators.

I want to study the most general ansatz of the gap matrix for the CFL
phase in color-flavor space. Therefore, I use the following
nine-parameter ansatz [ 110 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This ansatz for the gap matrix is indeed the most general one for the
CFL phase because it can be obtained with some modifications from the
antitriplet and sextet gap ansatz ( 1.20 ). The difference between the
gap ansatz ( 1.20 ) and the gap matrix ( 2.53 ) is that the gap ansatz (
2.53 ) has different entries for all nonzero color-flavor elements. The
wavefunction requirements are still fulfilled because the gap matrix (
2.53 ) is symmetric in color-flavor space.

The effective action of quarks at the stationary point ( 2.41 ) in
energy-momentum space reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where I used Eqs. ( 2.42 ), the derivation of the Fourier transformed
kinetic part of the QCD grand partition function which is shown in Sec.
B.5 in the Appendix, and the relation @xmath which is proven in Sec. B.6
in the Appendix.

#### 2.1.3 Propagators and self-energies in projector representation

I only represented the color-flavor structure in the gap ansatz ( 2.53
). Together with the Dirac part, the complete gap matrices read [ 128 ]
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is only the color-flavor part of the gap ansatz ( 2.53 ),
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the energy-chirality projectors, see Eq. ( A.16c ). The gap
parameters @xmath are real-valued numbers. It will be very advantageous
in later calculations if the (inverse) massless Dirac propagators are
also written in terms of the energy-chirality projectors,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Let the matrix of quark chemical potentials @xmath and the color-flavor
part of the gap matrix @xmath be arbitrary for the moment. I separated
the Dirac part and the color-flavor part,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the (inverse) massless Dirac propagators in Eq. ( 2.57 ). Note that
the color-flavor matrices in Eq. ( 2.58 ) depend on @xmath . I did not
show an extra index @xmath in the above equations for simplicity. I
shall omit the indices @xmath and @xmath at the color-flavor matrices of
propagators and self-energies.

The (inverse) regular propagator reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The anomalous propagator can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.1.4 The potential part of the effective action of quarks

The potential part of the effective action of quarks ( 2.54 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be simplified. After performing the Nambu-Gorkov trace, one obtains
for the potential part of the effective action of quarks,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the anomalous propagators ( 2.52 ) and the relation @xmath , one
can easily check that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the potential part of the effective action of quarks can be
simplified to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Dirac trace has been performed in the last step. In the
following, I shall further simplify the potential part of the effective
action of quarks ( 2.64 ): I insert the anomalous propagator ( 2.60 )
into the gap equation ( 2.47 ) and multiply it from the left side with
the energy-chirality projectors in order to project onto @xmath . Thus,
the sums over @xmath and @xmath vanish. By performing the Dirac trace
one obtains,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In this expression, I explicitly show that the color-flavor part of the
gap matrix carries the indices @xmath and @xmath which arise from the
energy and chirality projections. In the second line, the color-flavor
part of the Feynman gauged gluon propagator has been performed. The
Dirac trace is computed in Sec. B.7 in the Appendix. One obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . As one can see, the gap equations do not depend on the
indices @xmath and @xmath because they do not appear any longer on the
right-hand side of this equation. After summation over @xmath one
obtains [ 19 ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.67)
  -- -- -- --------

which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where only one term is left on the right-hand side. This equation can be
transformed into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where I renamed @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . I now want to
write the right-hand side of this equation in a nicer form. Therefore, I
use the relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Multiplying by six and rearranging yields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression can be inserted into Eq. ( 2.69 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

By inserting this result into the potential part of the effective action
of quarks ( 2.64 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum over @xmath has been performed which yields an extra
factor of two.

#### 2.1.5 The kinetic part of the effective action of quarks

The inverse quark propagator @xmath ( 2.48 ) is a @xmath -matrix and
consists of the following subspace structure: it is a @xmath -matrix in
Nambu-Gorkov space, a @xmath -matrix in color-flavor space, and a @xmath
-matrix in Dirac space. In order to calculate the kinetic (first) part
of the effective action in Eq. ( 2.54 ), I transform the inverse quark
propagator into block-diagonal form. This is easily achieved by changing
the order of rows and columns in color-flavor and Nambu-Gorkov space. By
such a transformation, the absolute value of a determinant does not
change. Only the sign of the determinant is changed if there is an odd
number of exchanges of rows and columns. In the case mentioned above, no
corrections have to be made to the result of the determinant because
there is an even number of exchanges of rows and columns. There are six
@xmath -blocks,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.74)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and one @xmath -block in the block-diagonal structure of the inverse
quark propagator ( 2.48 ) in color-flavor and Nambu-Gorkov space. This
@xmath -block is a @xmath -matrix in Nambu-Gorkov space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Dirac propagators as well as the gap matrices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

are @xmath -matrices in color-flavor space.

Since @xmath [ 129 ] , where @xmath and @xmath are quadratic matrices,
the kinetic part of the effective action of quarks ( 2.54 ) is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to simplify the determinants, I make use of the
Gauss-elimination procedure [ 129 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are quadratic matrices and
@xmath is invertible. Hereby, all @xmath -blocks in color-flavor and
Nambu-Gorkov space become @xmath -blocks in color-flavor space, while
the original @xmath -block in color-flavor and Nambu-Gorkov space
becomes a @xmath -block in color-flavor space so that the kinetic part
of the effective action reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.79)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

The color and flavor indices at the propagators in Eq. ( 2.79 ) denote
the respective elements of the propagators which are given by Eqs. (
2.45 ) and ( 2.51 ). The kinetic part of the effective action of quarks
can be simplified by separating the color-flavor part and the Dirac part
in the propagators which can be achieved by using the energy-chirality
projectors, see Sec. 2.1.3 . With the relations @xmath and @xmath (see
Secs. B.5 and B.8 in the Appendix), only the color-flavor part is
remaining in the kinetic part of the effective action of quarks,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.81)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In this expression, also the sum over @xmath has been performed which
gives an extra factor of two. One can simplify the effective action of
quarks,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.82)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Some computations and definitions have been made in order to get this
result. These are explained in the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.83)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

are the averaged values and half of the differences of various pairs of
quark chemical potentials which come from the six @xmath -blocks in
color-flavor and Nambu-Gorkov space, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.84)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

are useful definitions for the gap parameters in order to write Eq. (
2.82 ) in a more compact form. The gap parameters in the first two lines
correspond to the attractive antitriplet channel, while the gap
parameters in the last line correspond to the repulsive sextet channel.
The quasiparticle energies which come from the six @xmath -blocks in
color-flavor and Nambu-Gorkov space are defined by the following
equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

cf. Eqs. ( 1.12 ) and ( 1.24 ). The dispersion relations (energy
eigenvalues) of the quasiquarks which come out of the six @xmath -blocks
in color-flavor and Nambu-Gorkov space read,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most complicated expression arises from the determinant of the
@xmath -matrix in color-flavor space in Eq. ( 2.81 ) which can be
calculated analytically. For doing this, one can use computer software [
130 , 131 ] . The determinant has the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficients @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are rather complicated
functions of the quark momentum @xmath , the three chemical potentials
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , and the six gap parameters @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath which stands for quasiquarks and
quasiantiquarks, respectively. The determinant ( 2.87 ) can always be
factorized as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath are the quasiparticle energies, dispersion
relations, and energy eigenvalues of the three quasiquarks which come
from the @xmath -block of the inverse Nambu-Gorkov quark propagator. In
order to get their explicit expressions, one has to solve the cubic
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . By making use of Cardano’s formulae, see Sec. B.9 in the
Appendix, the solutions can be presented in an analytical form. Because
of their very complicated nature I refrain from presenting them
explicitly.

The sum over all fermionic Matsubara frequencies has to be performed in
the kinetic term of the effective action of quarks ( 2.82 ). This is
also done with the grand partition function in Sec. B.10 in the Appendix
which is of the same form as the kinetic term of the effective action of
quarks. Therefore, the result in Sec. B.10 can be applied to the kinetic
term of the effective action of quarks,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.90)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where irrelevant constants are neglected and the vacuum contribution is
subtracted.

#### 2.1.6 The pressure of color-superconducting quark matter

Finally, by combining all contributions to the effective action of
quarks ( 2.54 ), I derive the result for the pressure @xmath of
color-superconducting quark matter,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.91)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where I have performed the trace in the potential part of the effective
action of quarks ( 2.73 ). I also converted the sums over all @xmath
into integrals by using the relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term in the pressure ( 2.91 ) is the contribution of leptons,
i.e. electrons and muons. They are added in order to make
color-superconducting quark matter electrically neutral. In principle,
the contribution of neutrinos should be added as well. In this section,
however, their contribution is neglected which is a good approximation
for neutron stars after deleptonization. The dispersion relations of the
leptons are given by @xmath , where @xmath MeV is the electron mass and
@xmath MeV is the muon mass [ 16 ] . In various applications, a bag
constant could be added to the pressure if necessary. In order to render
the integrals in the expression for the pressure finite, I introduced a
three-momentum cutoff @xmath . In QCD with dynamical gluons, of course,
such a cutoff would not be necessary. Here, however, I use a model in
which the gluon-exchange interaction between quarks is approximated by a
point-like four-fermion coupling. Such a model is nonrenormalizable.

The stationary conditions of the pressure ( 2.91 ) with respect to the
nine gap parameters read,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

cf. Eq. ( 1.7 ). In order to find the values of the gap parameters, one
can solve for them in Eq. ( 2.68 ). But a much simpler and equivalent
method is to solve the gap equations ( 2.93 ) for the nine gap
parameters,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath                        
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.94a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.94b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.94c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which has to be done numerically. In order to obtain these results, I
made use of the relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function which was defined
by Eq. ( 1.63 ).

Matter in neutron stars has to satisfy the conditions of charge
neutrality. The condition for electric charge neutrality ( 1.54 ) reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.96)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the number density of electrons and muons, respectively,
see Eq. ( 1.81 ). The conditions for color neutrality ( 1.60 ) are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.97a)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.97b)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The derivatives of the averaged values of various pairs of quark
chemical potentials which come out of the @xmath -blocks in color-flavor
and Nambu-Gorkov space with respect to the chemical potential of
electric charge @xmath and the color chemical potentials @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.98)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The derivatives of half of the differences of various pairs of quark
chemical potentials which come out of the @xmath -blocks in color-flavor
and Nambu-Gorkov space with respect to the chemical potential of
electric charge @xmath and the color chemical potentials @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, read,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.99)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The number density of quarks with color @xmath and flavor @xmath can be
obtained by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By using this relation, the number density of red up, green down, and
blue strange quarks respectively reads,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The number density of green strange, red strange, and red down quarks
(upper sign) as well as the number density of blue down, blue up, and
green up quarks (lower sign) is,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.102)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In this equation for the quark number densities, those @xmath and @xmath
( 2.83 ) have to be taken which contain the respective quark chemical
potential that corresponds to the respective quark number density which
one wants to calculate. Since the quasiparticle distribution relations
@xmath are obtained analytically by solving the cubic equation ( 2.89 ),
the derivatives of @xmath with respect to the gap parameters and the
chemical potentials can also be computed analytically. Because of their
very complicated nature, I refrain from presenting them explicitly.

All these thermodynamic quantities are valid for nonzero temperature. I
also want to show the results in the special case of zero temperature.
Therefore, Eqs. ( 1.64 ) and ( 1.68 ), and the following relations are
useful:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.104a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.104b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In this context, it is important to mention that the quasiparticle
energies @xmath and @xmath are positive numbers.

In the limit of zero temperature, the pressure of color-superconducting
quark matter ( 2.91 ) reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.105)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At zero temperature, the gap equations ( 2.94 ) are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.107a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.107b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.107c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

From Eq. ( 2.96 ), the condition for electric charge neutrality at zero
temperature can be easily derived,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.108)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the number density of electrons and muons respectively is given by
Eq. ( 1.83 ). The color charge neutrality conditions ( 2.97 ) at zero
temperature read,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.109a)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.109b)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The quark number densities of red up, green down, and blue strange
quarks at zero temperature can be easiliy derived from Eq. ( 2.101 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The quark number densities of green strange, red strange, and red down
quarks (upper sign) as well as the number densities of blue down, blue
up, and green up quarks (lower sign) at zero temperature can be obtained
by Eq. ( 2.102 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

I use the following model parameters: the strength of the diquark
coupling and the value of the cutoff are fixed as,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The model parameters are chosen to reproduce several key observables of
vacuum QCD such as the pion decay constant.

For given temperature @xmath , strange quark mass @xmath , and quark
chemical potential @xmath , I solved a coupled system of twelve
non-linear equations, i.e. nine gap equations and three neutrality
conditions, in order to obtain the values of the nine gap parameters and
of the chemical potentials of electric and color charge. This was done
numerically [ 132 ] .

#### 2.1.7 Results at zero temperature

In this subsection, I focus on three-flavor quark matter at zero
temperature. It is clear that, for small and moderate values of the
strange quark mass, the ground state of neutral quark matter should
correspond to either the regular (gapped) CFL phase or the gCFL phase.
At very large strange quark mass and/or relatively weak coupling, the
ground state can also be either a regular (gapped) or gapless 2SC color
superconductor.

In order to see how the phase structure of neutral three-flavor quark
matter changes with the strange quark mass @xmath , I solve a coupled
set of twelve equations, i.e., nine gap equations ( 2.107 ) and three
neutrality conditions ( 2.108 ) and ( 2.109 ), for various values of
@xmath , keeping the quark chemical potential fixed. In this calculation
I take @xmath MeV. The results for the absolute values of the gap
parameters and the chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are
shown in Figs. 2.2 and 2.3 , respectively. Note that, strictly speaking,
the gap parameters do not coincide with the actual values of the gaps in
the quasiparticle spectra. In the case of the CFL phase, for example,
there is a degenerate octet of quasiparticles with a gap @xmath and a
singlet state with a gap @xmath . In the CFL phase, @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath . Also, in the CFL phase, the following relation between the
gap parameters is satisfied: @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is the
sextet gap in the notation of Ref. [ 19 ] .

The results in Figs. 2.2 and 2.3 extend the results of Refs. [ 90 , 91 ]
by considering a more general ansatz for the gap matrix that takes into
account, in particular, the pairing in the symmetric sextet channel. The
effect of including pairing in the symmetric channel is a splitting
between the pairs of gaps ( @xmath , @xmath ), ( @xmath , @xmath ), and
( @xmath , @xmath ) that is also reflected in the change of the
quasiparticle spectra. In agreement with the general arguments of Refs.
[ 18 , 19 , 109 ] , the symmetric sextet gaps are rather small, see Fig.
2.2 c). This explains the fact why the splittings between the above
mentioned pairs of gap parameters are not very large [compare the
results in Figs. 2.2 a) and b)].

The effects of the strange quark mass are incorporated by a shift of the
strange quark chemical potential ( 2.35 ). Such an approach is certainly
reliable at small values of the strange quark mass. However, I assumed
that it is also qualitatively correct at large values of the strange
quark mass. By comparing the results for the gap parameters shown in
panel a) of Fig. 2.2 with the results for the gap parameters obtained by
taking the strange quark mass properly into account shown in the left
panel of Fig. 1 in Ref. [ 113 ] , one can see that both results are
qualitatively in good agreement.

I confirm that the phase transition from the CFL phase to the gCFL phase
happens at a critical value of the parameter @xmath that is in good
agreement with the simple estimate of Refs. [ 90 , 91 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The qualitative results for the chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath in Fig. 2.3 are in agreement with the corresponding results
obtained in Refs. [ 90 , 91 ] as well. In my notation, the color
chemical potential @xmath fulfills the identity,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the CFL phase, cf. Eq. ( 1.100 ). While the CFL phase requires no
electrons to remain neutral, the pairing in the gCFL phase is distorted
and a nonzero density of electrons appears. This is seen directly from
the dependence of the chemical potential of electric charge @xmath in
Fig. 2.3 which becomes nonzero only in the gCFL phase. This observation
led the authors of Refs. [ 90 , 91 ] to the conclusion that the phase
transition between the CFL and gCFL phase is an insulator-metal phase
transition, and that the value of the electron density is a convenient
order parameter in the description of such a transition. In fact, one
could also choose one of the differences between number densities of
mutually paired quarks as an alternative choice for the order parameter
[ 84 , 85 ] . In either case, there does not seem to exist any
continuous symmetry that is associated with such an order parameter. To
complete the discussion of the chemical potentials, I add that the other
color chemical potential @xmath is zero only in the CFL phase at @xmath
.

The effects of a nonzero strange quark mass on the phase structure of
neutral strange quark matter could be viewed from a different standpoint
that, in application to stars, may look more natural. This is the case
where the dependence on the quark chemical potential is studied at a
fixed value of @xmath . The corresponding numerical results are shown in
Fig. 2.4 . (Note once again that @xmath , where @xmath , have negative
values, and I always plotted their absolute values.) In this particular
calculation I chose @xmath MeV.

At large values of the quark chemical potential [ @xmath MeV which is
similar to the small strange quark mass limit considered before], the
ground state of quark matter is the CFL phase. At smaller values of the
chemical potential, the ground state of dense matter is the gCFL phase.
In this case, there are nine gap parameters all of which are different
from each other. One could also check that the density of quarks that
pair are not equal in the gCFL phase. This can be seen from Fig. 2.5
where all nine quark number densities are plotted for the same value of
the strange quark mass, @xmath MeV. Only @xmath and @xmath , all other
quark number densities are different from each other. This agrees with
the general criterion of the appearance of gapless phases at @xmath that
was proposed in Refs. [ 84 , 85 ] in the case of two-flavor quark
matter. In the ordinary CFL phase, in contrast, one finds that @xmath ,
and @xmath .

In order to see that the gCFL phase indeed describes a gapless
superconductor, it is necessary to show that the dispersion relations of
quasiparticles contain gapless excitations. In Fig. 2.6 , the dispersion
relations of all nine quasiparticles are plotted. The dispersion
relations for the corresponding antiparticles are not shown. From Fig.
2.6 , one can see that there is indeed a gapless mode in the
green-strange–blue-down sector. This is the same that was found in Refs.
[ 90 , 91 ] . Note also that, in agreement with Refs. [ 90 , 91 ] , the
red-strange–blue-up quasiparticle has a dispersion relation that is
nearly quadratic, @xmath with @xmath MeV for the given choice of
parameters, see Fig. 2.6 c). The nearly quadratic dispersion relation
resembles the situation at the transition between the 2SC phase, where
@xmath , and the gapless 2SC phase, where @xmath and @xmath are
different. This explains the approximate equality @xmath mentioned
above.

#### 2.1.8 Results at nonzero temperature

In this subsection, I present the results for the phase structure of
dense neutral three-flavor quark matter in the plane of temperature and
@xmath , as well as in the plane of temperature and quark chemical
potential.

I discuss the temperature dependence of the gap parameters in the two
qualitatively different cases of small and large values of the strange
quark mass. As one could see in Sec. 2.1.7 , the zero-temperature
properties of neutral quark matter were very different in these two
limits.

The results for the temperature dependence of the gap parameters are
shown in Figs. 2.7 , 2.8 , and 2.9 for two different values of the
strange quark mass that represent the two qualitatively different
regimes. In the case of a small strange quark mass (i.e., the case of
@xmath MeV which is shown in Figs. 2.7 and 2.8 ), the zero-temperature
limit corresponds to the CFL phase. This is seen from the fact that the
three different gaps shown in every panel of Fig. 2.7 merge as @xmath .
At nonzero temperature, on the other hand, the gap parameters are not
the same. This suggests that, similar to the zero-temperature case of
Figs. 2.2 and 2.4 , a phase transition to the gCFL phase happens at some
nonzero temperature. However, I shall show below that there is no phase
transition between the CFL and gCFL phases at any nonzero temperature.
Instead, there is an insulator-metal crossover transition between the
CFL phase and a so-called metallic CFL (mCFL) phase. At this point, all
quasiparticles are still gapped. At some higher temperature, the mCFL
phase is replaced by the gCFL phase.

If the temperature is increased even further, there are three
consecutive phase transitions. These correspond to the three phase
transitions predicted in Ref. [ 111 ] in the limit of a small strange
quark mass. In order to resolve these, I show a close-up of the
near-critical region of Fig. 2.7 in Fig. 2.8 . The three transitions
that one observes are the following:

1.  transition from the gCFL phase to the so-called uSC phase,

2.  transition from the uSC phase to the 2SC phase,

3.  transition from the 2SC phase to the normal quark phase.

Here, the notation uSC (dSC) stands for s uper c onductivity in which
all three colors of the u p ( d own) quark flavor participate in diquark
pairing [ 111 ] . My results differ from those of Ref. [ 111 ] in that
the dSC phase is replaced by the uSC phase. The reason is that, in my
case, the first gaps which vanish with increasing temperature are @xmath
and @xmath , see Fig. 2.8 , while in their case @xmath (corresponding to
my @xmath and @xmath ) disappears first. The authors of Ref. [ 112 ]
also obtain the dSC phase instead of the uSC phase at temperatures close
to the critical temperature and at small values of the strange quark
mass. I also obtain the dSC phase with my numerical calculations when I
use the model parameters of Ref. [ 112 ] . In fact, the main difference
between these two studies is the value of the cutoff parameter in the
model. From this, I conclude that the size of the uSC or dSC region,
respectively, in the phase diagram is particularly sensitive to the
choice of the cutoff parameter in the model [ 113 ] . Although I use the
same terms for the phases that were introduced in Ref. [ 111 ] , I
distinguish between the gapped phases (e.g., CFL and mCFL phase) and the
gapless phases (e.g., gCFL). Also, in order to reflect the physical
properties of the mCFL phase, I prefer to use the term metallic CFL,
instead of modified CFL as in Ref. [ 111 ] . (Note that, in that work,
the mCFL phase also encompasses the gCFL phase.)

In the case of a large strange quark mass (i.e., the case of @xmath MeV
shown in Fig. 2.9 ), the zero-temperature limit corresponds to the gCFL
phase. By looking at the corresponding temperature dependence of the gap
parameters, one can see that this case is a natural generalization of
the previous limit of a small strange quark mass. There are also three
consecutive phase transitions. It is noticeable, however, that the
separation between the different transitions becomes much wider at large
@xmath .

I now take a closer look at the transition between the CFL, the mCFL,
and the gCFL phase. At zero temperature, there was no symmetry connected
with the order parameter, i.e., the number density of electrons, that is
associated with the CFL @xmath gCFL phase transition. At nonzero
temperature, the electron density is not strictly zero in the CFL phase
as soon as @xmath . Indeed, the arguments of Ref. [ 20 ] regarding the
enforced neutrality of the CFL phase do not apply at @xmath . This is
why I conclude that the insulator-metal transition between the CFL and
the mCFL phase is just a smooth crossover at @xmath . Of course, in
principle, one can never exclude the existence of a first-order phase
transition. My numerical analysis, however, reveals a crossover. The
transition can only be identified by a rapid increase of the chemical
potential of electric charge or the electron density in a relatively
narrow window of temperatures, see panel a) in Fig. 2.10 . The location
of the maximum of the corresponding susceptibility (i.e., @xmath ) is
then associated with the transition point.

The transition between the mCFL and the gCFL phase corresponds to the
appearance of gapless quasiparticle modes in the spectrum. There is no
way of telling from the temperature dependences in Figs. 2.7 , 2.8 and
2.9 , whether the corresponding CFL and/or 2SC phases are gapless or
not. This additional piece of information can only be extracted from the
behavior of the quasiparticle spectra. I also investigated them, but I
do not show them explicitly.

My results for the phase structure of dense neutral three-flavor quark
matter are summarized in Fig. 2.11 . I show the phase diagram in the
plane of temperature and @xmath at a fixed value of the quark chemical
potential, @xmath MeV, and in the plane of temperature and quark
chemical potential at a fixed value of the strange quark mass, @xmath
MeV. The three solid lines denote the three phase transitions discussed
above. The two dashed lines mark the appearance of gapless modes in the
mCFL and 2SC phases. I term these as the mCFL @xmath gCFL and 2SC @xmath
g2SC crossover transitions. In addition, as I mentioned above, there is
also an insulator-metal type transition between the CFL and mCFL phase.
This is marked by the dotted lines in Fig. 2.11 .

The effects of the strange quark mass are incorporated only by a shift
of the strange quark chemical potential ( 2.35 ). By comparing the phase
diagram shown in panel a) of Fig. 2.11 with that one shown in the right
panel of Fig. 1 in Ref. [ 113 ] , where the strange quark mass is
properly taken into account, one can see that both phase diagrams are
quantitatively in good agreement for low strange quark masses. For large
strange quark masses, the phase diagrams are still qualitatively in good
agreement.

### 2.2 The phase diagram with a self-consistent treatment of quark
masses

The first attempt to obtain the phase diagram of dense, locally neutral
three-flavor quark matter as a function of the strange quark mass, the
quark chemical potential, and the temperature was made in Ref. [ 110 ] .
I presented this work in Sec. 2.1 . It was shown that, at zero
temperature and small values of the strange quark mass, the ground state
of quark matter corresponds to the CFL phase [ 18 , 19 , 109 ] . At some
critical value of the strange quark mass, this is replaced by the gCFL
phase [ 90 , 91 ] . In addition, several other phases were found at
nonzero temperature. For instance, it was shown that there should exist
a metallic CFL (mCFL) phase, a so-called uSC phase, as well as the
standard 2SC phase [ 15 , 32 , 107 , 108 ] and the g2SC phase [ 84 , 85
] .

In Ref. [ 110 ] , the effect of the strange quark mass was incorporated
only approximately by a shift of the strange quark chemical potential,
@xmath . Such an approach is reliable at small values of the strange
quark mass but for larger values of the strange quark mass, the results
are only qualitatively in good agreement by comparing them to the case,
where the strange quark mass is properly taken into account [ 113 ] .
The phase diagram of Ref. [ 110 ] was further developed in Refs. [ 112 ,
113 ] where the shift-approximation in dealing with the strange quark
was not employed any more. So far, however, quark masses were treated as
free parameters, rather than dynamically generated quantities.

In this section, I study the phase diagram of dense, locally neutral
three-flavor quark matter within the framework of a NJL model [ 14 , 103
, 104 , 105 , 106 ] , treating dynamically generated quark masses
self-consistently. I introduce the model and, within this model, I
derive a complete set of gap equations and charge neutrality conditions.
The results are summarized in the phase diagram in the plane of
temperature @xmath and quark chemical potential @xmath . Some results
within this approach were also obtained in Refs. [ 115 , 117 , 118 , 133
] .

#### 2.2.1 Model

In this section, I use a three-flavor NJL model [ 103 , 104 , 105 , 106
] . The Lagrangian density is given by [ 106 , 114 , 116 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.115)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the quark spinor field,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

carries color ( @xmath ) and flavor ( @xmath ) indices. The matrix of
quark current masses is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath with @xmath are the Gell-Mann matrices in flavor space ( A.27
), @xmath . In the Lagrangian density, I use the charge-conjugate quark
spinors ( A.14 ). The Dirac conjugate quark spinor is given by @xmath .

Throughout this work, I shall assume isospin symmetry on the Lagrangian
level, @xmath , whereas @xmath will be different, thus explicitly
breaking @xmath flavor symmetry. The terms in the Lagrangian density (
2.115 ) can straightforwardly be generalized to any number of flavors
@xmath . I only deal with the lighter up, down, and strange quarks
because charm, bottom, and top quarks are too heavy to occur in the
cores of neutron stars.

The term in the first line in the Lagrangian density ( 2.115 ), @xmath ,
is the Dirac Lagrangian density of non-interacting massive quarks. The
terms in the second line correspond to a @xmath symmetric four-point
interaction with the scalar coupling constant @xmath . Therefore, this
part of the Lagrangian density is termed symmetric Lagrangian density,
@xmath . The term in the third line of the Lagrangian density, @xmath ,
describes a scalar diquark interaction in the color-antitriplet and
flavor-antitriplet channel. For symmetry reasons there also should be a
pseudoscalar diquark interaction with the same diquark coupling constant
@xmath . This term would be important to describe Goldstone boson
condensation in the CFL phase [ 134 ] . In this study, however, I
neglect this possibility, and therefore drop the pseudoscalar diquark
term. The terms in the last line of the Lagrangian density, @xmath , are
called the ’t Hooft interaction, where @xmath is the coupling constant.
The determinants in these terms have to be taken in flavor space which
means that @xmath is a maximally flavor-mixing @xmath -point
interaction, involving an incoming and an outgoing quark of each flavor.
Consequently, for three flavors, the ’t Hooft term is a six-point
interaction term of the form,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are flavor indices.

The ’t Hooft interaction is @xmath symmetric, but it breaks the @xmath
axial symmetry [ 135 ] , which was left unbroken by @xmath . It thus
translates the @xmath anomaly, which in QCD arises at quantum level from
the gluon sector, to a tree-level interaction in a pure quark model. The
’t Hooft term is phenomenologically important to get the correct mass
splitting of the @xmath and @xmath mesons. In the chiral limit ( @xmath
), the @xmath mass is lifted to a nonzero value by @xmath , while the
other pseudoscalar mesons, including the @xmath , remain massless. There
are many other terms which are consistent with the symmetries and which
could be added to the Lagrangian. But for simplicity, however, I shall
restrict myself to the Lagrangian density ( 2.115 ). This Lagrangian
density should be viewed as an effective model of strongly interacting
matter that captures at least some key features of QCD dynamics. The
Lagrangian density contains three interaction terms which are chosen to
respect the symmetries of QCD.

In the Lagrangian density ( 2.115 ), there are six parameters: the quark
current masses @xmath and @xmath , the coupling constants @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , and the cutoff @xmath . I use the following set of
model parameters [ 136 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.119)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

After fixing the current masses of the up and down quarks at equal
values, @xmath MeV, the other four parameters in Eq. ( 2.119 ) are
chosen to reproduce the following four observables of vacuum QCD [ 136 ]
: @xmath MeV, @xmath MeV, @xmath MeV, and @xmath MeV. This parameter set
gives @xmath MeV [ 136 ] . In Ref. [ 136 ] , the diquark coupling
constant @xmath was not fixed by the fit of the meson spectrum in
vacuum. In general, it is expected to be of the same order as the
quark-antiquark coupling constant @xmath . In this section, I study the
following two cases in detail:

1.  the regime of intermediate diquark coupling strength with @xmath ,

2.  the regime of strong diquark coupling strength with @xmath .

In fact, the value of the diquark coupling constant for the regime of
intermediate coupling strength is used in many studies because this
value for the diquark coupling constant is predicted by the Fierz
transformation in vacuum. Therefore, it is a standard value, and, if not
mentioned otherwise, throughout this thesis, the standard value of the
diquark coupling constant,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is used.

In order to obtain the Lagrangian density ( 2.115 ) in mean-field
approximation, one can adopt the rules [ 105 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.121a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.121b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the last terms on the right-hand side are indispensable to avoid a
double counting of the interaction energy. This is why there is also a
factor of two in the six-fermion interaction. One should note that in
this approach, the condensates are treated as variational parameters
which are determined so as to give a maximum point of the pressure.

The diquark condensates @xmath are analogously defined as in Eq. ( 1.5
). The quark-antiquark condensates are defined as,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Herewith, I arrive at the following Langangian density in mean-field
approximation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the constituent quark mass matrix is defined as,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The constituent mass of each quark flavor can be obtained by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the set of flavor indices ( @xmath ) is a permutation of ( @xmath
). The Lagrangian density in mean-field approximation contains the gap
matrices in color-flavor and Dirac space,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which fulfill the relation @xmath . The color-flavor part of the gap
matrices reads,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are real-valued gap parameters. Here, as before, @xmath and
@xmath refer to the color components, and @xmath and @xmath refer to the
flavor components. The gap parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
correspond to the down-strange, the up-strange, and the up-down diquark
condensates, respectively. All three of them originate from the
color-antitriplet, flavor-antitriplet diquark pairing channel. For
simplicity, the color and flavor symmetric condensates are neglected in
this study. They were shown to be small [see Figs. 2.2 c), 2.4 c), 2.7
c), and 2.9 c)] and not crucial for the qualitative understanding of the
phase diagram [ 110 ] .

I should note that I have restricted myself to field contractions
corresponding to the Hartree approximation in Eq. ( 2.123 ). In a more
complete treatment, among others, the ’t Hooft interaction term gives
also rise to mixed contributions containing both diquark and
quark-antiquark condensates, i.e., @xmath [ 137 ] . In this study, as in
Refs. [ 106 , 133 ] , I neglected such terms for simplicity. While their
presence may change the results quantitatively, one does not expect them
to modify the qualitative structure of the phase diagram.

Up to irrelevant constants, the grand partition function is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the action. The conserved quantities,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are the quark number density operator, the operator of electric charge
density of the quarks, and the operators of color charge densities of
the quarks, respectively. The action can be split into a kinetic and a
potential part,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By inserting the Lagrangian density in mean-field approximation ( 2.123
) into the action ( 2.129 ), one obtains for the kinetic part of the
action,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and for the potential part of the action,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The massive inverse Dirac propagator for quarks and charge-conjugate
quarks, respectively, is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the matrix of quark chemical potentials. The chemical potentials for
each quark color and flavor are defined by Eq. ( 1.52 ) because quark
matter inside neutron stars is in @xmath equilibrium.

By introducing the Nambu-Gorkov basis,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.136)
  -- -- -- ---------

the kinetic part of the action can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where I have used the inverse quark propagator in Nambu-Gorkov space,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In momentum space, the massive inverse Dirac propagator for quarks and
charge-conjugate quarks, respectively, reads,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The kinetic part of the grand partition function ( 2.128 ) is Fourier
transformed in Sec. B.5 in the Appendix. With that result, one obtains
for the pressure of color-superconducting quark matter, @xmath ,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.140)
  -- -- -- ---------

where I also added the contribution of leptons, @xmath , which will be
specified later.

The most complicated expression in the pressure is the determinant
because the inverse quark propagator ( 2.138 ) is a @xmath -matrix with
the following substructure: it is a @xmath -matrix in Nambu-Gorkov
space, a @xmath -matrix in color-flavor space and a @xmath -matrix in
Dirac space. By using the relation @xmath [ 129 ] , where @xmath is a
factor and @xmath is a quadratic matrix with dimension @xmath , one
obtains for the kinetic part of the pressure,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where it is useful to rewrite the determinant of the inverse quark
propagator with the relation @xmath , where the matrices @xmath and
@xmath are quadratic [ 129 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By using the spin projectors ( A.4 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath stands for projections onto states with spin up or spin
down, respectively, one can rewrite the matrices @xmath and @xmath as [
114 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.144)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.145)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The spin projectors are @xmath -matrices in spin space. Thus, I have
separated the spin space from the color-flavor space and
particle-antiparticle space. The subdivision of the Dirac space into the
spin space and the particle-antiparticle space is necessary in order to
take the different quark masses properly into account.

By making use of the definition in Eq. ( 2.138 ), as well as Eqs. (
2.144 ) and ( 2.145 ), I obtain the following representation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(with @xmath ) is real and symmetric. By using the spin projectors, the
spin space is separated from the Nambu-Gorkov space, color-flavor space,
and particle-antiparticle space. Therefore, the matrices @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath -matrices and have the following substructure: they
are @xmath -matrices in Nambu-Gorkov space, @xmath -matrices in
color-flavor space, and @xmath -matrices in particle-antiparticle space.
Each element of the matrices which are shown in Eqs. ( 2.144 ), ( 2.145
), and ( 2.148 ) are @xmath -matrices in color-flavor space.

Since there is no explicit energy dependence in @xmath , its eigenvalues
@xmath determine the quasiparticle dispersion relations, @xmath . By
using the properties of the projectors @xmath as well as the matrix
relations, @xmath , and @xmath , see Secs. B.6 and B.8 in the Appendix,
I derive,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.149)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the traces in the first line run over Nambu-Gorkov, color-flavor,
particle-antiparticle, and spin indices, while the trace in the second
line only runs over Nambu-Gorkov, color-flavor, and
particle-antiparticle indices. It turns out that the two determinants
appearing on the right-hand side of this equation are equal, i.e.,
@xmath . From the physics viewpoint, this identity reflects the twofold
spin degeneracy of the spectrum of quark quasiparticles. The formal
proof of this degeneracy is straightforward after noticing that the
following matrix relation is satisfied:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is a matrix with the properties @xmath and @xmath .

Another observation which turns out to be helpful in the calculation is
that the determinant @xmath is an even function of @xmath , i.e., @xmath
. This is a formal consequence of the following matrix relation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is a matrix with the properties @xmath and @xmath . The invariance of
the determinant @xmath with respect to the change of the energy sign,
@xmath , is directly related to the use of the Nambu-Gorkov basis for
quark fields. In this basis, for each quasiparticle excitation with a
positive energy @xmath , there exists a corresponding excitation with a
negative energy @xmath . Therefore, the result for the determinant
should read,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The expression @xmath in Eq. ( 2.154 ) has to be squared because of the
spin degeneracy. Because of the artificial Nambu-Gorkov degeneracy,
@xmath , where @xmath are the 18 positive energy eigenvalues of Eq. (
2.148 ).

In order to simplify the numerical calculation of the eigenvalues of the
matrix @xmath , defined in Eq. ( 2.148 ), I first write it in a
block-diagonal form. With a proper ordering of its 36 rows and 36
columns, it decomposes into six diagonal blocks of dimension @xmath and
one diagonal block of dimension @xmath . The explicit form of these
blocks reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.155a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.155b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.155c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.155d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.155e)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.155f)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.155g)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Here, I have only shown the color-flavor structure of the matrix @xmath
because the repesentation of the total structure of the @xmath -matrix
@xmath would be too large. Each color-flavor element in @xmath is a
@xmath -matrix in Nambu-Gorkov and particle-antiparticle space,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.156)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The inverse quark propagator is a @xmath -matrix, and therefore, it has
72 energy eigenvalues. Because of spin degeneracy half of them are
equal. Out of 36 eigenvalues from all seven blocks ( 2.155 ), there are
18 positive and 18 negative eigenvalues because of the Nambu-Gorkov
degeneracy. Out of total 18 positive eigenvalues, nine of them
correspond to the nine quasiquarks and the other nine correspond to the
nine quasiantiquarks. I obtained the 36 eigenvalues of Eq. ( 2.155 )
numerically [ 132 ] .

Here, it might be interesting to note that the eigenvalues of the first
six @xmath matrices in Eq. ( 2.155 ) can be calculated analytically in
the limit when two quark masses appearing in each of them are equal. For
example, when @xmath , the four eigenvalues of matrix @xmath are given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the eigenvalues of @xmath differ only by the sign in front of the
second term,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When the value of @xmath is nonzero but small, the corrections to the
above eigenvalues are @xmath with the plus sign in the case of
antiparticle modes, and the minus sign in the case of particle modes.
The eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath in the limit @xmath , as well as
the eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath in the limit @xmath , are similar.

It turns out that in regular color-superconducting quark phases, there
are two positive-energy eigenvalues and two negative-energy eigenvalues
in each of the first six matrices in Eq. ( 2.155 ). The two
negative-energy eigenvalues are a consequence of the artificial
Nambu-Gorkov degeneracy. These negative-energy eigenvalues do not have
the same absolute value as the positive-energy eigenvalues in the same
matrix. That it why these negative-energy eigenvalues have their
positive counterparts in another of these first six matrices. It is easy
to extract the 18 positive-energy eigenvalues out of the total 36 energy
eigenvalues. This is done by sorting the energy eigenvalues in
descending order [ 132 ] in each of the first six matrices. After that,
I take the first two energy eigenvalues from each of the first six
matrices. The lower one of these positive energy eigenvalues corresponds
to a quasiquark and the larger one corresponds to a quasiantiquark. It
is necessary to remember to which of the first six matrices they belong
to in order to determine from which of the matrices a gapless mode comes
from. In gapless color-superconducting quark phases, an energy
eigenvalue of at least one of the first six matrices becomes positive
(negative) which has been negative (positive) in regular
color-superconducting quark phases. This means in the case of one
gapless mode that one of the first six matrices has three positive but
only one negative energy eigenvalues, and another one has only one
positive but three negative energy eigenvalues. The matrix from which
arise three positive-energy eigenvalues shows a gapless mode. Therefore,
if one sorts the energy eigenvalues in each of the first six matrices in
descending order and then extracts from each of these matrices the first
two energy eigenvalues, one obtains at least one negative-energy
eigenvalue in a gapless color-superconducting quark phase by this
method. Since I do not need such negative energy eigenvalues, I take the
absolute value of them. Because of the Nambu-Gorkov degeneracy, they can
be found by using the following relation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . This relation means that for example the matrices @xmath
and @xmath have the same four absolute values of energy eigenvalues but
in each of these two matrices the four energy eigenvalues have different
signs. So, if one finds a negative-energy eigenvalue in matrix @xmath
which has been positive in a regular phase before, then the gapless mode
arises from @xmath .

The relation ( 2.159 ) is easily proven by introducing the matrix,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the properties @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath .

The @xmath -matrix in Eq. ( 2.155 ), @xmath , always has six positive
and six negative eigenvalues. Therefore, it is easy to extract the six
positive-energy eigenvalues out of @xmath . I sort the energy
eigenvalues in descending order [ 132 ] and then take the first six one.
The first three out of the six positive-energy eigenvalues correspond to
the three quasiantiquarks while the second three out of the six
positive-energy eigenvalues correspond to three quasiparticles. The
remaining six negative-energy eigenvalues arise because of the
artificial Nambu-Gorkov degeneracy. Their absolute values are equal to
the positive-energy eigenvalues of @xmath .

By using Eq. ( 2.154 ), the kinetic part of the pressure ( 2.141 ) can
be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After performing the sum over all fermionic Matsubara frequencies, see
Sec. B.10 in the Appendix, and by noting that @xmath and @xmath , one
obtains,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which can be converted into an integral representation by using Eq. (
2.92 ). Therefore, the pressure of color-superconducting quark matter
reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.164)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the term in the last line is the contribution of leptons, @xmath ,
i.e. electrons and muons. They are added in order to make
color-superconducting quark matter electrically neutral. In principle,
the contribution of neutrinos should be added as well. In this section,
however, their contribution is neglected which is a good approximation
for neutron stars after deleptonization. The effect of neutrino trapping
is included in Ref. [ 116 ] and is the subject in Sec. 2.3 of my thesis.
The dispersion relations of the leptons are given by @xmath , where
@xmath MeV is the electron mass and @xmath MeV is the muon mass [ 16 ] .
In various applications, a bag constant could be added to the pressure,
and also the vacuum contribution could be substracted from the pressure
if necessary. In order to render the integrals in the expression for the
pressure finite, I used the three-momentum cutoff @xmath .

In the limit of zero temperature, the pressure of color-superconducting
quark matter reads,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to obtain the values for the quark-antiquark condensates @xmath
and the color-superconducting gap parameters @xmath , I solve the
following six stationary conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After the quark-antiquark condensates are known, the quark constituent
masses can be determined by Eq. ( 2.125 ). In order to enforce the
conditions of local electric and color charge neutrality in
color-superconducting quark matter, it is necessary to require the three
Eqs. ( 1.54 ) and ( 1.60 ) to be satisfied. These fix the values of the
three corresponding chemical potentials, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
After these are fixed, only the quark chemical potential @xmath and the
temperature @xmath are left as free parameters.

The number density of each quark is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the number density of each quark flavor reads,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the energy eigenvalues are computed numerically, the derivatives,
i.e. the six gap equations, the three neutrality conditions, and the
quark number densities have to be computed numerically. The number
densities of the leptons can be calculated using Eq. ( 1.81 ) in the
case of nonzero temperature and Eq. ( 1.83 ) in the case of zero
temperature.

#### 2.2.2 Results

In order to obtain the phase diagram, I have to find the ground state of
quark matter for each given set of the parameters in the model. In the
case of locally neutral quark matter, there are two parameters that
should be specified: temperature @xmath and quark chemical potential
@xmath . After these are fixed, one has to compare the values of the
pressure in all competing neutral phases of quark matter. The ground
state corresponds to the phase with the highest pressure.

Before calculating the pressure, given by Eq. ( 2.164 ) for nonzero
temperature and by Eq. ( 2.165 ) for zero temperature, one has to find
the values of the chiral and the color-superconducting order parameters,
@xmath and @xmath , as well as the values of the three charge chemical
potentials, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These are obtained by solving
the coupled set of six gap equations ( 2.166 ) together with the three
neutrality conditions ( 1.54 ) and ( 1.60 ). By using standard numerical
recipes [ 132 ] , it is not extremely difficult to find a solution to
the given set of nine nonlinear equations. Complications arise, however,
due to the fact that often the solution is not unique.

The existence of different solutions to the same set of equations, (
1.54 ), ( 1.60 ), and ( 2.166 ), reflects the physical fact that there
could exist several competing neutral phases with different physical
properties. Among these phases, all but one are unstable or metastable.
In order to take this into account in my study, I look for the solutions
of the eight types which are listed in Table 2.1 .

Then, I calculate the values of the pressure in all nonequivalent
phases, and determine the ground state as the phase with the highest
pressure. After this is done, I additionally study the spectrum of
low-energy quasiparticles in search for the existence of gapless modes.
This allows me to refine the specific nature of the ground state.

In the definition of the eight phases in terms of @xmath in Table 2.1 ,
I have ignored the quark-antiquark condensates @xmath . In fact, in the
chiral limit ( @xmath ), the quantities @xmath are good order parameters
and I could define additional sub-phases characterized by nonvanishing
values of one or more @xmath . With the model parameters at hand,
however, chiral symmetry is broken explicitly by the nonzero current
quark masses, and the values of @xmath never vanish. Hence, in a strict
sense it is impossible to define any new phases in terms of @xmath .

Of course, this does not exclude the possibility of discontinuous
changes in @xmath at some line in the plane of temperature and quark
chemical potential, thereby constituting a first-order phase transition
line. It is generally expected that the chiral phase transition remains
first order at low temperatures, even for nonzero quark masses. Above
some critical temperature, however, this line could end in a critical
endpoint, and there is only a smooth crossover at higher temperatures.
Among others, this picture emerges from NJL-model studies, both, without
[ 138 ] and with [ 139 ] diquark pairing (see also Ref. [ 106 ] ).
Therefore, I expect a similar behavior in my analysis.

My numerical results for neutral quark matter are summarized in Figs.
2.12 and 2.13 . These are the phase diagrams in the plane of temperature
@xmath and quark chemical potential @xmath in the case of an
intermediate diquark coupling strength, @xmath , and in the case of a
strong coupling, @xmath , respectively. The corresponding dynamical
quark masses, gap parameters, and three charge chemical potentials are
displayed in Figs. 2.14 and 2.15 , respectively. All quantities are
plotted as functions of @xmath for three different fixed values of the
temperature: @xmath MeV in the case of @xmath (see Fig. 2.14 ) and
@xmath MeV in the case of @xmath (see Fig. 2.15 ).

Let me begin with the results in the case of the diquark coupling being
@xmath . In the region of small quark chemical potentials and low
temperatures, the phase diagram is dominated by the normal phase in
which the approximate chiral symmetry is broken, and in which quarks
have relatively large constituent masses. This is denoted by @xmath SB
in Fig. 2.12 . With increasing the temperature, this phase changes
smoothly into a normal quark phase (NQ) in which quark masses are
relatively small. Because of explicit breaking of the chiral symmetry in
the model at hand, there is no need for a phase transition between the
two regimes.

However, as pointed out above, the symmetry argument does not exclude
the possibility of a first-order chiral phase transition. As expected,
at lower temperatures I find a line of first-order chiral phase
transitions. It is located within a relatively narrow window of the
quark chemical potentials (336 MeV @xmath 368 MeV) which are of the
order of the vacuum values of the light-quark constituent masses. (For
the parameters used in my calculations one obtains @xmath MeV and @xmath
MeV in vacuum [ 136 ] .) At this critical line, the quark chiral
condensates, as well as the quark constituent masses, change
discontinuously. With increasing temperature, the size of the
discontinuity decreases, and the line terminates at the endpoint located
at @xmath MeV, see Fig. 2.12 .

The location of the critical endpoint is consistent with other
mean-field studies of NJL models with similar sets of parameters [ 106 ,
138 , 139 ] . This agreement does not need to be exact because, in
contrast to the studies in Refs. [ 106 , 138 , 139 ] , here I imposed
the condition of electric charge neutrality in quark matter. (Note that
the color neutrality is satisfied automatically in the normal quark
phase.) One may argue, however, that the additional constraint of
neutrality is unlikely to play a big role in the vicinity of the
endpoint.

It is appropriate to mention here that the location of the critical
endpoint might be affected very much by fluctuations of the composite
chiral fields. These are not included in the mean-field studies of the
NJL model. In fact, this is probably the main reason for their inability
to pin down the location of the critical endpoint consistent with
lattice QCD calculations [ 5 ] . It is fair to mention that the current
lattice QCD calculations are not very reliable at nonzero @xmath either.
Therefore, the predictions of this study, as well as of those in Refs. [
106 , 138 , 139 ] , regarding the critical endpoint cannot be considered
as very reliable.

When the quark chemical potential exceeds some critical value and the
temperature is not too large, a Cooper instability with respect to
diquark condensation should develop in the system. Without enforcing
neutrality, i.e., if the chemical potentials of up and down quarks are
equal, this happens immediately after the chiral phase transition, when
the density becomes nonzero [ 139 ] . In the present model, this is not
the case at low temperatures.

In order to understand this, let me inspect the various quantities at
@xmath which are displayed in the upper three panels of Fig. 2.14 . At
the chiral phase boundary, the up and down quark masses become
relatively small, whereas the strange quark mass experiences only a
moderate drop of about 84 MeV induced by the ’t Hooft interaction. This
is not sufficient to populate any strange quark states at the given
chemical potential, and the system mainly consists of up and down quarks
together with a small fraction of electrons, see Fig. 2.16 . The
electric charge chemical potential which is needed to maintain
neutrality in this regime is between about @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV. It
turns out that the resulting splitting of the up and down quark Fermi
momenta is too large for the given diquark coupling strength to enable
diquark pairing and the system stays in the normal quark phase.

At @xmath MeV, the chemical potential felt by the strange quarks, @xmath
, reaches the strange quark mass and the density of strange quarks
becomes nonzero. At first, this density is too small to play a sizeable
role in neutralizing the quark matter, or in enabling strange-nonstrange
cross-flavor diquark pairing, see Fig. 2.16 . The first instability
happens at @xmath MeV, where a first-order phase transition from the NQ
phase to the gCFL phase takes place. This is directly related to a drop
of the strange quark mass by about 121 MeV. As a consequence, strange
quarks become more abundant and pairing gets easier. Yet, in the gCFL
phase, the strange quark mass is still relatively large, and the
standard BCS pairing between strange and light (i.e., up and down)
quarks is not possible. In contrast to the regular CFL phase, the gCFL
phase requires a nonzero density of electrons to stay electrically
neutral. At @xmath , therefore, one could use the value of the electron
density as a formal order parameter that distinguishes these two phases
[ 90 , 91 ] .

With increasing the chemical potential further (still at @xmath ), the
strange quark mass decreases and the cross-flavor Cooper pairing gets
stronger. Thus, the gCFL phase eventually turns into the regular CFL
phase at @xmath MeV. The electron density goes to zero at this point, as
it should. This is indicated by the vanishing value of @xmath in the CFL
phase, see the upper right panel in Fig. 2.14 . I remind that the CFL
phase is neutral because of having equal number densities of all three
quark flavors, @xmath , see Figs. 2.16 and 2.17 . This equality is
enforced by the pairing mechanism, and this is true even when the quark
masses are not exactly equal [ 20 ] .

The same NJL model at zero temperature was studied previously in Ref. [
133 ] . My results agree qualitatively with those of Ref. [ 133 ] only
when the quark chemical potential is larger than the critical value for
the transition to the CFL phase at 457 MeV. The appearance of the gCFL
phase for 443 MeV @xmath 457 MeV was not recognized in Ref. [ 133 ] .
Instead it was suggested that there exists a narrow (about 12 MeV wide)
window of values of the quark chemical potential around @xmath MeV in
which the 2SC phase is the ground state. By carefully checking the same
region, I find that the 2SC phase does not appear there.

This is illustrated in Fig. 2.18 where the pressure of three different
solutions is displayed. Had I ignored the gCFL solution (thin solid
line), the 2SC solution (dashed line) would indeed be the most favored
one in the interval between @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV. After including
the gCFL phase in the analysis, this is no longer the case.

Now let me turn to the case of nonzero temperature. One might suggest
that this should be analogous to the zero temperature case, except that
Cooper pairing is somewhat suppressed by thermal effects. In contrast to
this naïve expectation, the thermal distributions of quasiparticles
together with the local neutrality conditions open qualitatively new
possibilities that were absent at @xmath . As in the case of the
two-flavor model of Refs. [ 84 , 85 ] , a moderate thermal smearing of
mismatched Fermi surfaces could increase the probability of creating
zero-momentum Cooper pairs without running into a conflict with Pauli
blocking. This leads to the appearance of several stable
color-superconducting phases that could not exist at zero temperatures.

With increasing the temperature, the first qualitatively new feature in
the phase diagram appears when 5 MeV @xmath 10 MeV. In this temperature
interval, the NQ phase is replaced by the uSC phase when the quark
chemical potential exceeds the critical value of about 444 MeV. The
corresponding transition is a first-order phase transition, see Fig.
2.12 . Increasing the chemical potential further by several MeV, the uSC
phase is then replaced by the gCFL phase, and the gCFL phase later turns
gradually into the (m)CFL phase. (In this study, I do not distinguish
between the CFL phase and the mCFL phase [ 110 ] .) Note that, in the
model at hand, the transition between the uSC and the gCFL phase is of
second order in the following two temperature intervals: 5 MeV @xmath
9 MeV and @xmath MeV. On the other hand, it is a first-order phase
transition when 9 MeV @xmath 24 MeV. Leaving aside its unusual
appearance, this is likely to be an accidental property in the model for
a given set of parameters. For a larger value of the diquark coupling,
in particular, such a feature does not appear, see Fig. 2.13 .

The transition from the gCFL to the CFL phase is a smooth crossover at
@xmath . The reason is that the electron density is not a good order
parameter that could be used to distinguish the gCFL from the CFL phase
when the temperature is nonzero. This is also confirmed by my numerical
results for the electric charge chemical potential @xmath in Fig. 2.14 .
While at zero temperature the value of @xmath vanishes identically in
the CFL phase, this is not the case at nonzero temperatures.

Another new feature in the phase diagram appears when the temperature is
above about 11 MeV. In this case, with increasing the quark chemical
potential, the Cooper instability happens immediately after the @xmath
SB phase. The corresponding critical value of the quark chemical
potential is rather low, about 365 MeV. The first color-superconducting
phase is the g2SC phase [ 84 , 85 ] . This phase is replaced with the
2SC phase in a crossover transition only when @xmath MeV. The 2SC phase
is then followed by the gapless uSC (guSC) phase, by the uSC phase, by
the gCFL phase and, eventually, by the CFL phase (see Fig. 2.12 ).

In the NJL model at hand, determined by the parameters in Eq. ( 2.119 ),
I do not find the dSC phase as the ground state anywhere in the phase
diagram. This is similar to the conclusion of Refs. [ 110 , 113 ] , but
differs from that of Refs. [ 111 , 112 ] . This should not be surprising
because, as was noted earlier [ 113 ] , the appearence of the dSC phase
is rather sensitive to a specific choice of parameters in the NJL model.

The phase diagram in Fig. 2.12 has a very specific ordering of quark
phases. One might ask if this ordering is robust against the
modification of the parameters of the model at hand. Below, I argue that
some features are indeed quite robust, while others are not.

It should be clear that the appearance of color-superconducting phases
under the stress of neutrality constraints is very sensitive to the
strength of diquark coupling. In the case of two-flavor quark matter,
this was demonstrated very clearly in Refs. [ 84 , 85 ] at zero as well
as at nonzero temperatures. Similar conclusions were also reached in the
study of three-flavor quark matter at zero temperature [ 117 ] .

In the model at hand, it is instructive to study the phase diagram in
the regime of strong diquark coupling, @xmath . The corresponding
results are summarized in the diagram in Fig. 2.13 . As one can see, the
main qualitative difference between the diagrams in Figs. 2.12 and 2.13
occurs at intermediate values of the quark chemical potential. While at
@xmath , there is a large region of the g2SC phase sandwiched between
the low-temperature and high-temperature NQ phases, this is not the case
at stronger coupling, @xmath . The regions of the gapless phases shrink
with increasing diquark coupling constant. Above some value of the
diquark coupling constant in the regime of (very) strong coupling, all
gapless phases disappear [ 118 ] .

The last observation can easily be explained by the fact that with
increasing diquark coupling strength, the condensation energy also
increases and therefore Cooper pairing is favorable, even if there is a
larger mismatch of the Fermi surfaces due to charge neutrality
constraints. Moreover, in the presence of large gaps, the Fermi surfaces
are smeared over a region which is of the order of the values of the
gaps. Therefore additional thermal smearing is of no further help, and
it is not surprising that the thermal effects in a model with
sufficiently strong coupling are qualitatively the same as in models
without neutrality constraints imposed: thermal fluctuations can only
destroy the pairing. In the model with a not very strong coupling, on
the other hand, the interplay of the charge neutrality and thermal
fluctuations is more subtle. The normal phase of cold quark matter
develops a Cooper instability and becomes a color superconductor only
after a moderate thermal smearing of the quark Fermi surfaces is
introduced [ 84 , 85 ] .

Other than this, the qualitative features of the phase diagrams in Figs.
2.12 and 2.13 are similar. Of course, in the case of the stronger
coupling, the critical lines lie systematically at higher values of the
temperature and at lower values of the quark chemical potential. In this
context one should note that the first-order phase boundary between the
two normal regimes @xmath SB and NQ is insensitive to the diquark
coupling. Therefore, upon increasing @xmath it stays at its place until
it is eventually displaced by the expanding 2SC phase. As a result,
there is no longer a critical endpoint in Fig. 2.13 , but only a
critical point where the first-order normal( @xmath SB)-2SC phase
boundary changes into second order.

### 2.3 The phase diagram with the effect of neutrino trapping

Quark matter is expected to be color-superconducting. At extremely large
densities, namely when the quark chemical potential @xmath is much
larger than the constituent, medium-modified quark masses, the ground
state of matter is given by the CFL phase [ 18 ] (for studies of QCD at
large densities, see also Refs. [ 19 , 109 ] ). At the highest densities
existing in stars, however, the chemical potential is unlikely to be
much larger than 500 MeV, while the constituent mass of the strange
quarks is not smaller than the current mass, which is about 100 MeV. In
stellar matter, therefore, the heavier strange quarks may not be able to
participate in diquark Cooper pairing as easily as the light up and down
quarks. Then, the pairing of light quarks can lead to the two-flavor
color-superconducting ground state [ 15 , 32 , 107 , 108 ] . It should
be pointed out, however, that the 2SC phase is subject to large
penalties after imposing the charge neutrality and @xmath -equilibrium
conditions [ 83 ] . Indeed, when the fraction of strange quarks and
leptons is small, the electric neutrality requires roughly twice as many
down quarks as up quarks. In this case, Cooper pairing of up quarks with
down quarks of opposite momenta becomes rather difficult. Then,
depending on the details of the interaction, the gCFL phase [ 90 , 91 ]
, the g2SC phase [ 84 , 85 ] , or even the normal quark matter phase
(NQ) may be more favored. Also, there exist other reasonable
possibilities [ 35 , 36 , 94 , 96 , 99 , 101 , 100 , 120 , 39 , 140 ,
141 ] which, in view of the known instabilities in the gapless phases [
92 , 94 , 97 ] , are considered to be very promising.

In Ref. [ 114 ] , the phase diagram of neutral quark matter was obtained
which was described by a NJL-type model with the parameter set from Ref.
[ 136 ] . This work is presented in Sec. 2.2 . In contrast to previous
studies in Refs. [ 110 , 112 , 113 ] , dynamically generated quark
masses were treated self-consistently in Ref. [ 114 ] . (For earlier
studies on color superconductivity, treating quark masses as dynamical
quantities, see also Refs. [ 139 , 142 ] .)

In this section, I follow the same approach to study the effect of a
nonzero neutrino (or, more precisely, lepton-number) chemical potential
on the structure of the phase diagram [ 116 ] . This is expected to have
a potential relevance for the physics of protoneutron stars where
neutrinos are trapped during the first few seconds of the stellar
evolution. In application to protoneutron stars, it is of interest to
cover a range of parameters that could provide a total lepton fraction
in quark matter of up to about 0.4. This is the value of the
lepton-to-baryon charge ratio in iron cores of progenitor stars. Because
of the conservation of both, lepton and baryon charges, this value is
also close to the lepton fraction in protoneutron stars at early times,
when the leptons do not have a chance to diffuse through dense matter
and escape from the star.

The effect of neutrino trapping on color-superconducting quark matter
has been previously discussed in Ref. [ 133 ] . It was found that a
nonzero neutrino chemical potential favors the 2SC phase and disfavors
the CFL phase. This is not unexpected because the neutrino chemical
potential is related to the conserved lepton number in the system and
therefore it also favors the presence of (negatively) charged leptons.
This helps 2SC-type pairing because electrical neutrality in quark
matter can be achieved without inducing a very large mismatch between
the Fermi surfaces of up and down quarks. The CFL phase, on the other
hand, is electrically and color neutral in the absence of charged
leptons when @xmath [ 20 ] . A nonzero neutrino chemical potential can
only spoil CFL-type pairing.

In this section, I extend the analysis of Ref. [ 133 ] by performing a
more systematic survey of the phase diagram in the space of temperature,
quark, and lepton-number chemical potentials. This also includes the
possibility of gapless phases which have not been taken into account in
Ref. [ 133 ] .

#### 2.3.1 Model

I consider a system of up, down, and strange quarks, in weak equilibrium
with charged leptons and the corresponding neutrinos. I assume that the
lepton sector of the model is given by an ideal gas of massive electrons
( @xmath MeV) and muons ( @xmath MeV) [ 16 ] , as well as massless
electron and muon neutrinos. I do not take into account the @xmath
lepton, which is too heavy to play any role. Also, I neglect the
possibility of neutrino mixing, and therefore I do not take into account
the @xmath neutrino either. In the quark sector, I use the same
three-flavor NJL model as in Sec. 2.2 , cf.  Eq. ( 2.115 ).

In the model at hand, there are six mutually commuting conserved charge
densities. They split naturally into the following three classes:

  electric charge:  

    This is related to the @xmath symmetry of electromagnetism. The
    corresponding charge density is given by

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.169)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath is the electric charge matrix of the quarks ( 1.50 ),
    and @xmath and @xmath denote the number densities of electrons and
    muons, respectively, cf. Eq. ( 1.53 ).

  two lepton charges:  

    As long as the neutrinos are trapped and their oscillations are
    neglected, the lepton family numbers are conserved. The
    corresponding densities read,

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.170)
      -- -------- -- ---------

  baryon number and two color charges:  

    The @xmath -color symmetry and @xmath baryon number symmetry imply
    the conservation of three independent charge densities in the quark
    sector,

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.171)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath and @xmath are the matrices associated with the two
    mutually commuting color charges of the @xmath gauge group,
    cf. Eq. ( 1.57 ). Note that @xmath is the quark number density that
    is related to the baryon number density as follows: @xmath . An
    alternative choice of the three conserved charges is given by the
    number densities of red, green and blue quarks, i.e.,

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.172)
      -- -------- -- ---------

The six conserved charge densities defined above are related to the six
chemical potentials of the model. These are the quark chemical potential
@xmath , the two color chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath , the
electric charge chemical potential @xmath , and the two lepton-number
chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath .

In chemical equilibrium, the chemical potentials of all individual quark
and lepton species can be expressed in terms of these six chemical
potentials according to their content of conserved charges. For the
quarks, which carry quark number, color and electric charge, this is
related to the matrix of the quark chemical potentials ( 1.52 ). The
neutrinos, on the other hand, carry lepton number only, cf. Eq. ( 1.43
). Finally, electrons and muons carry both, lepton number and electric
charge, see Eq. ( 1.47 ). As in Sec. 2.2 , the quark part of the model
is treated in the mean-field (Hartree) approximation, allowing for the
presence of both, quark-antiquark condensates and scalar diquark
condensates. By using the same gap ansatz ( 2.126 )–( 2.127 ) and by
following the same steps in the derivation as in Sec. 2.2 and by
including the ideal-gas contribution for the leptons, I arrive at the
following expressions for the pressure at nonzero and zero temperature,
respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.173a)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.173b)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath are eighteen independent positive-energy eigenvalues, see
Sec. 2.2 for details. In order to obtain the values for the
quark-antiquark condensates @xmath and the color-superconducting gap
parameters @xmath , I solve the following six stationary conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to enforce the conditions of local charge neutrality in quark
matter, one also requires Eqs. ( 1.54 ) and ( 1.60 ) to be satisfied. By
solving these, I determine the values of the three corresponding
chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for a given set of the
other chemical potentials, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and for a given
temperature @xmath . In general, therefore, the phase diagram of dense
quark matter with neutrino trapping should span a four-dimensional
parameter space.

Note that instead of using the chemical potentials, @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath as free parameters in the study of the phase diagram, one may
also try to utilize the quark number density and the two lepton
fractions,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.175)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the two lepton densities @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.176)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In some cases, the choice of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath as free
parameters is indeed very useful. For instance, this is helpful in order
to determine the initial state of matter inside protoneutron stars at
very early times, when the lepton fractions are approximately the same
as in the progenitor stars (i.e., @xmath and @xmath ). The problem is,
however, that such an approach becomes ambiguous in the vicinity of
first-order phase transitions, where the baryon number density as well
as the lepton fractions are in general discontinuous. For this reason,
it is more appropriate to study the phase structure of (dense) QCD at
given fixed values of the chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . Unlike densities, the chemical potentials change continuously
when the system crosses a boundary of a first-order phase transition.
(It should be noted that the chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath may change discontinuously at a boundary of a first-order phase
transition because of the long-range Coulomb interaction enforcing the
constraints @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .)

#### 2.3.2 Simplified considerations

As mentioned before, neutrino trapping favors the 2SC phase and strongly
disfavors the CFL phase [ 133 ] . This is a consequence of the modified
@xmath -equilibrium condition in the system. In this section, I would
like to emphasize that this is a model-independent effect. In order to
understand the physics behind it, it is instructive to start my
consideration from a very simple toy model. Later, many of its
qualitative features will be also observed in my self-consistent
numerical analysis of the NJL model.

Let me first assume that strange quarks are very heavy and consider a
gas of non-interacting massless up and down quarks in the normal quark
phase at @xmath . As required by @xmath equilibrium, electrons and
electron neutrinos are also present in the system. (Note that in this
section I neglect muons and muon neutrinos for simplicity.)

In the absence of Cooper pairing, the densities of quarks and leptons
are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.177)
  -- -------- -- ---------

cf. Eq. ( 1.76 ). Expressing the chemical potentials through @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath by using Eq. ( 1.49 ), and imposing electric charge
neutrality by setting Eq. ( 2.169 ) equal to zero, one arrives at the
following relation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.178)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where I have introduced the chemical potential ratios @xmath and @xmath
. The above cubic equation can be solved for @xmath (electric chemical
potential) at any given @xmath (lepton-number chemical potential) with
Cardano’s formulae which are shown in Sec. B.9 in the Appendix. The
result can be used to calculate the ratio of quark chemical potentials,
@xmath .

The ratio @xmath as a function of @xmath is shown in Fig. 2.19 . At
vanishing @xmath , one finds @xmath and, thus, @xmath (note that this
value is very close to @xmath ). This result corresponds to the
following ratios of the number densities in the system: @xmath and
@xmath , reflecting that the density of electrons is tiny and the charge
of the up quarks has to be balanced by approximately twice as many down
quarks, cf. Sec. 1.4.4 .

At @xmath , on the other hand, the real solution to Eq. ( 2.178 ) is
@xmath , i.e., the up and down Fermi momenta become equal. This can be
seen most easily if one inverts the problem and solves Eq. ( 2.178 ) for
@xmath at given @xmath . When @xmath one finds @xmath , meaning that
@xmath and, in turn, suggesting that pairing between up and down quarks
is unobstructed at @xmath . This is in contrast to the case of vanishing
@xmath , when the two Fermi surfaces are split by about 25%, and pairing
is difficult.

It is appropriate to mention that many features of the above
considerations would not change much even when Cooper pairing is taken
into account. The reason is that the corresponding corrections to the
quark densities are parametrically suppressed by a factor of order
@xmath , where @xmath is the gap parameter.

In order to estimate the magnitude of the effect in the case of quark
matter in protoneutron stars, I indicate several typical values of the
lepton fractions @xmath in Fig. 2.19 . As mentioned earlier, @xmath is
expected to be of order @xmath right after the collapse of the iron core
of the progenitor star. According to Fig. 2.19 , this corresponds to
@xmath , i.e., while the splitting between the up and down Fermi
surfaces does not disappear completely, it gets reduced considerably
compared to its value in the absence of trapped neutrinos. This
reduction substantially facilitates the cross-flavor pairing of up and
down quarks. The effect is gradually washed out during about a dozen of
seconds of the deleptonization period when the value of @xmath decreases
to zero.

The toy model is easily modified to the opposite extreme of three
massless quark flavors, where the number density of strange quarks
reads,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.179)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Basically, this corresponds to replacing Eq. ( 2.178 ) by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.180)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the absence of neutrino trapping, @xmath , the only real solution to
this equation is @xmath , indicating that the chemical potentials (which
also coincide with the Fermi momenta) of up, down and strange quarks are
equal, cf. Sec. 1.4.4 . This reflects the fact that the system with
equal densities of up, down and strange quarks is neutral by itself,
without electrons. With increasing @xmath , the solution requires a
nonzero @xmath , suggesting that up-down and up-strange pairing becomes
more difficult. To see this more clearly, I can go one step further in
the analysis of the toy model.

Let me assume that the quarks are paired in a regular, i.e., fully
gapped, CFL phase at @xmath . Then, as shown in Ref. [ 20 ] , the quark
part of the matter is automatically electrically neutral. Hence, if I
want to keep the whole system electrically and color neutral, there must
be no electrons. Obviously, this is easily realized without trapped
neutrinos by setting @xmath equal to zero. At non-vanishing @xmath the
situation is more complicated. The quark part is still neutral by itself
and therefore no electrons are admitted. Hence, the electron chemical
potential @xmath must vanish, and consequently @xmath should be nonzero
and equal @xmath . It is natural to ask what should be the values of the
color chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath in the CFL phase when @xmath
.

In order to analyze the stress on the CFL phase due to nonzero @xmath ,
I follow the same approach as in Sec. 1.5.1 . In this analytical
consideration, I also account for the effect of the strange quark mass
simply by shifting the strange quark chemical potential by @xmath . In
my notation, CFL-type pairing requires the Fermi momenta defined by
Eq. ( 1.96 ). These are used to calculate the pressure in the toy model,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.181)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where in contrast to the toy model for the CFL phase defined by Eq. (
1.95 ), the contributions of electrons and electron neutrinos are
included and the bag pressure is neglected. With Eqs. ( 1.98 ) and (
2.181 ), one easily derives the neutrality conditions ( 1.54 ) and (
1.60 ). Thus, it becomes obvious that charge neutrality requires @xmath
. The neutrality condition, @xmath , requires that @xmath which means
that @xmath . Finally, one can check that the third neutrality
condition, @xmath , requires,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.182)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The results for the charge chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath imply the following magnitude of stress on pairing in the CFL
phase:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.183a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.183b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.183c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Note that there is no mismatch between the values of the chemical
potentials of the other three quarks, @xmath .

From Eq. ( 2.183 ) one can see that the largest mismatch occurs in the
@xmath pair (for positive @xmath ). The CFL phase can withstand the
stress only if the value of @xmath is less than @xmath . A larger
mismatch should drive a transition to a gapless phase exactly as in
Refs. [ 84 , 85 , 90 , 91 ] . Thus, the critical value of the
lepton-number chemical potential is,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.184)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When @xmath , the CFL phase turns into the gCFL @xmath phase, which is a
variant of the gCFL phase [ 90 , 91 ] . By definition, the gapless mode
with a linear dispersion relation in the gCFL @xmath phase is @xmath –
@xmath instead of @xmath – @xmath as in the standard gCFL phase. (Let me
remind that the mode @xmath – @xmath is defined by its dispersion
relation which interpolates between the dispersion relations of
hole-type excitations of @xmath -quarks at small momenta, @xmath , and
particle-type excitations of @xmath -quarks at large momenta, @xmath .)

In order to see what this means for the physics of protoneutron stars, I
should again try to relate the value of @xmath to the lepton fraction.
There are no electrons in the (regular) CFL phase at @xmath . Therefore
the entire lepton number is carried by neutrinos. For the baryon density
I may neglect the pairing effects to first approximation and employ the
ideal-gas relations. This yields,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Inserting typical numbers, @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV–100 MeV, one finds
@xmath – @xmath . Thus, there is practically no chance to find a
sizeable amount of leptons in the CFL phase. The constraint gets relaxed
slightly at nonzero temperatures and/or in the gCFL phase, but the
lepton fraction remains rather small even then (my numerical results
indicate that, in general, @xmath in the CFL phase).

#### 2.3.3 Results

The simple toy-model considerations in Sec. 2.3.2 give a qualitative
understanding of the effect of neutrino trapping on the mismatch of the
quark Fermi momenta and, thus, on the pairing properties of two- and
three-flavor quark matter. Now I turn to a more detailed numerical
analysis of the phase diagram in the framework of the NJL model defined
in Sec. 2.3.1 .

In the numerical calculations, I use the same set of model parameters as
in Sec. 2.2 of my thesis, see Eq. ( 2.119 ). The parameters are chosen
to reproduce several key observables of vacuum QCD [ 136 ] . In this
section, I choose a diquark coupling constant @xmath .

In order to obtain the phase diagram, one has to determine the ground
state of matter for each given set of the parameters. As discussed in
Sec. 2.3.1 , in the case of locally neutral matter with trapped
neutrinos, there are four parameters that should be specified: the
temperature @xmath , the quark chemical potential @xmath as well as the
two lepton family chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath . After these
are fixed, the values of the pressure in all competing neutral phases of
quark matter should be compared. This is determined by using the same
algorithm as in Sec. 2.2 . The complete set of equations ( 1.54 ), (
1.60 ), and ( 2.174 ) is solved for each of the eight phases allowed by
symmetries. Then, the corresponding values of the pressure are
determined from Eq. ( 2.173 ). The phase with the largest pressure is
the ground state.

In this section, I always assume that the muon lepton-number chemical
potential vanishes, i.e., @xmath . This is expected to be a good
approximation for matter inside protoneutron stars. My analysis can thus
be interpreted as an extension of the @xmath – @xmath phase diagram
which is discussed in Sec. 2.2 into the @xmath direction. Consequently,
the complete phase structure requires a three-dimensional presentation.

##### The three-dimensional phase diagram

The general features of the phase diagram in the three-dimensional
space, spanned by the quark chemical potential @xmath , the
lepton-number chemical potential @xmath , and the temperature @xmath are
depicted in Fig. 2.20 . Because of the rather complicated structure of
the diagram, only the four main phases ( @xmath SB, NQ, 2SC, and CFL)
are shown explicitly. Although it is not labeled, a thin slice of a
fifth phase, the uSC phase, squeezed in between the 2SC and CFL phases,
can also be seen. In addition, at small values of the lepton-number
chemical potential and small temperatures, another unmarked region
between @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV exists. In Fig. 2.20 , however, only a
small part of the surface at its boundary with the 2SC phase can be
seen. This region corresponds to the second piece of the normal quark
matter phase which is disconnected from the main region (the appearance
of a small disconnected region can also be deduced from the @xmath –
@xmath phase diagram in Fig. 2.12 ). While lacking detailed information,
the phase diagram in Fig. 2.20 gives a clear overall picture. Among
other things, one sees, for example, that the CFL phase becomes strongly
disfavored with increasing @xmath and gets gradually replaced by the 2SC
phase.

In order to discuss the structure of the phase diagram in more details I
proceed by showing several two-dimensional slices of it. These are
obtained by keeping one of the chemical potentials, @xmath or @xmath ,
fixed and varying the other two parameters.

##### The @xmath–@xmath phase diagram

The phase diagrams at two fixed values of the lepton-number chemical
potential, @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV are presented in Figs. 2.21 and
2.22 . The phase diagram at @xmath MeV, see Fig. 2.12 , has already been
discussed in Sec. 2.2 . The general effects of neutrino trapping can be
understood by analyzing the similarities and differences between these
three phase diagrams. In this section, I use the same convention for
line styles as in Sec. 2.2 : thick and thin solid lines denote
first-order and second-order phase transitions, respectively; dashed
lines indicate the (dis-)appearance of gapless modes in different
phases.

Here it is appropriate to note that, in the same model, a schematic
version of the @xmath – @xmath phase diagram at @xmath MeV was first
presented in Ref. [ 133 ] , see the right panel of Fig. 4 there. If one
ignores the complications due to the presence of the uSC phase and
various gapless phases, the results of Ref. [ 133 ] are in qualitative
agreement with my findings.

In order to understand the basic characteristics of different phases in
the phase diagrams in Figs. 2.21 and 2.22 , I also present the results
for the dynamical quark masses, the gap parameters, and the charge
chemical potentials. These are plotted as functions of the quark
chemical potential in Figs. 2.23 and 2.24 , for two different values of
the temperature in the case of @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV, respectively.

In each of the diagrams, there are roughly four distinct regimes. At low
temperature and low quark chemical potential, there is a region in which
the approximate chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken by large @xmath
-condensates. The corresponding phase is denoted by @xmath SB. In this
regime, quarks have relatively large constituent masses which are close
to the vacuum values, see Figs. 2.23 and 2.24 . Here, the density of all
quark flavors is very low and even vanishes at @xmath . There is no
diquark pairing in this phase. The @xmath SB phase is rather insensitive
to the presence of a nonzero lepton-number chemical potential. With
increasing @xmath the phase boundary is only slightly shifted to lower
values of @xmath . This is just another manifestation of the
strengthening of the 2SC phase due to neutrino trapping.

With increasing temperature, the @xmath -condensates melt and the @xmath
SB phase turns into the NQ phase where the quark masses are relatively
small. Because of the explicit breaking of the chiral symmetry by the
current quark masses, there is no need for a phase transition between
the two regimes. In fact, at low chemical potentials, I find only a
smooth crossover, whereas there is a first-order phase transition in a
limited region, 320 MeV @xmath 360 MeV. In contrast to the @xmath SB
regime, the high-temperature NQ phase extends to arbitrary large values
of @xmath . All these qualitative features are little affected by the
lepton-number chemical potential.

The third regime is located at relatively low temperatures but at quark
chemical potentials higher than in the @xmath SB phase. In this region,
the masses of the up and down quarks have already dropped to values well
below their respective chemical potentials while the strange quark mass
is still large, see left columns of panels in Figs. 2.23 and 2.24 . As a
consequence, up and down quarks are quite abundant but strange quarks
are essentially absent.

It turns out that the detailed phase structure in this region is very
sensitive to the lepton-number chemical potential. At @xmath , as
discussed in Sec. 2.2 , the pairing between up and down quarks is
strongly hampered by the constraints of neutrality and @xmath
equilibrium. As a consequence, there is no pairing at low temperatures,
@xmath MeV, and g2SC-type pairing appears at moderate temperatures,
10 MeV @xmath with the value of @xmath in the range of several dozen
MeV, see Fig. 2.12 . The situation changes dramatically with increasing
the value of the lepton-number chemical potential. Eventually, the
low-temperature region of the normal phase of quark matter is replaced
by the (g)2SC phase (e.g., at @xmath MeV, this happens at @xmath MeV).
With @xmath increasing further, no qualitative changes happen in this
part of the phase diagram, except that the area of the (g)2SC phase
expands slightly.

Finally, the region in the phase diagram at low temperatures and large
quark chemical potentials corresponds to phases in which the
cross-flavor strange-nonstrange Cooper pairing becomes possible. In
general, as the strength of pairing increases with the quark chemical
potential, the system passes through regions of the gapless uSC (guSC),
uSC, and gCFL phases and finally reaches the CFL phase. (Of course, the
intermediate phases may not always be realized.) The effect of neutrino
trapping, which grows with increasing lepton-number chemical potential,
is to push out the location of the strange-nonstrange pairing region to
larger values of @xmath . Of course, this is in agreement with the
general arguments in Sec. 2.3.2 .

It is interesting to note that the growth of the strangeness content
with increasing quark chemical potential could indirectly be deduced
from the behavior of the electric charge chemical potential @xmath at
@xmath , see the solid lines in the right panels of Figs. 2.23 and 2.24
. The value of @xmath reaches its minimum somewhere in a range of values
of the quark chemical potential around @xmath MeV. This corresponds to
the point where the strange quark chemical potential, @xmath , reaches
the value of the strange quark mass (see left panels). Hence, there are
essentially no strange quarks at lower values of @xmath , and a rapidly
increasing amount of strange quarks at higher values of @xmath . Since
the latter contribute to the electric neutralization, this is a natural
explanation for the drop of @xmath above this point.

As I mentioned earlier, the presence of the lepton-number chemical
potential @xmath leads to a change of the quark Fermi momenta. This
change, in turn, affects Cooper pairing of quarks, facilitating the
appearance of some phases and suppressing others. As it turns out, there
is also another qualitative effect due to a nonzero value of @xmath . In
particular, I find several new variants of gapless phases which do not
exist at vanishing @xmath . In Figs. 2.21 , 2.22 , 2.26 , and 2.27 ,
these are denoted by the same names, g2SC or gCFL, but with one or two
primes added.

I define the g2SC @xmath as the gapless two-flavor color-superconducting
phase in which the gapless excitations correspond to @xmath – @xmath and
@xmath – @xmath modes instead of the usual @xmath – @xmath and @xmath –
@xmath ones, i.e., @xmath and @xmath flavors are exchanged as compared
to the usual g2SC phase. The g2SC @xmath phase becomes possible only
when the value of @xmath is positive and larger than @xmath . The other
phases are defined in a similar manner. In particular, the gCFL @xmath
phase, which was already introduced in Sec. 2.3.2 , is indicated by the
gapless @xmath – @xmath mode, while the gCFL @xmath phase has both,
@xmath – @xmath (as in the gCFL phase) and @xmath – @xmath gapless
modes. The definitions of all gapless phases are summarized in Table 2.2
.

##### The lepton fraction @xmath

The numerical results for the lepton fraction @xmath are shown in Fig.
2.25 . The thick and thin lines correspond to two different fixed values
of the lepton-number chemical potential, @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV,
respectively. For a fixed value of @xmath , I find that the lepton
fraction changes only slightly with temperature. This is concluded from
the comparison of the results at @xmath MeV (solid lines), @xmath MeV
(dashed lines), and @xmath MeV (dotted lines) in Fig. 2.25 .

As is easy to check, at @xmath MeV, i.e., when Cooper pairing is not so
strong, the @xmath dependence of @xmath does not differ very much from
the prediction in the simple two-flavor model in Sec. 2.3.2 . By saying
this, of course, one should not undermine the fact that the lepton
fraction in Fig. 2.25 has a visible structure in the dependence on
@xmath at @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV. This indicates that quark Cooper
pairing plays a nontrivial role in determining the value of @xmath .

My numerical study shows that it is hard to achieve values of the lepton
fraction more than about @xmath in the CFL phase. Gapless versions of
the CFL phases, on the other hand, could accommodate the lepton fraction
up to about @xmath or so, provided the quark and lepton-number chemical
potentials are sufficiently large.

From Fig. 2.25 , one can also see that the value of the lepton fraction
@xmath , i.e., the value expected at the center of the protoneutron star
right after its creation, requires a lepton-number chemical potential
@xmath in the range somewhere between @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV, or
slightly higher. The larger the quark chemical potential @xmath , the
larger a lepton-number chemical potential @xmath is needed. Then, in a
realistic construction of a protoneutron star, this is likely to result
in a noticeable gradient of the lepton-number chemical potential at the
initial time. This gradient may play an important role in the subsequent
deleptonization due to neutrino diffusion through dense matter.

##### The @xmath–@xmath phase diagram

Now let me explore the phase diagrams in the plane of temperature and
lepton-number chemical potential, keeping the quark chemical potential
fixed. Two such slices of the phase diagram are presented in Figs. 2.26
and 2.27 . The first one corresponds to a not very large value of the
quark chemical potential, @xmath MeV. This could be loosely termed as
the outer stellar core phase diagram. The second one corresponds to
@xmath MeV, and one could associate it with the inner stellar core case.
Note, however, that the terms outer stellar core and inner stellar core
should not be interpreted literally here. The central densities of
(proto-)neutron stars are subject to large theoretical uncertainties
and, thus, are not known very well. In the model at hand, the outer
stellar core case corresponds to a range of densities around @xmath ,
while the inner stellar core case corresponds to a range of densities
around @xmath . These values are of the same order of magnitude that one
typically obtains in models (see, e.g., Ref. [ 48 ] ).

In addition to the phase diagrams, I also show the results for the
dynamical quark masses, the gap parameters, and the charge chemical
potentials. These are plotted as functions of temperature in Fig. 2.28 (
@xmath MeV, outer stellar core case) and in Fig. 2.29 ( @xmath MeV,
inner stellar core case), for three different values of the
lepton-number chemical potential, @xmath MeV (upper panels), @xmath MeV
(middle panels), and @xmath MeV (lower panels).

At first sight, the two phase diagrams in Figs. 2.26 and 2.27 look so
different that no obvious connection between them could be made. It is
natural to ask, therefore, how such a dramatic change could happen with
increasing the value of the quark chemical potential from @xmath MeV to
@xmath MeV. In order to understand this, it is useful to place the
corresponding slices of the phase diagram in the three-dimensional phase
diagram in Fig. 2.20 .

The @xmath MeV phase diagram corresponds to the right-hand side surface
of the bounding box in Fig. 2.20 . This contains almost all complicated
phases with strange-nonstrange cross-flavor pairing. The @xmath MeV
phase diagram, on the other hand, is obtained by cutting the
three-dimensional phase diagram with a plane parallel to the bounding
surface, but going through the middle of the phase diagram. This part of
the phase diagram is dominated by the 2SC and NQ phases. Keeping in mind
the general structure of the three-dimensional phase diagram, it is also
not difficult to understand how the two phase diagrams in Figs. 2.26 and
2.27 transform into each other.

Several comments are in order regarding the zero-temperature phase
transition from the CFL to gCFL @xmath phase, shown by a small black
triangle in the phase diagram at @xmath MeV, see Fig. 2.27 . The
appearance of this transition is in agreement with the analytical result
in Sec. 2.3.2 . Moreover, the critical value of the lepton-number
chemical potential also turns out to be very close to the estimate in
Eq. ( 2.184 ). Indeed, by taking into account that @xmath MeV and @xmath
MeV, I obtain @xmath MeV which agrees well with the numerical value.

In order to estimate how the critical value of @xmath changes with
decreasing the quark chemical potential below @xmath MeV, one can use
the zero-temperature numerical results for @xmath and @xmath from Sec.
2.2 . Then, one arrives at the following power-law fit for the @xmath
-dependence of the critical value:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for 457.4 MeV @xmath 500 MeV. Note that the CFL phase does not appear at
@xmath when @xmath MeV, cf. Fig. 2.12 . With increasing the values of
the quark chemical potential above @xmath MeV, one expects that the
critical value of @xmath should continue to increase for a while, and
then decrease when the effects of the cutoff start to suppress the size
of the gap @xmath . However, the validity of the fit in Eq. ( 2.186 ) is
questionable there because no numerical data for @xmath MeV was used in
its derivation.

A schematic version of the phase diagram in the @xmath – @xmath plane
was presented earlier in Ref. [ 133 ] , see the left panel in Fig. 4
there. In Ref. [ 133 ] , the value of the quark chemical potential was
@xmath MeV, and therefore a direct comparison with my results is not
easy. One can see, however, that the diagram of Ref. [ 133 ] fits
naturally into the three-dimensional diagram in Fig. 2.20 . Also, the
diagram of Ref. [ 133 ] is topologically close to my version of the
phase diagram at @xmath MeV which is shown in Fig. 2.27 . The
quantitative difference is not surprising: the region of the (g)CFL
phase is considerably larger at @xmath MeV than at @xmath MeV.

## Chapter 3 Conclusions

The phase diagram of neutral quark matter was poorly understood as I
began with the research on this topic in 2003, see Fig. 1.1 . The task
of my thesis is to illuminate the phase structure of neutral quark
matter. From the phase diagram of neutral quark matter, one can predict
in which state is neutral quark matter in the cores of neutron stars
which are most probably the candidates for neutral color-superconducting
quark matter in nature.

### 3.1 Summary and discussion

In Chapter 1 , I gave an introduction to quark matter, color
superconductivity, and stellar evolution. I presented the most important
color-superconducting quark phases and explained how stars evolve and
become neutron stars. At extremely large densities which are probably
present in the cores of neutron stars, there is a dominant attractive
interaction between the quarks that causes the formation of quark Cooper
pairs [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] . This causes color superconductivity. Since
quarks are spin- @xmath fermions which appear in various colors and
flavors, there are many possibilities of forming quark Cooper pairs.
This is why there exist many different color-superconducting quark
phases.

In order to predict which of these phases are energetically preferred in
nature, it is necessary to compute the phase diagram of neutral quark
matter and to determine which phases are dominant at a given temperature
and quark chemical potential. The phase diagram of neutral quark matter
consisting of up, down, and strange quarks is presented in Chapter 2 .
In this context, it is important to consider neutral quark matter
because otherwise there would occur repulsive Coulomb forces which lead
to the explosion of the neutron stars. Quark matter has to be color
neutral because color-charged objects have never been seen in nature.
Besides, color-charged neutron stars would be unstable. Matter inside
neutron stars is in @xmath equilibrium which means that neutron-star
matter is in equilibrium with respect to weak interactions.

In Sec. 2.1 , I studied massless neutral three-flavor quark matter at
large baryon densities within an NJL model. The effects of the strange
quark mass were incorporated by a shift of the chemical potential of
strange quarks, see Eq. ( 2.35 ). This shift reflects the reduction of
the Fermi momenta of strange quarks due to their mass. Such an approach
is certainly reliable at small values of the strange quark mass. In Ref.
[ 113 ] , where the strange quark mass was properly taken into account,
I confirmed that it is also qualitatively correct at large values of the
strange quark mass. I obtained a very rich phase structure by varying
the strange quark mass, the quark chemical potential, and the
temperature.

At @xmath , there are two main possibilities for the strange quark
matter ground state: the CFL and gCFL phases. These findings confirm the
results of Refs. [ 90 , 91 ] concerning the existence of the gCFL phase,
the estimate of the critical value of the strange quark mass @xmath ,
and the dependence of the chemical potentials on @xmath . I also
confirmed that it is the color-neutrality condition, controlled by the
color chemical potential @xmath which drives the transition from the CFL
to the gCFL phase [ 90 , 91 ] . This is in contrast to gapless
two-flavor color superconductivity which results from electrical
neutrality [ 84 , 85 ] .

Because I use a nine-parameter ansatz for the gap matrix, see Eq. ( 2.53
), the results of Sec. 2.1 are more general than those of Refs. [ 90 ,
91 ] . For example, I was able to explicitly study the effects of the
symmetric pairing channel, described by the sextet gap parameters, that
were neglected in Refs. [ 90 , 91 ] . As one might have expected, these
latter modify the quasiparticle dispersion relations only slightly. This
check was important, however, to see that the zero-temperature phase
transition from the CFL phase to the gCFL phase, which is not associated
with any symmetry, is robust against such a deformation of the quark
system.

In Sec. 2.1 , I also studied the temperature dependence of the gap
parameters and the quasiparticle spectra. In particular, this study
revealed that there exist several different phases of neutral
three-flavor quark matter that have been predicted in the framework of
the Ginzburg-Landau-type effective theory in Ref. [ 111 ] . My results
extend the near-critical behavior discussed in Ref. [ 111 ] to all
temperatures. Also, I show how this behavior evolves with changing the
value of the strange quark mass. The only real qualitative difference
between my results and the results of Refs. [ 111 , 112 ] is that,
instead of the dSC phase, I find the uSC phase in the phase diagram. In
Ref. [ 113 ] , I confirmed the results of Sec. 2.1 regarding the
existence of several different phases of neutral three-flavour quark
matter at nonzero temperature. I also confirmed the order in which they
appear. In particular, I observed the appearance of the uSC phase as an
intermediate state in the melting of the (g)CFL phase into the 2SC
phase. Formally, this is different from the prediction of Ref. [ 111 ] .
I find, however, that the difference is connected with the choice of the
model parameters. In the NJL model with a cutoff parameter of 800 MeV
used in Ref. [ 112 ] , there is a non-vanishing (although rather small)
region of the dSC phase. On the other hand, in the NJL model with a
relatively small cutoff parameter of 653.3 MeV, no sizeable window of
the dSC phase can be found. Therefore, I conclude that the appearence of
the uSC or dSC phase, repectively, is very sensitive to the choice of
the model parameters, or more precisely, it depends strongly on the
cutoff parameter.

The main result of Sec. 2.1 is the complete phase diagram of massless
neutral three-flavor quark matter in the @xmath – @xmath and @xmath –
@xmath plane, shown in Fig. 2.11 . In this figure, all symmetry-related
phase transitions are denoted by solid lines. (The symmetries of all
phases appearing in this figure were discussed in Ref. [ 111 ] .) The
dashed lines in Fig. 2.11 separate the mCFL and regular 2SC phases from
the gCFL and g2SC phases. These cannot be real phase transitions, but
are at most smooth crossovers. At @xmath , there is an insulator-metal
phase transition between the CFL and the gCFL phase [ 90 , 91 ] . At
nonzero temperature, there exists a similar insulator-metal-type
transition between the CFL and the mCFL phase, given by the dotted lines
in Fig. 2.11 .

In Sec. 2.2 , I studied the @xmath – @xmath phase diagram of neutral
three-flavor quark matter within the NJL model of Ref. [ 136 ] in which
chiral symmetry is broken explicitly by small but nonzero current quark
masses. As in the previous study in Sec. 2.1 , I used the mean-field
approximation in the analysis. In contrast to Sec. 2.1 , in Sec. 2.2 ,
the constituent quark masses were treated self-consistently as
dynamically generated quantities. The main results were summarized in
Figs. 2.12 and 2.13 .

By comparing the phase diagram of massless quarks shown in the right
panel of Fig. 2.11 with the phase diagram shown in Fig. 2.12 , I noticed
several important differences. First of all, I observed that a
self-consistent treatment of quark masses strongly influences the
competition between different quark phases. As was noticed earlier in
Ref. [ 139 ] , there exists a subtle interplay between the two main
effects. On the one hand, the actual values of the quark masses directly
influence the competition between different normal and
color-superconducting phases. On the other hand, competing phases
themselves determine the magnitude of the masses. Very often, this leads
to first-order phase transitions in which certain regions in the
mass-parameter space become inaccessible.

Some differences to the results in Sec. 2.1 and Sec. 2.2 are related to
a different choice of model parameters. Most importantly, the value of
the diquark coupling @xmath is considerably weaker in the NJL model of
Sec. 2.2 . This can be easily seen by comparing the magnitude of the
zero-temperature gap at a given value of the quark chemical potential,
say at @xmath MeV, in the two models. It is @xmath MeV in Sec. 2.1 and
@xmath MeV in Sec. 2.2 . (Note that the strength of the diquark pairing
in Ref. [ 112 ] is even weaker, corresponding to @xmath MeV.) It should
be noted that even the strong coupling @xmath which leads to @xmath MeV,
is still slightly weaker than that in Sec. 2.1 . In this case, however,
the corresponding results differ mostly because the quark masses are
treated very differently.

Because of the weaker diquark coupling strength, the Cooper
instabilities in Fig. 2.12 occur systematically at higher values of the
quark chemical potential than in the right panel of Fig. 2.11 . In
particular, this is most clearly seen from the critical lines of the
transition to the (g)CFL phase. Another consequence of the weaker
interaction is the possibility of a thermal enhancement of the (g)2SC
Cooper pairing at intermediate values of the quark chemical potential.
This kind of enhancement was studied in detail in Refs. [ 84 , 85 ] .
Making use of the same arguments, one can tell immediately how the phase
diagram in Fig. 2.12 should change with increasing or decreasing the
diquark coupling strength.

In particular, with increasing (decreasing) the diquark coupling
strength, the region of the (g)2SC phase at intermediate values of the
quark chemical potential should expand (shrink) along the temperature
direction. The regions covered by the other (i.e., uSC and CFL) phases
should have qualitatively the same shape, but shift to lower (higher)
values of the quark chemical potential and to higher (lower) values of
the temperature. In the case of strong coupling, in particular, these
general arguments are confirmed by my numerical calculations. The
corresponding phase diagram is shown in Fig. 2.13 .

Several comments are in order regarding the choice of the NJL model used
in Sec. 2.2 . The model is defined by the set of parameters in Eq. (
2.119 ) which were fitted to reproduce several important QCD properties
in vacuum [ 136 ] . (Note that the same model also was used in Ref. [
133 ] .) It is expected, therefore, that this is a reasonable effective
model of QCD that captures the main features of both, chiral and
color-superconducting pairing dynamics. Also, a relatively small value
of the cutoff parameter in the model, see Eq. ( 2.119 ), should not
necessarily be viewed as a bad feature of the model. In fact, this might
simply mimic a natural property of the full theory in which the coupling
strength of relevant interactions is quenched at large momenta.

In this relation, note that the approach of Ref. [ 112 ] regarding the
cutoff parameter in the NJL model is very different. It is said there
that a large value of this parameter is beneficial in order to extract
results which are insensitive to a specific choice of the cutoff.
However, I do not find any physical argument that would support this
requirement. Instead, I insist on having an effective model that
describes reasonably well the QCD properties at zero quark chemical
potential. I do not pretend, of course, that a naïve extrapolation of
the model to large densities can be rigorously justified. In absence of
a better alternative, however, this seems to be the only sensible
choice.

The results of Sec. 2.2 might be relevant for understanding the physics
of (hybrid) neutron stars with quark cores, in which the deleptonization
is completed. In order to obtain a phase diagram that could be applied
to protoneutron stars, one has to generalize the analysis to take into
account neutrino trapping.

In Sec. 2.3 , I studied the effect of neutrino trapping on the phase
diagram of neutral three-flavor quark matter within the NJL model of
Ref. [ 136 ] . The results were obtained in the mean-field
approximation, treating constituent quark masses as dynamically
generated quantities. The overall structure of the phase diagram in the
space of three parameters, namely temperature @xmath , quark chemical
potential @xmath and lepton-number chemical potential @xmath , was
summarized in Fig. 2.20 . This was further detailed in several
two-dimensional slices of the phase diagram, including phase diagrams in
the plane of temperature and quark chemical potential (see Figs. 2.21
and 2.22 ) and in the plane of temperature and lepton-number chemical
potential (see Figs. 2.26 and 2.27 ).

By making use of simple model-independent arguments, as well as detailed
numerical calculations in the framework of the NJL model, I found that
neutrino trapping helps Cooper pairing in the 2SC phase and suppresses
the CFL phase. In essence, this is the consequence of satisfying the
electric neutrality constraint in the quark system. In two-flavor quark
matter, the (positive) lepton-number chemical potential @xmath helps to
provide extra electrons without inducing a large mismatch between the
Fermi momenta of up and down quarks. With reducing the mismatch, of
course, Cooper pairing gets stronger. This is in sharp contrast to the
situation in the CFL phase of quark matter, which is neutral in the
absence of electrons. Additional electrons due to large @xmath can only
put extra stress on the system.

In application to protoneutron stars, my findings in Sec. 2.3 strongly
suggests that the CFL phase is very unlikely to appear during the early
stage of the stellar evolution before the deleptonization is completed.
If color superconductivity occurs there, the 2SC phase is the best
candidate for the ground state. In view of this finding, it might be
quite natural to suggest that matter inside protoneutron stars contains
little or no strangeness (just as the cores of the progenitor stars)
during the early times of their evolution. In this connection, it is
appropriate to recall that neutrino trapping also suppresses the
appearance of strangeness in the form of hyperonic matter and kaon
condensation [ 48 ] . My finding, therefore, is a special case of a
generic property.

The authors of Ref. [ 83 ] claimed that the 2SC phase is absent in
compact stars and underpinned their claim by using a very simple
model-independent calculation. The phase diagrams which were created by
using more precise NJL-type models and which are shown in my thesis are
the best evidence that there indeed could exist a 2SC phase in compact
stars and that the 2SC phase in general is not absent. This is always
the case in protoneutron stars and in cold neutron stars at large
diquark coupling constants. But in the limit of weak diquark coupling
and zero temperature in which the simple model-independent calculation
in Ref. [ 83 ] is valid, the statement seems to be true that the 2SC
phase is absent, cf. Fig. 2.12 .

After the deleptonization occurs, it is possible that the ground state
of matter at high density in the central region of neutron stars is the
CFL phase. This phase contains a large number of strange quarks.
Therefore, an abundant production of strangeness should happen right
after the deleptonization in protoneutron stars. If realized in nature,
in principle this scenario may have observational signatures.

### 3.2 Open questions and outlook

The quark sector of the phase diagram of strongly interacting matter was
poorly understood in 2003, see Fig. 1.1 . With my investigations of this
subject, I made the first attempt to illuminate the phase structure in
the quark sector of the phase diagram of strongly interacting matter
within the framework of an NJL model. In Fig. 3.1 , I finally show the
status of knowledge about the phase diagram of strongly interacting
matter in 2005.

With my investigations I took the first step in order to study the phase
diagram of neutral quark matter, see Ref. [ 110 ] and Sec. 2.1 . I
further improved my result for the phase diagram of neutral quark matter
by properly incorporating the strange quark mass [ 113 ] . The next step
in my investigation was to treat the quark masses self-consistently as
dynamically generated quantities, see Ref. [ 114 ] and Sec. 2.2 , and
finally to incorporate a nonzero lepton-number chemical potential, see
Ref. [ 116 ] and Sec. 2.3 .

Here, I restricted my study to spin-zero color-superconducting phases
only which seem to be the most preferred color-superconducting states
because they have the highest pressure. Therefore, I do not expect that
other than these color-superconducting states which I have investigated
in this thesis will occur in the phase diagram of neutral quark matter.
But if the pressures of one or more of these other color-superconducting
quark phases are larger than those of the spin-zero
color-superconducting quark phases so that these other
color-superconducting quark phases indeed will occur in the phase
diagram of neutral quark matter, then I expect that the regions of such
color-superconducting phases in the phase diagram are small so that the
phase diagram in Fig. 2.12 will not be changed very much. In order to
avoid misunderstandings, I want to say that I do not expect that such
color-superconducting states occur in the phase diagram of neutral quark
matter. I do not say that such color-superconducting phases are absent .

An example for a possible occurrence of a color-superconducting phase
which I have not considered in my investigations is the spin-one
color-superconducting transverse CSL phase (the most preferred spin-one
color-superconducting quark phase [ 39 ] ). This phase has good chances
to occur very close to the axis of the quark chemical potential in the
region of the normal quark phase in the phase diagram of neutral quark
matter in Fig. 2.12 . If one will find that this is really true then the
phase diagram of neutral quark matter shown in Fig. 2.12 will not be
changed much because spin-one color-superconducting quark phases like
the transverse CSL phase will be destroyed even at small temperatures.
Therefore, the line width of the axis of the quark chemical potential is
possibly thicker than the region of the spin-one color-superconducting
transverse CSL phase in the phase diagram of neutral quark matter.
Nevertheless, the CSL phase could occur in cold neutron stars [ 38 ] .

In Ref. [ 143 ] , another possible spin-zero color-superconducting quark
phase, the A-phase, was checked if it occurs in the phase diagram of
neutral quark matter. The result was that this phase always has a lower
pressure than the phases which I have investigated in my thesis.
Therefore, the A-phase does not appear in the phase diagram of neutral
quark matter.

However, it will be very important to check if other than these
color-superconducting phases which I have investigated in this thesis
indeed occur in the phase diagram of neutral quark matter (see Ref. [
144 ] , where some of these other color-superconducting quark phases are
shown). Such an investigation is outside the scope of my thesis. Much
work concerning this check has to be done in future. The pressures of
all competing phases have to be compared. The phase with the highest
value of the pressure is the preferred one and therefore appears in the
phase diagram of neutral quark matter.

Despite the progress in understanding the phase diagram of neutral quark
matter, there still exists a fundamental problem. Gapless
color-superconducting quark phases are unstable in some regions of the
phase diagram of neutral quark matter because of chromomagnetic
instabilities [ 92 ] so that another phase will be the preferred state.
Chromomagnetic instabilities occur even in regular color-superconducting
quark phases. The author of Ref. [ 93 ] shows that chromomagnetic
instabilities occur only at low temperatures in neutral
color-superconducting quark matter. The author of Ref. [ 94 ] points out
that the instabilities might be caused by using BCS theory in mean-field
approximation, where phase fluctuations have been neglected. With the
increase of the mismatch between the Fermi surfaces of paired fermions,
phase fluctuations play more and more an important role, and soften the
superconductor. Strong phase fluctuations will eventually
quantum-disorder the superconducting state, and turn the system into a
phase-decoherent pseudogap state. By using an effective theory of the
CFL state, the author of Ref. [ 95 ] demonstrates that the
chromomagnetic instability is resolved by the formation of an
inhomogeneous meson condensate. The authors of Ref. [ 96 ] describe a
new phase in neutral two-flavor quark matter within the framework of the
Ginzburg-Landau approach, in which gluonic degrees of freedom play a
crucial role. They call it a gluonic phase. In this phase, gluon
condensates cure a chromomagnetic instability in the 2SC solution and
lead to spontaneous breakdown of the color gauge symmetry, the @xmath
and the rotational @xmath group. In other words, the gluonic phase
describes an anisotropic medium in which color and electric
superconductivity coexist. In Ref. [ 97 ] , it was suggested that the
chromomagnetic instability in gapless color-superconducting phases
indicates the formation of the LOFF phase [ 98 ] which is discussed in
Ref. [ 99 ] in the context of quark matter. Other possibilities could be
the formation of a spin-one color-superconducting quark phase, a mixed
phase, or a completely new state. The authors of Ref. [ 100 ] suggest
that a mixed phase composed of the 2SC phase and the normal quark phase
may be more favored if the surface tension is sufficiently small [ 101 ]
. The authors of Ref. [ 102 ] suggest a single first-order phase
transition between CFL and nuclear matter. Such a transition, in space,
could take place either through a mixed phase region or at a single
sharp interface with electron-free CFL and electron-rich nuclear matter
in stable contact. The authors of Ref. [ 102 ] constructed a model for
such an interface.

Another possibility in order to avoid gapless color-superconducting
quark phases is to set the diquark coupling constant to such high values
that gapless phases will not occur in the phase diagram [ 118 ] . But
then it is another question if such large diquark coupling constants
indeed occur in nature. My personal opinion is that one should not
increase the diquark coupling constant to such high values in order to
get rid of the problem but use the standard value of the diquark
coupling constant in Eq. ( 2.120 ) which is predicted by the Fierz
transformation in vacuum.

Whether gapless phases can indeed exist as color-superconducting quark
phases or whether they will be unstable because of chromomagnetic
instabilities is not known yet. Also, if they are unstable, it is not
yet known which states will be formed in the respective regions of the
phase diagram. Such an investigation is outside the scope of my thesis,
and much work has to be done in future to solve this problem. The
pressures of all competing quark phases have to be determined in these
regions of the phase diagram. The phase with the highest value of the
pressure is the preferred one.

Another problem which has to be solved is the discrepancy between the
critical endpoint of the quark-hadron phase transition which is obtained
by lattice QCD calculations [ 5 ] and NJL models [ 106 , 114 , 115 , 116
, 118 , 138 , 139 ] , see also Fig. 3.1 . It is appropriate to mention
here that the location of the critical endpoint might be affected very
much by fluctuations of the composite chiral fields. These are not
included in the mean-field studies of the NJL model. In fact, this is
probably the main reason for their inability to pin down the location of
the critical endpoint consistent for example, with lattice QCD
calculations [ 5 ] . It is fair to mention that the current lattice QCD
calculations are not very reliable at nonzero @xmath either. Therefore,
the predictions of my thesis, as well as of those in Refs. [ 106 , 114 ,
115 , 116 , 118 , 138 , 139 ] , regarding the critical endpoint cannot
be considered as very reliable. One definitely will be able to say where
exactly the critical endpoint is located and how the phase diagram of
neutral quark matter looks like if one uses full QCD. Such an
investigation is outside the scope of my thesis and has to be done in
future. Since the NJL-type models used in my thesis fulfill at least
some important key features of QCD, I expect that the phase diagram of
neutral quark matter which is shown in Fig. 2.12 will be changed only
quantitatively so that the overall phase structure does not change if
one computes a more realistic phase diagram of neutral quark matter by
using full QCD.

In the context of compact stars, it is not known yet if their cores
reach chemical potentials which make color superconductivity possible.
It is of great importance to resolve this issue. Neutron stars are the
most likely candidates for color superconductivity in nature and
therefore, one expects that they contain color-superconducting quark
cores. Therefore, one has to find an experimental proof for
color-superconducting quark matter. This can be done by detecting
neutrino and @xmath -emissions of protoneutron stars and in colliders.

Since one does not know yet how large the lepton-number chemical
potential in protoneutron stars is during their evolution from the
supernova explosion until they become a cold neutron star, it is
difficult to say exactly, through which phases they go in the
three-dimensional phase diagram shown in Fig. 2.20 . Therefore, it would
be very interesting to study the precise evolution path of protoneutron
stars in the three-dimensional phase diagram.

I note that the analysis in this thesis is restricted to locally neutral
phases only. This automatically excludes, for example, crystalline [ 99
] and mixed [ 101 , 100 , 120 ] phases. Also, in the mean field
approximation utilized here, I cannot get any phases with meson
condensates [ 28 , 29 , 30 ] .

In nature, phase transitions can take place either through sharp
boundaries between pure phases which are located next to each other or
through mixed-phase regions. In this thesis, I considered only the
former possibility, where each phase has the highest pressure in its
region of the phase diagram and where the pressures of the phases are
equal only at the sharp phase boundaries. Such phase transitions are
obtained by so-called Maxwell constructions. It would be interesting to
study the possibility of mixed phases by making so-called Gibbs
constructions [ 145 ] , in which the pressures and the chemical
potentials of the phases are equal and continuous in contrast to Maxwell
constructions.

Another interesting investigation in the context of compact stars would
be to create a phase-radius diagram that shows which phase occurs at
which radius of the compact star. Such a diagram would directly show the
composition and structure of a compact star.

## Appendix A Definitions of matrices

In this chapter of the Appendix, I present some definitions such as the
Pauli and @xmath -matrices, and the generatores of the @xmath group. I
also show the chirality, energy, energy-chirality, and the spin
projectors as well as their properties.

### a.1 The Pauli matrices

The Pauli matrices are defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.1)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The Pauli matrices are hermitian,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following relations are valid:

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.3)
  -- -- -- -------

#### a.1.1 Spin projectors

The spin projectors are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath corresponds to the projections onto spin up or spin down
states, respectively, and @xmath are the Pauli matrices. The spin
projectors fulfill the properties of completeness and orthogonality,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The spin projectors are hermitian,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following relations are valid:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

### a.2 Matrices in Dirac space

The Dirac definition of the @xmath -matrices reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.9)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The following relations are valid:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the metric tensor. The charge-conjugation matrix in Dirac
representation is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by Eq. ( A.9 ). The following relations are valid:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

With the charge-conjugation matrix, one can introduce the
charge-conjugate spinors in space-time,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.14)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

and in energy-momentum space,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.15)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### a.2.1 Projectors in Dirac space

In the limit of vanishing mass, the chirality, energy, and
energy-chirality projectors are defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath or @xmath , respectively, stands for right-handed and
left-handed projections, and @xmath for projections onto states of
positive and negative energy. The chirality and energy projectors
fulfill the properties of completeness and orthogonality,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.17b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.17c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.17d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

These projectors are hermitian,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.18a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.18b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and they commute with each other,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energy-chirality projectors fulfill the properties of completeness
and orthogonality,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The energy-chirality projectors are hermitian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following relations are valid:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### a.3 The generators of the Su(3) group

The generators of the @xmath group are defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                     (A.26)
              @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The Gell-Mann matrices are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following relations are valid:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

All @xmath , except,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.29a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.29b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.29c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

## Appendix B Useful formulae

Several relations which are used in this thesis are derived and proven
in this chapter of the Appendix.

### b.1 Non-interacting massless fermions and antifermions at nonzero
temperature

The pressure of non-interacting massless fermions and antifermions at
nonzero temperature @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the degeneracy factor, @xmath is the momentum, and
@xmath is the chemical potential of the fermions. The first term
corresponds to the pressure of fermions while the second one corresponds
to the pressure of antifermions. By an integration by parts one obtains,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function.

With the substitutions @xmath one computes,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integrals can be split so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.5)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The first two integrals can be joined. In the last integral, one can use
the substitution @xmath . Then, also the last two integrals can be
joined,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where I renamed @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath . With the
relation @xmath , the integrals [ 130 , 131 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the substitution, @xmath , one obtains for the pressure of
non-interacting massless fermions and antifermions at nonzero
temperature [ 80 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

### b.2 The inverse Dirac propagator

The inverse tree-level propagator for quarks and charge-conjugate
quarks, respectively, is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.9b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the covariant derivatives for quarks and
charge-conjugate quarks, respectively, @xmath is the color-flavor matrix
of the chemical potentials, and @xmath is the quark-mass matrix. By
using the charge-conjugate spinors ( A.14 ), the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be proven:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### b.3 The tree-level quark propagator

The inverse tree-level quark propagator in Nambu-Gorkov space is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inverse tree-level propagator for quarks or
charge-conjugate quarks, respectively, @xmath are the regular quark
self-energies, and @xmath are the gap matrices. From this expression,
the tree-level quark propagator in Nambu-Gorkov space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be obtained by using the relation @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.14)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the propagator for quasiquarks or charge-conjugate
quasiquarks, respectively, and @xmath are the anomalous propagators.
This can also be written in the form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.15b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.15c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.15d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

From Eqs. ( B.15b ) and ( B.15c ) one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

By inserting these relations into Eqs. ( B.15a ) and ( B.15d ), one
obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same way, one proceeds with

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.18)
  -- -- -- --------

and gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

By inserting these results into Eq. ( B.18 ), one again obtains for
@xmath and @xmath the relations ( B.17 ). For @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.4 The Feynman gauged gluon propagator

The QCD Lagrangian density is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this section, I focus on the contribution of gluons to the QCD
Lagrangian density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gluon field-strength tensor is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

By neglecting the gluon self-interaction, the gluon field-strength
tensor simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which breaks @xmath gauge invariance. The Abelian part of the gluon
Lagrangian density is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

After integration by parts, and discarding surface terms, the Abelian
part of the gluon Lagrangian density reads [ 146 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

By choosing Lorentz gauge, @xmath , one obtains,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

One gets the same result if one sets the gauge-fixing term of the QCD
Lagrangian density to

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.28)
  -- -- -- --------

which leads to the QCD Lagrangian density in Feynman gauge. The Feynman
gauged gluon Lagrangian density can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called the inverse Feynman gauged gluon propagator. Inverting yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

In momentum space, the Feynman gauged gluon propagator reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.5 The determinant of the inverse quark propagator

In space-time, the contribution of the kinetic term to the grand
partition function reads up to irrelevant constants [ 7 , 128 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the action of the kinetic term is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inverse quark propagator (without regular self-energies)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a @xmath -matrix in Nambu-Gorkov space, where

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.36)
  -- -- -- --------

are the Nambu-Gorkov quark spinors. The Fourier transforms of the quark
spinors read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.37a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.37b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.37c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.37d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By assuming translational invariance, the Fourier transform of the
inverse quark propagator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

By Fourier transforming the kinetic term of the action, the integration
measure has to be rewritten,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is an irrelevant constant Jacobian which arises from charge
conjugation of quark spinors. The Fourier-transformed kinetic term of
the action is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.40)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the contribution of the kinetic term to the grand partition
function in energy-momentum space reads [ 146 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Up to irrelevant constants, the logarithm of the kinetic part of the
grand partition function is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The relation in the last of line of this equation is proven in Sec. B.6
.

### b.6 The logarithm of the determinant

The following relation is to be proven:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quadratic matrix @xmath with dimension @xmath is diagonalizable if a
matrix @xmath exists, which fulfills the property [ 129 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of the matrix @xmath . Therefore, one
can write,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The logarithm can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that Eq. ( B.45 ) becomes,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since @xmath and because of Eq. ( B.46 ), one obtains that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.7 The Dirac trace

By using the Minkowski space part of the gluon propagator ( B.32 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

one obtains,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the projectors yields,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.51)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With the relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

one computes the trace of the product of these projectors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Herewith, the first trace in Eq. ( B.50 ) is solved. From the second
trace in Eq. ( B.50 ), one gets,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.54)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which can be rewritten as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (B.55)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Summing over all @xmath yields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first of these two traces is already known by Eq. ( B.53 ). The
second one is determined by using the relation ( B.52 ),

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (B.57)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Herewith, one obtains the second trace in Eq. ( B.50 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, one calculates for the Dirac trace ( B.50 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.8 The trace of the logarithm

The relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

is to be proven. Each trace in this section is taken over a @xmath
matrix. The @xmath are projectors, which fulfill the properties of
completeness, @xmath , and orthogonality, @xmath , and the @xmath are
factors, where @xmath and @xmath . Because of the completeness of the
projectors, one gets,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With the expansion of the logarithm,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( B.62 ) reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.64)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This equation can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Further calculations yield

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.66)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Finally, one obtains,

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.67)
  -- -- -- --------

### b.9 Cubic equations

In this section, I show Cardano’s formulae which are the roots of the
general cubic equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath [ 132 , 147 , 148 ] .

Recall that a polynomial of degree @xmath has @xmath roots. The roots
can be real or complex, and they might not be distinct. If the
coefficients of the polynomial are real, then complex roots will occur
in pairs that are complex conjugates, i.e., if @xmath is a root then
@xmath will also be a root. When the coefficients are complex, the
complex roots need not be related.

The solution to the cubic (as well as the quartic) equation was
published by Gerolamo Cardano (1501–1576) in his treatise Ars Magna .
However, Cardano was not the original discoverer of either of these
results. The hint for the cubic equation had been provided by Niccolò
Tartaglia, while the quartic equation had been solved by Ludovico
Ferrari. However, Tartaglia himself had probably caught wind of the
solution from another source. The solution was apparently first arrived
at by a little-remembered professor of mathematics at the University of
Bologna by the name of Scipione del Ferro (ca. 1465–1526). While del
Ferro did not publish his solution, he disclosed it to his student
Antonio Maria Fior [ 149 ] . This is apparently where Tartaglia learned
of the solution around 1541.

The general cubic equation always can be brought into the normal form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the substitution @xmath , the cubic equation in normal form assumes
the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

By setting @xmath the quadratic term disappears. Thereby, one obtains
with the substitution,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

the cubic equation in standard form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.74a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.74b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The cubic equation in standard form can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath and @xmath be, for the moment, arbitrary constants. The cubic
equation in standard form ( B.75 ) can be decomposed into a linear and a
quadratic term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that one easiliy recognizes by comparing the coefficients that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Solving Eq. ( B.78 ) for @xmath yields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this result into Eq. ( B.79 ) gives,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, if one can find an expression for @xmath which satisfies this
identity, one has factored a linear term from the cubic equation, thus
reducing it to a quadratic equation. The trial solution accomplishing
this miracle turns out to be the symmetrical expression,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The discriminant is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the remaining quadratic equation has to be solved. Inserting Eq. (
B.80 ) into the quadratic part of Eq. ( B.77 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving this quadratic equation gives the solutions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the definition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can find out that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, with the substitution ( B.72 ), the roots of the general
cubic equation ( B.68 ), which are called Cardano’s formulae, are given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.89a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.89b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.89c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the case of real-valued coefficients in the general cubic equation (
B.68 ), one can distinguish the following three cases:

 @xmath  :  

    one real and two complex solutions,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (B.90)
      -- -------- -- --------

 @xmath  :  

    three real solutions,

     @xmath  :  

        one single and one double solution,

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (B.91)
          -- -------- -- --------

     @xmath  :  

        one triple solution,

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (B.92)
          -- -------- -- --------

 @xmath  :  

     casus irreducibilis , three different real solutions,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (B.93)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (B.94)
      -- -------- -- --------

The equations for @xmath in which @xmath first appear in Chapter VI of
François Viète’s treatise De emendatione , published in 1615.

### b.10 Summation over the fermionic Matsubara frequencies

The following kinetic term of a fermionic logarithmic grand partition
function is given:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be split into two parts,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is up to irrelevant constants,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

One uses the relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and integrates over the fermionic poles,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

on the imaginary axis. The @xmath are called fermionic Matsubara
frequencies. The factor @xmath in Eq. ( B.100 ) is needed as a damping
factor so that the sum over all @xmath does not diverge, @xmath . In the
end of the calculation, one sets @xmath . Because of the symmetry around
the imaginary axis, see left panel in Fig. B.1 , one obtains,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With the relation,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, one gets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this equation, one uses the theorem of residues of first order,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (B.106)
  -- -- -- ---------

In this connection, one has to note that contour integrations are done
anticlockwise. But the contour integration in Eq. ( B.105 ) has to be
done clockwise, see right panel in Fig. B.1 . Therefore, the result has
to be multiplied by minus one. One also has to note that the respective
pole is on the positive real axis. Therefore, an extra Heaviside
function has to be included in the result,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.107a)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.107b)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Summing up the two residua for each sign in Eq. ( B.105 ) leads to the
result,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, one obtains for Eq. ( B.97 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Up to irrelevant constants, one computes,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

## Anhang C Zusammenfassung

Das Phasendiagramm von neutraler Quarkmaterie war, bis ich mit meinen
Forschungen auf diesem Gebiet im Jahr 2003 begonnen hatte, nur
unzureichend bekannt, siehe Abb. 1.1 . Für meine Dissertation war dieses
Thema daher besonders gut geeignet. Meine Aufgabe war es, das
Phasendiagramm von neutraler Quarkmaterie zu erstellen.

Im Kapitel 1 wird man in das Themengebiet Quarkmaterie, Farbsupraleitung
und Sterne eingeführt. Neutronensterne sind in der Natur die wohl
wahrscheinlichsten Plätze, in denen farbsupraleitende Quarkmaterie
vorkommen könnte. Daher gehe ich in Kapitel 1 nicht nur auf die
wichtigsten Phasen der Farbsupraleitung, sondern auch auf das Thema
Sternentwicklung ein, um dann schließlich die Entstehung von
Neutronensternen zu erklären, deren Kerne möglicherweise aus sehr
dichter, neutraler, farbsupraleitender Quarkmaterie bestehen. Bei extrem
hohen Dichten, wie sie wahrscheinlich in Neutronensternkernen vorkommen,
herrscht eine attraktive Wechselwirkung in Quarkmaterie vor, die die
Bildung von Quark-Cooper-Paaren bewirkt [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] . Dies
verursacht Farbsupraleitung. Da Quarks als Spin- @xmath Fermionen in
verschiedener Farbe und Flavor vorkommen, gibt es viele Möglichkeiten,
um Quark-Cooper-Paare zu bilden. Daher gibt es viele unterschiedliche
farbsupraleitende Quarkphasen.

In der 2 -flavor color- s uper c onducting (2SC)-Phase paaren sich rote
up mit grünen down Quarks und rote down mit grünen up Quarks und bilden
antiblaue Quark-Cooper-Paare. Die blauen up und down Quarks bleiben
ungepaart und sind daher gaplose Quasiteilchen, die einen großen Beitrag
zur spezifischen Wärme, zur elektrischen Leitung und zur Wärmeleitung
leisten. Die gaplosen blauen Quarks sind außerdem für eine starke
Neutrinoemission verantwortlich, die durch @xmath -Prozesse verursacht
wird.

Die Beiträge der vier gegappten Quasiteilchen zu allen Transport- und
vielen thermodynamischen Größen ist bei niedrigen Temperaturen durch den
exponentiell kleinen Faktor @xmath unterdrückt [ 9 ] . Die Gluonen sind
Bosonen, und daher ist deren Teilchenzahldichte bei niedrigen
Temperaturen klein. In der 2SC-Phase ist die @xmath Eichsymmetrie zu
@xmath gebrochen. (Eichsymmetrien sind durch eckige Klammern
gekennzeichnet.) Daher gibt es in der 2SC-Phase @xmath gebrochene
Generatoren. Diese führen zu fünf massiven Gluonen in der 2SC-Phase.
Daher haben diese Gluonen nur geringe Einflüsse auf die Eigenschaften
der Quarkmaterie in der 2SC-Phase. Die ungepaarten blauen Quarks sind
für die Abwesenheit von Baryonsuperfluidität verantwortlich. Nur die
antiblauen Quasiteilchen tragen eine von Null verschiedene Baryonenzahl.
In der 2SC-Phase existiert kein elektromagnetischer Meißnereffekt, und
das ist der Grund dafür, warum ein Magnetfeld aus der farbsupraleitenden
Region nicht herausgedrängt werden würde. Die 2SC-Phase ist ein
sogenannter @xmath -Leiter, weil ihre elektrische Leitfähigkeit aufgrund
der ungepaarten blauen up Quarks groß ist.

Wenn das chemische Potential der strange Quarks die strange Quarkmasse
übersteigt, dann treten auch die strange Quarks in der Quarkmaterie bei
der Temperatur @xmath auf. Dadurch ist es möglich, daß auch die strange
Quarks bei der Bildung von Quark-Cooper-Paaren beteiligt sind. Das
Kondensat bricht @xmath zur vektoriellen Untergruppe @xmath und ist noch
immer invariant unter Vektortransformationen im Farb- und Flavorraum.
Das bedeutet, daß eine Transformation in Farbe eine gleichzeitige
Transformation in Flavor voraussetzt, um die Invarianz des Kondensates
zu bewahren. Deswegen nannten die Entdecker [ 18 ] diese Phase auch c
olor– f lavor- l ocked (CFL)-Phase.

Bei hohen Dichten und niedrigen Temperaturen ist die CFL-Phase der wahre
Grundzustand von Quarkmaterie, da sie den höchsten Druck hat und weil
alle Quarks gegappt sind. Im Gegensatz zur 2SC-Phase mit ihren
Antitriplettgaps @xmath existieren in der CFL-Phase neben ihren
Antitriplettgaps @xmath auch symmetrische Sextettgaps @xmath . In den
Quasiteilchenspektra treten sowohl der Singlettgap @xmath , als auch der
Oktettgap @xmath auf. Wenn man den kleinen repulsiven Sextettgap
vernachlässigt, dann findet man heraus, daß @xmath ist. In der CFL-Phase
existieren keine gaplosen Quarks.

Die Beiträge der Quasiteilchen zu allen Transport- und vielen
thermodynamischen Größen ist bei niedrigen Temperaturen durch den
exponentiell kleinen Faktor @xmath unterdrückt [ 9 ] . Der Einfluß der
Gluonen ist vernachlässigbar, da in der CFL-Phase alle Gluonen gegappt
sind. Im Gegensatz zur 2SC-Phase ist die CFL-Phase superfluid, weil die
@xmath Baryonzahlsymmetrie gebrochen ist. Aber die CFL-Phase besitzt
eine ungebrochene @xmath Eichsymmetrie und ist daher, wie die 2SC-Phase,
kein elektromagnetischer Supraleiter. Daher drängt die CFL-Phase auch
kein Magnetfeld aus ihrem Inneren heraus. Die CFL-Phase ist ein @xmath
-Isolator, da alle Quarks gegappt sind und keine elektrische Ladung
verbleibt, wie das bei den ungegappten blauen up Quarks in der 2SC-Phase
der Fall ist. Daher ist die CFL-Phase elektrisch ladungsneutral. Bei
@xmath sind in der CFL-Phase keine Elektronen vorhanden [ 20 ] . Bei
niedrigen Temperaturen wird die elektrische Leitfähigkeit in der
CFL-Phase durch thermisch angeregte Elektronen und Positronen
gewährleistet. Ein Phasenübergang zu einer CFL-Phase mit einem
Mesonkondensat ist möglich, falls @xmath [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] ,
wobei @xmath und @xmath die up bzw. strange Quarkmasse sind.

Die 2SC- und die CFL-Phase sind farbsupraleitende Phasen, deren
Kondensate einen Spin @xmath haben. Die Bildung von Quark-Cooper-Paaren
bei @xmath für nur einen Flavor ist wegen des Pauliprinzips nicht
erlaubt. Aber dies ist möglich bei @xmath , d.h. bei
Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung. Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung ist jedoch viel
schwächer als Spin-Null-Farbsupraleitung. Während der Gap in den Phasen
der Spin-Null-Farbsupraleitung ca. 100 MeV groß ist, beträgt er in den
Phasen der Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung nur ca. 100 keV. Solch ein kleiner
Gap hat keine großen Einflüsse auf Transport- und viele thermodynamische
Eigenschaften von Quarkmaterie [ 9 ] . Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung ist
weniger energetisch bevorzugt als Spin-Null-Farbsupraleitung, da die
letztere einen höheren Druck besitzt. Daher ist es auch nicht zu
erwarten, daß Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung im Phasendiagramm von neutraler
Quarkmaterie auftritt. Jedoch könnte Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung
bevorzugt werden, wenn der Unterschied zwischen den Fermioberflächen bei
Spin-Null-Farbsupraleitung zu groß ist.

Die wichtigsten Phasen der Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung sind die A-Phase,
die c olor– s pin- l ocked (CSL)-Phase, die polare Phase und die planare
Phase. In Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitern kann, im Gegensatz zu
Spin-Null-Farbsupraleitern, ein elektromagnetischer Meißnereffekt
auftreten. Dies ist z.B. der Fall in der CSL-Phase. Die am meisten
energetisch bevorzugte Phase der Spin-Eins-Farbsupraleitung ist die
transverse CSL-Phase, da sie den höchsten Druck hat [ 39 ] .

Sterne entstehen in interstellaren Gaswolken. Sie sind nukleare
Fusionsfabriken, da in ihnen leichtere Kerne zu schwereren Kernen
verbrannt werden. Nachdem alle Fusionsreaktionen abgeschlossen sind,
werden Sterne entweder zu Weißen Zwergen, Neutronensternen oder
Schwarzen Löchern. Ein Neutronenstern entsteht, wenn ein Roter Überriese
seine Fusionsreaktionen beendet hat. Dann kollabiert dieser, weil der
Innendruck fehlt und daher die Gravitation überwiegt, bis schließlich
der Druck von entarteten Neutronen den Kollaps zum Erliegen bringt. Die
äußeren Schichten fallen auf den entstandenen Protoneutronenstern,
prallen zurück und erzeugen dadurch eine Supernova vom Typ II. Durch den
Kollaps wird eine riesige Anzahl von Neutrinos produziert, die im
Protoneutronenstern zunächst gefangen sind. Dies wird als
Neutrinotrapping bezeichnet. Der zunächst heiße Protoneutronenstern
kühlt durch Neutrinoemission und später durch Photoemission ab.
Neutronensterne werden als Pulsare detektiert. Diese senden wegen des
sogenannten Leuchtturmeffekts sehr präzise Radiopulse aus und besitzen
ein starkes Magnetfeld. Ihre Rotationsperiode liegt im Millisekunden-
bis Sekundenbereich.

Neutronensterne bestehen nicht etwa, wie der Name vermuten läßt, nur aus
Neutronen. Sie bestehen jedoch hauptsächlich aus Neutronen. Es gibt in
Neutronensternen bei verschiedenen Massendichten unterschiedliche
Grundzustände. Die Materie in Neutronensternen ist im Gleichgewicht
bezüglich der schwachen Wechselwirkung, im sogenannten @xmath
-Gleichgewicht. Zudem sind Neutronensterne ladungsneutral, d.h. sie
tragen keine elektrische Ladung und keine Farbladung, denn ansonsten
würden sie instabil sein.

Neutronensterne besitzen eine Atmosphäre, die aus Elektronen, Kernen und
Atomen besteht. Falls der Neutronenstern eine Temperatur @xmath eV
besitzt, dann ist seine Oberflächenschicht flüssig. Sie besteht aus
Kernen und Elektronen. Bei einer Massendichte @xmath g/cm @xmath beginnt
die äußere Kruste von Neutronensternen, die aus Elektronen und Kernen
besteht, wobei letztere in einem b ody- c entered c ubic (bcc) lattice
angeordnet sind, wodurch ein günstigerer Energiezustand eingenommen
wird. Mit zunehmender Massendichte werden die Kerne immer
neutronenreicher, bis bei @xmath g/cm @xmath die sogenannte
Neutrondripline erreicht wird, bei der die Neutronen beginnen, sich von
den Kernen zu lösen. Das Ende der äußeren Kruste ist damit erreicht. Die
innere Kruste von Neutronensternen besteht aus Kernen, Neutronen und
Elektronen. Bei höheren Massendichten zerfallen die Kerne in ihre
Bestandteile, Protonen und Neutronen. Diese werden superfluid. Auch
Myonen treten in diesen Neutronensternschichten auf. In welcher Phase
sich die Kerne von Neutronensternen befinden, hängt von deren
Zentraldichte ab. Neutronensterne mit geringerer Zentraldichte bestehen
in ihrem Inneren nur aus Protonen, Neutronen, Elektronen und Myonen.
Neutronensterne mit größerer Zentraldichte könnten in ihrem Inneren aus
Pionen und Hyperonen bestehen, während sich bei Neutronensternen mit
riesigen Zentraldichten die Protonen, Neutronen und Hyperonen in ihre
Bestandteile auflösen: Quarks, die in den Kernen von Neutronensternen
wahrscheinlich farbsupraleitend sind.

Bei großen strange Quarkmassen kann neutrale Quarkmaterie bestehend aus
up und down Quarks im @xmath -Gleichgewicht einen eher ungewöhnlichen
Grundzustand einnehmen, den man gaplose 2SC (g2SC)-Phase nennt. Die
Symmetrie im g2SC-Grundzustand ist dieselbe wie in der regulären
2SC-Phase. Jedoch weist das Quasiteilchenspektrum in der g2SC-Phase eine
gapfreie Mode auf. Gapfreie Moden entstehen, wenn der Unterschied
zwischen den Fermiimpulsen von sich paarenden Quarks groß wird. Deswegen
existiert auch eine gaplose CFL (gCFL)-Phase. Jedoch weisen sowohl die
gaplosen, als auch die regulären farbsupraleitenden Quarkphasen bei
niedrigen Temperaturen chromomagnetische Instabilitäten auf [ 93 ] .

Um nun vorhersagen zu können, welche Phasen in der Natur energetisch
bevorzugt werden, ist es notwendig, das Phasendiagramm von neutraler
Quarkmaterie zu erstellen, in das diejenigen Phasen eingetragen werden,
die bei vorgegebenen Temperaturen und quarkchemischen Potentialen
vorherrschen. In diesem Zusammenhang ist es wichtig, neutrale
Quarkmaterie zu betrachten, da ansonsten repulsive Coulombkräfte
auftreten würden, die die Neutronensterne zur Explosion zwingen würden.
Zudem muß Quarkmaterie auch farbladungsneutral sein, weil farbgeladene
Objekte noch niemals in der Natur gesehen worden sind und auch
farbgeladene Neutronensterne instabil wären. Zudem befindet sich die
Materie in Neutronensternen im @xmath -Gleichgewicht. Das Phasendiagramm
von neutraler Quarkmaterie, bestehend aus up, down und strange Quarks im
@xmath -Gleichgewicht, habe ich im Kapitel 2 erstellt.

Im Abschnitt 2.1 habe ich masselose neutrale Quarkmaterie bestehend aus
up, down und strange Quarks bei hohen Dichten untersucht. Die Effekte
der strange Quarkmasse @xmath sind durch eine Verschiebung im chemischen
Potential der strange Quarks berücksichtigt worden, @xmath . Diese
Verschiebung spiegelt die Reduktion der Fermiimpulse der strange Quarks
wegen der strange Quarkmasse wider. Solch eine Näherung ist sicherlich
zuverlässig bei kleinen Werten der strange Quarkmasse. In Ref. [ 113 ] ,
wo die strange Quarkmasse richtig miteinbezogen wurde, bestätige ich,
daß sie auch qualitativ korrekte Ergebnisse bei großen strange
Quarkmassen liefert. Ich habe eine sehr mannigfaltige Phasenstruktur
durch Variieren der strange Quarkmasse, des quarkchemischen Potentials
und der Temperatur erhalten.

Bei @xmath gibt es zwei Möglichkeiten für den Grundzustand von
Quarkmaterie: die CFL- und die gCFL- Phase [ 90 , 91 ] . Ich bestätige,
daß das farbchemische Potential @xmath dafür verantwortlich ist, daß die
CFL-Phase bei einem kritischen Wert der strange Quarkmasse in die
gCFL-Phase übergeht. Da ich einen neunparametrischen Ansatz für die
Gapmatrix benutze, bin ich in der Lage, auch die Effekte der repulsiven
Sextettgaps zu untersuchen. Wie zu erwarten war, modifizieren diese die
Quasiteilchendispersionsrelationen nur geringfügig. Jedoch ist diese
Untersuchung wichtig gewesen, um zu kontrollieren, ob die Sextettgaps
vielleicht ungeahnte Auswirkungen auf den Übergang von der CFL- zur
gCFL-Phase haben.

Im Abschnitt 2.1 habe ich auch die Temperaturabhängigkeit der
Gapparameter und der Quasiteilchenspektra untersucht. Ich habe gezeigt,
daß viele unterschiedliche Phasen existieren, die in Ref. [ 111 ]
vorhergesagt wurden. Jedoch erhalte ich, im Gegensatz zu den Autoren von
Ref. [ 111 , 112 ] , die die dSC-Phase erhalten, in der alle down Quarks
gepaart sind, die uSC-Phase, in der alle up Quarks gepaart sind. In Ref.
[ 113 ] habe ich mein Resultat bestätigt, daß die uSC-Phase und nicht
die dSC-Phase im Phasendiagramm von neutraler Quarkmaterie auftritt. Das
Auftreten der dSC-Phase hängt stark von den Modellparametern, genauer
gesagt vom Cutoff, ab. Wählt man nämlich einen größeren Cutoff als in
Ref. [ 111 , 112 ] , dann erhält man in der Tat die dSC-Phase, und die
uSC-Phase kommt im Phasendiagramm von neutraler Quarkmaterie im @xmath
-Gleichgewicht nicht mehr vor.

Das wichtigste Resultat in Abschnitt 2.1 ist das Phasendiagramm von
masseloser neutraler Quarkmaterie bestehend aus up, down und strange
Quarks im @xmath -Gleichgewicht, siehe Abb. 2.11 . In dieser Abbildung
sind alle symmetriebezogenen Phasenübergänge mit durchgezogenen Linien
gekennzeichnet. Die gestrichelten Linien kennzeichnen die Übergänge von
regulären zu gaplosen Phasen. Dies sind jedoch keine echten
Phasenübergänge, sondern weiche Übergänge. Bei @xmath existiert ein
Isolator-Metall-Phasenübergang zwischen der CFL- und der gCFL-Phase [ 90
, 91 ] . Bei höheren Temperaturen ist ein ähnlicher
Isolator-Metall-Phasenübergang zwischen der CFL- und der metallischen
CFL (mCFL)-Phase vorhanden. Dieser ist in Abb. 2.11 durch die
gepunkteten Linien gekennzeichnet.

Im Abschnitt 2.2 habe ich das Phasendiagramm von neutraler Quarkmaterie
mit Hilfe des Nambu–Jona-Lasinio (NJL)-Modells aus Ref. [ 136 ]
untersucht. Wie in der vorangegangenen Untersuchung benutze ich eine
Mean-Field-Näherung in der Analyse. Im Gegensatz zu Abschnitt 2.1
behandele ich jedoch in Abschnitt 2.2 die Quarkmassen selbstkonsistent
als dynamisch generierte Größen. Die wichtigsten Resultate sind in Abb.
2.12 und Abb. 2.13 zusammengefaßt.

Beim Vergleichen des Phasendiagramms für masselose Quarks, siehe Abb.
2.11 rechts, mit dem Phasendiagramm in Abb. 2.12 bemerkt man einige
wichtige Unterschiede. Es fällt auf, daß die selbstkonsistente
Behandlung von Quarkmaterie das Auftreten der unterschiedlichen
Quarkphasen stark beeinflußt [ 139 ] . Zudem bestimmen aber auch die
Phasen ihrerseits wiederum die Größe der Quarkmassen. Dies führt sehr
oft zu Phasenübergängen erster Ordnung.

Viele Unterschiede zu den Resultaten in den Abschnitten 2.1 und 2.2 sind
auf das Verwenden von unterschiedlichen Modellparametern zurückzuführen.
Der Wert der Diquarkkopplungskonstante @xmath in Abschnitt 2.2 ist
schwächer als jener in Abschnitt 2.1 , was man sehr leicht sehen kann,
indem man die Werte der Gaps bei @xmath und @xmath MeV vergleicht. Das
sind @xmath MeV im Abschnitt 2.1 und @xmath MeV in Abschnitt 2.2 . Im
Vergleich hierzu ist der Wert der Diquarkkopplungskonstante in Ref. [
112 ] noch viel schwächer, wo @xmath MeV ist. Im Fall von starker
Kopplung im Abschnitt 2.2 mit @xmath , wodurch @xmath MeV ist, ist
@xmath immer noch schwächer als im Abschnitt 2.1 . In diesem Fall
unterscheiden sich die Resultate hauptsächlich dadurch, daß die
Quarkmassen unterschiedlich behandelt werden.

Wegen der niedrigen Diquarkkopplung geschehen die Cooperinstabilitäten
in Abb. 2.12 bei größeren Werten des quarkchemischen Potentials als in
Abb. 2.11 rechts. Das kann man am besten am Übergang zur (g)CFL-Phase
erkennen. Eine andere Konsequenz der schwächeren Wechselwirkung ist die
Möglichkeit eines thermal verursachten Anstiegs des (g)2SC-Cooperpaarens
bei mittleren Werten des quarkchemischen Potentials. Diese Art des
Anstiegs wurde in Ref. [ 84 , 85 ] im Detail untersucht. Mit denselben
Argumenten kann man sofort sagen, wie sich das Phasendiagramm in Abb.
2.12 durch die Zu- oder Abnahme der Diquarkkopplungskonstante ändern
sollte.

Insbesondere sollte durch Zunahme (Abnahme) der
Diquarkkopplungskonstante die Region der (g)2SC-Phase bei mittleren
Werten des quarkchemischen Potentials expandieren (schrumpfen). Die
Regionen, die durch die anderen (d.h. uSC- und CFL-) Phasen abgedeckt
werden, sollten qualitativ dieselbe Form haben, sich jedoch zu
niedrigeren (höheren) Werten des quarkchemischen Potentials und zu
höheren (niedrigeren) Temperaturwerten verschieben.

Das NJL-Modell, das ich in Abschnitt 2.2 verwende, ist definiert durch
einen Parametersatz, dessen Werte so angepaßt wurden, daß sie wichtige
QCD-Eigenschaften im Vakuum reproduzieren. (Das gleiche Modell wurde
auch in Ref. [ 133 ] verwendet.) Es ist daher zu erwarten, daß es ein
gutes effektives Modell der QCD ist, das die beiden wichtigen Merkmale,
chirale und farbsupraleitende Dynamik, abdeckt. Auch der relativ
niedrige Wert des Cutoffs sollte nicht notwendigerweise als ein
schlechtes Merkmal des Modells angesehen werden. Vielmehr könnte das
eine Nachahmung der natürlichen Eigenschaft der vollständigen Theorie
sein, in der die Kopplungsstärke von Wechselwirkungen bei großen
Impulsen gering ist.

In diesem Zusammenhang ist es wichtig darauf hinzuweisen, daß die
Näherung in Ref. [ 112 ] bezüglich des Cutoffs im NJL-Modell im
Vergleich zu meiner sehr unterschiedlich ist. Dort wird nämlich
behauptet, daß ein großer Wert für den Cutoff vorteilhaft sei, um
Resultate zu erhalten, die unempfindlich auf eine spezielle Wahl des
Cutoffs sind. Ich finde jedoch kein physikalisches Argument, das diese
Voraussetzung unterstützt. Vielmehr bestehe ich darauf, ein effektives
Modell zu verwenden, das die QCD-Eigenschaften bei verschwindendem
quarkchemischen Potential gut beschreibt. Natürlich will ich damit nicht
behaupten, daß eine Extrapolation des Modells zu großen Dichten damit zu
rechtfertigen ist. Jedoch scheint mir das momentan die beste Lösung zu
sein.

Die Resultate aus Abschnitt 2.2 könnten wichtig für das physikalische
Verständnis von (hybriden) Neutronensternen mit Quarkkern sein, in denen
die Deleptonisierung stattgefunden hat. Um ein Phasendiagramm zu
erhalten, das auf Protoneutronensterne angewandt werden kann, muß man
den Effekt von Neutrinotrapping berücksichtigen.

Im Abschnitt 2.3 habe ich den Effekt von Neutrinotrapping auf das
Phasendiagramm von neutraler Quarkmaterie bestehend aus up, down und
strange Quarks im @xmath -Gleichgewicht mit Hilfe des NJL-Modells aus
Ref. [ 136 ] untersucht. Die Resultate habe ich in der
Mean-Field-Näherung erhalten. Die Quarkmassen sind als dynamisch
generierte Größen behandelt worden. Die Gesamtstruktur der Phasen wird
als dreidimensionales Diagramm im Raum von Temperatur @xmath ,
quarkchemischem Potential @xmath und dem chemischen Potential der
Leptonen @xmath in Abb. 2.20 dargestellt. Dieses Phasendiagramm wird
zudem anhand von sämtlichen zweidimensionalen Teildiagrammen desselben
detailliert diskutiert, siehe Abb. 2.21 , 2.22 , 2.26 und 2.27 .

Sowohl anhand von einfachen modellunabhängigen Argumenten, als auch
anhand von detaillierten numerischen Berechnungen mit Hilfe des
NJL-Modells habe ich herausgefunden, daß Neutrinotrapping das
Cooper-Paaren in der 2SC-Phase begünstigt und die CFL-Phase unterdrückt.
Hauptsächlich kommt das durch das Erfüllen der elektrischen
Neutralitätsbedingung zustande. In Quarkmaterie, die nur aus up und down
Quarks im @xmath -Gleichgewicht besteht, hilft das chemische Potential
der Leptonen @xmath , zusätzliche Elektronen zur Verfügung zu stellen,
ohne einen großen Unterschied zwischen den Fermiimpulsen zu verursachen.
Durch Verringern der Fermiimpulsunterschiede wird das Cooperpaaren
natürlich stärker. Dies ist eine völlig andere Situation als in der
CFL-Phase, in der die Quarkmaterie in Abwesenheit von Elektronen neutral
ist. Zusätzliche Elektronen würden, wegen des großen chemischen
Potentials der Leptonen, die CFL-Phase belasten.

Wendet man dieses Resultat auf Protoneutronensterne an, die
farbsupraleitende Quarkkerne besitzen, dann bedeutet das, daß die
CFL-Phase wohl kaum in Protoneutronensternen auftritt bevor die
Deleptonisierung komplett ist. Daher ist die 2SC-Phase der
wahrscheinlichste Grundzustand in Protoneutronensternen mit
farbsupraleitenden Quarkkernen. Zudem habe ich festgestellt, daß
Protoneutronensterne kaum strange Quarks enthalten.

Die Autoren von Ref. [ 83 ] behaupten, daß die 2SC-Phase in kompakten
Sternen nicht vorkommt und untermauern ihre Behauptung mit Hilfe einer
einfachen modellunabhängigen Berechnung. Die Phasendiagramme, die ich
mit Hilfe des genaueren NJL-Modells erstellt habe und in meiner
Dissertation zeige, sind der beste Beweis dafür, daß die 2SC-Phase
wirklich in kompakten Sternen vorkommen kann. Falls kompakte Sterne
farbsupraleitende Kerne besitzen, dann käme die 2SC-Phase auf jeden Fall
in Protoneutronensternen und in kalten Neutronensternen mit großer
Diquarkkopplungskonstante vor. Für kleine oder mittlere Werte der
Diquarkkopplungskonstante und bei verschwindender Temperatur, für die
die einfache modellunabhängige Berechnung in Ref. [ 83 ] gültig ist,
scheint es jedoch richtig zu sein, daß die 2SC-Phase nicht auftritt. Wie
dem auch sei, man sollte mit der Aussage, daß eine Phase nicht auftritt,
sehr vorsichtig sein.

Nachdem die Deleptonisierung stattgefunden hat, ist es möglich, daß der
Grundzustand im Inneren von farbsupraleitenden Neutronensternen die
CFL-Phase ist. Diese Phase besitzt eine große Anzahl von strange Quarks.
Deswegen sollte eine große Produktion von strange Quarks sofort nach der
Deleptonisierung einsetzen. Dieser Vorgang könnte beobachtbar sein.

Im Kapitel 3 fasse ich meine Resultate zusammen und diskutiere sie.
Zudem zeige ich offengebliebene Fragen auf und gebe einen Ausblick auf
mögliche zukünftige Untersuchungen.

Im Anhang befinden sich nützliche Formeln und Definitionen, die in
meiner Dissertation verwendet werden.