##### Contents

-    Abstract
-    Preface
-    Author’s declaration
-    1 Entanglement and separability
    -    1.1 The EPR argument and Bell’s inequalities
    -    1.2 The main road
        -    1.2.1 Hahn-Banach theorem and entanglement witnesses
        -    1.2.2 Jamiołkowski isomorphism and positive maps
        -    1.2.3 Some deeper results
        -    1.2.4 PPT entangled states
        -    1.2.5 A numerical approach
    -    1.3 Permutation criteria
        -    1.3.1 From cross norm over realignment to permutation
            criteria
        -    1.3.2 Definitions, graphical notation and first results
        -    1.3.3 Main theorem
        -    1.3.4 Illustrations
-    2 Schmidt number for mixed states
    -    2.1 Introduction and Schmidt witnesses
    -    2.2 Main theorem
    -    2.3 A conjecture
    -    2.4 Schmidt robustness
        -    2.4.1 Generalised Schmidt robustness
        -    2.4.2 Random Schmidt robustness
-    3 Entanglement distillation: Introduction and classical results
    -    3.1 Quantum operations
        -    3.1.1 General quantum operations
        -    3.1.2 Bipartite quantum operations
        -    3.1.3 Entangling operations
    -    3.2 Pure states and the reversibility of entanglement
        -    3.2.1 Pure state distillation protocols
        -    3.2.2 Finite regime
        -    3.2.3 Asymptotic regime
    -    3.3 Mixed states and the irreversibility of entanglement
        -    3.3.1 Geometric measures
        -    3.3.2 Operational measures
        -    3.3.3 Irreversibility
    -    3.4 Some important distillation protocols
        -    3.4.1 Recursive protocols
        -    3.4.2 Hashing and breeding
-    4 Distillability, activation and NPT bound entanglement
    -    4.1 Classic results
        -    4.1.1 States symmetric under local unitaries
        -    4.1.2 Fundamental theorems
    -    4.2 Uniform treatment of distillability
        -    4.2.1 Borrowing tools from the separability problem
        -    4.2.2 Application 1: Derivation of other distillability
            theorems
        -    4.2.3 Application 2: A plethora of reduction-like maps
        -    4.2.4 Application 3: Random Schmidt-2 robustness and
            distillability
        -    4.2.5 Application 4: Volume of 1-distillable states
    -    4.3 The question of NPT bound entanglement
        -    4.3.1 Early results
        -    4.3.2 The UUVVF-invariant states
        -    4.3.3 As a Schmidt number problem
        -    4.3.4 As a separability problem
        -    4.3.5 The rainbow states
    -    4.4 Activation of bound entanglement
-    A Two Matlab programs
    -    A.1 General permutation
    -    A.2 Distillability test

###### List of Figures

-    1 Structure of the dissertation and publications
-    1.1 The Jamiołkowski isomorphism
-    1.2 PPT states as the sum of an edge and a separable state
-    1.3 Basic permutations
-    1.4 Equivalent permutations under the new rule
-    1.5 Independent permutation criteria for @xmath and @xmath parties
-    2.1 Lower bounds on @xmath
-    3.1 Entanglement measures and the Werner states
-    3.2 One iteration in the recurrence protocol
-    3.3 Entanglement measures and the two-qubit Werner states
-    4.1 The probability of detecting 1-distillability in @xmath tests
-    4.2 Volume of NPT distillable states
-    4.3 Volume of distillable states
-    4.4 The @xmath -invariant states
-    4.5 The @xmath -invariant states.
-    4.6 The @xmath -invariant states
-    4.7 The rainbow states

## Preface

Quantum error correction allows quantum information to be reliably sent
through noisy channels. Tremendous effort has been devoted to the study
of quantum error correcting codes and capacities of quantum channels.
This thesis deals with entanglement distillation, also known as
counterfactual error correction [ 138 ] . The idea is to purify the
noisy channel before trying to send any information over it, rather than
the more indirect method of error correction. Personally I feel very
strongly about the idea of distillation since it also relates directly
to a canonical way of quantifying how much useful entanglement is
present in a state. The distillable entanglement is a physical property
of quantum states, bridging between a practical and theoretical study of
entanglement. Bound entangled states are states from which no pure
entanglement can be extracted, although entanglement is needed to
construct the state. They are two main open problems in the
classification of bound entangled states (the separability and the NPT
bound entanglement problem) and they constituted the bulk of my
research.

During the course of my Ph. D. I have published a number of papers, but
in writing up, I have tried to make this thesis more than just a
compilation or medley of these papers. The primary goal has been to
convey the context and motivation of the different problems. Secondary,
I have tried to provide a review of the state-of-the-art knowledge in
entanglement distillation in the bipartite scenario. A notable gap in
this presentation is a treatment of experimental entanglement
distillation. The structure of the dissertation and the interrelation
between the chapters, is depicted in Figure 1 . The figure also contains
a reference list of my papers, and their position in the thesis.

Chapter one deals with the separability problem. After having reviewed
the theory of positive maps and entanglement witnesses, I present new
classes of PPT entangled states with particular ranks. Next, the
permutation criteria for separability are studied in detail and a new
result on their classification is presented. This is the only place in
the dissertation which deals with multipartite systems.

The Schmidt number of mixed states is a generalisation of the separable
versus entangled division, imposing a finer structure on the set of
quantum states. This is the topic of Chapter two. The tools for the
separability problem are readily generalised to deal with Schmidt
numbers. I review in some detail known results. In a final section, I
introduce the Schmidt robustness and derive upper and lower bounds for
pure states. The motivation for the topics discussed in this chapter
becomes clear in Chapter four.

In Chapter three I review the literature on bipartite entanglement
distillation. After the necessary introduction of quantum operations,
the main results on pure state entanglement transformation are sketched.
Then I move over to mixed state entanglement. I start with a discussion
on entanglement measures focusing on the distillable entanglement and
end with a discussion of irreversibility in mixed state transformations.
This leads to the introduction of bound entangled states. The chapter
ends with a review of mixed state entanglement distillation protocols.

Chapter four is a discourse on distillability and NPT bound entanglement
and describes my main results. As usual, the first sections introduce
known results. In particular I review the three fundamental theorems on
distillability. Next a uniform treatment of distillability theorems is
presented. I illustrate the power of this reformulation by means of four
applications. The most important ones are the derivation of
reduction-like maps and an estimation of the volume of distillable
states. In the next section the problem of the existence of NPT bound
entanglement is reformulated as the problem of determining whether a
particular set of states is entangled. It follows that the two major
open problems on the classification of bound entangled states are really
just one problem (although the problems are by no means equivalent). I
end this dissertation with a short review on activation of bound
entanglement.

Acknowledgements

Words fall short in gratitude to my supervisor Anthony Sudbery. He took
the ungratifying task of agreeing on the supervision of an international
student, with little or no references. Subsequently he arranged,
together with Samuel Braunstein, financial support. I thank both of them
wholeheartedly for this. From the very start Tony has been enormously
encouraging and helpful, always making time for me despite a plethora of
departmental duties. I have enjoyed many discussions with him; his
mathematical quickness and wittiness never cease to amaze and inspire
me. It is also hard not to acknowledge the mental support he offered me
when I was in need for it the most.

Many thanks go to my coauthors Sibasish Ghosh, Simone Severini, Anthony
Sudbery and Paweł Wocjan; it was a true honour and pleasure working with
them. During my Ph. D. I enjoyed discussions with a number of
researchers, including those who have helped me out clarifying technical
issues on their own work. In particular, I want to thank Samuel
Braunstein, Ignacio Cirac, Jens Eisert, William Hall, Otfried Gühne,
Erik Hostens, Florian Hulpke, Maciej Lewenstein, Andreas Winter and
Christof Zalka. I thank Stefan Weigert and Martin Plenio for pointing
out numerous mistakes.

My girlfriend Christine has played a vital role in the completion of
this Ph. D.; Thank you Christine, for your continuous support,
dedication and love. Equally appreciative I am for her commitment during
the final year, which was infested by a prolonged period of illness. I
would also like to express a deep gratitude to my parents and my brother
and his wife who supported and encouraged me throughout. It was my
parents financial support during the first year that made my move to
York possible. I thank my friends in Catherine House and fellow
Ph. D. students for support, friendship and a wonderful time in York.

I enjoyed financial support through a W. W. Smith Scholarship and EPSRC
grant GR/S822176/01 for which I feel greatly indebted.

This thesis was typeset with the Miktex distribution ( www.miktex.de )
of LaTeX and text editor Winshell ( www.winshell.de ). The figures were
produced using GraphEq ( www.peda.com ), Mayura Draw ( www.mayura.com )
and Matlab ( www.mathworks.com ).

York
                                                                                              
Lieven Clarisse
July 2006

## Author’s declaration

Most of this material has been presented before. This is true for all
literature review and most of the original work. The introduction of PPT
states with special ranks, Section 1.2.4 has been presented in Ref. [ 62
] . Theorem 1.3.4 is one of the few results that has not been presented
before. The new results on the classification of permutation criteria
Sections 1.3.3 and 1.3.4 have been obtained in collaboration with
P. Wocjan and published in Ref. [ 63 ] . The main idea came from myself.
The results on the Schmidt robustness have been published in Ref. [ 61 ]
. In Section 3.1.3 the paper on the entangling power of permutations is
briefly mentioned. This paper was written in collaboration with S.
Ghosh, S. Severini and A. Sudbery, with me being the first author [ 64 ]
. The new results in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 have been obtained by myself
and published in Ref. [ 59 , 60 ] . The Appendix contains two Matlab
programs, which have not been published before. See also Figure 1 (page
1 ) for a schematic overview of the published papers and their position
in the thesis.

## Chapter 1 Entanglement and separability

From the 1930s, starting with the EPR thought experiment [ 88 , 27 ] ,
entanglement was mainly studied in the context of the completeness of
quantum mechanics. It was not until the 1960s when the problem of
completeness was put on solid mathematical grounds by the remarkable
works of Gleason [ 106 ] , Kochen and Specker [ 175 ] and Bell [ 16 , 17
] . The work of Bell dealt directly with the EPR thought experiment and
is of enormous importance as it showed that entanglement is incompatible
with a certain local classical inequality which can be verified
experimentally. We will discuss the EPR argument and Bell’s inequality
briefly in Section 1.1 . More in-depth treatments can be found in Ref. [
244 , 222 ] .

In recent years, the problem of completeness seems pretty much settled
and considerable effort has been put into understanding the mathematical
structure of entanglement. A primary problem is, given an arbitrary
quantum state, to determine whether it is entangled or not. The study of
this problem came together with the realisation that Bell-like
inequalities are pretty weak tests for entanglement. The breakthrough [
223 , 132 ] came when notions from convex analysis and @xmath -algebras
were applied to the problem. In Section 1.2 we review these mathematical
results leading to the general framework of entanglement witness and its
dual formulation in terms of positive maps. We also introduce the
so-called PPT states and relate them to classical problems in linear
algebra. The separability problem has been shown to be NP-hard [ 110 ] ,
and therefore there is little hope of finding a simple analytical method
which is able to distinguish all entangled states from all separable.
Subsequently, interest has grown in finding good numerical methods in
tackling the problem. In Section 1.2.5 we apply tools from semidefinite
programming to the separability problem. In particular we focus on the
work by Doherty et al. [ 75 ] , which besides a complete numerical
solution, offers appealing analytical features.

In Section 1.3 we step away from the entanglement witness approach and
study the permutation criteria for detecting entanglement, initiated in
Ref. [ 251 ] and further developed in Ref. [ 44 , 144 , 254 , 324 , 63 ]
. Although in general, these criteria cannot detect every entangled
state, they are particularly appealing because of their operational
simplicity and can be applied in the bipartite as well as the
multipartite scenario.

Reviews of the entanglement versus separability problem, from a variety
of different viewpoints, can be found in Ref. [ 184 , 138 , 283 , 284 ,
39 , 37 , 84 , 85 , 263 ] .

### 1.1 The EPR argument and Bell’s inequalities

The existence of entanglement [ 260 ] follows naturally from the quantum
mechanical formalism. This was first made explicit in the famous paper [
88 ] by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen (EPR), where it was used to argue
that quantum mechanics as a physical theory is incomplete. Their
argument runs as follows. Consider a particle with known position
decaying into two equal particles. Without measurement, all we know is
that the particles will drift apart with opposite momenta and that their
centre of mass remains constant throughout. Assuming that both particles
are well separated, there is no way a measurement on one of the
particles can affect the other particle. This is the famous local
realism assumption, which dictates that well separated systems can be
completely and independently described. Now, measuring the momentum or
position of the first particle enables one to predict either the
momentum or position of the second system, without disturbing it. In
quantum mechanics position and momentum are non-commuting observables
and the theory cannot predict precise values for both, hence EPR are led
to conclude that quantum mechanics is incomplete. A formidable
philosophical debate followed on the foundations and interpretation of
quantum mechanics, starting with Bohr’s reply [ 27 ] . For a historical
account see Ref. [ 167 ] .

In 1951 Bohm [ 26 ] formulated a version of the EPR argument with an
entangled spin system. Here both well separated parties ( @xmath and
@xmath ) share one half of the singlet state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Measurement of the spin of the first half in any direction reveals the
spin of the other particle in that direction. By an EPR argument the
quantum mechanical description of the second half cannot be complete. It
is for such a system Bell [ 16 ] derived his famous inequality. We will
present here a proof of the more general CHSH inequality [ 66 ] .

Suppose the two parties share a large number of singlet states and
measure them one by one. For each measurement, observer @xmath chooses
to measure the spin in direction @xmath or @xmath at random (with
results @xmath or @xmath ). Analogously observer @xmath measures the
spin of his half in direction @xmath or @xmath (with results @xmath or
@xmath ). Let us denote with @xmath the average value of the product of
the measurements outcomes @xmath . This quantity is a measure of the
correlation between the two measurement outcomes. Now the EPR argument
implies that for each singlet pair, @xmath have definite values ( @xmath
) before a measurement has taken place. By going through all
combinations, it is easy to see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because the left hand side is either -2 or +2, its average over all
@xmath is not larger than 2, thus we get on average

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This inequality gives an upper limit to the correlation coefficients.
Choosing the unit vectors @xmath in the same plane but separated by
angles of @xmath , one can verify that this inequality is violated
quantum mechanically for the singlet state (with a value of @xmath ).
Bell type inequalities can be derived for any number of parties, for
more than two distinct measurement outcomes or for any number of
alternative setups, see Ref. [ 225 ] .

Violation of the Bell inequalities has been experimentally demonstrated
using the polarisation of photons [ 99 , 6 ] and experimental results
are in excellent agreement with the predictions of quantum mechanics.
Apart from entanglement in polarisation, violation of Bell inequalities
with photons has been demonstrated using entanglement based on position
and time [ 98 , 288 ] , phase and momentum [ 243 ] and orbital angular
momentum [ 195 ] . Experiments also have been conducted without the use
of photons, namely with protons [ 180 ] and atoms [ 248 ] . It should be
mentioned however, that to date no experiment has been loophole free, so
that technically, local realism has not been ruled out experimentally.
An example of such a loophole is not having proper time-like separation
of the detectors (see Ref. [ 65 , 100 ] for a discussion of these
matters).

### 1.2 The main road

For any entangled pure state shared by an arbitrary number of parties,
it was shown that there exists a Bell inequality which is violated [ 104
, 235 ] . For mixed states this does not seem the case. In this context
it has been shown that although a state might not violate any Bell-like
inequality, it still may be useful for teleportation [ 233 , 154 ] .
Other states only violate some inequality after a certain local
generalised measurements [ 234 , 105 ] . Yet other states only show a
violation when multiple copies are measured collectively [ 224 ] . It
will be clear that Bell inequalities are a poor test of non-classical
behaviour. It has proven convenient to characterise the set of entangled
mixed states with a certain reasonable mathematical definition. The
advantage of this approach is to have a workable definition of what is
entangled and what not. Though only recently it has been rigorously
proven that all states defined in such way behave truly non-classically
(see Chapter 4 ).

We will give the definition of entanglement for bipartite states,
generalisation to multipartite states is straightforward. Let us first
recall the definition of a pure state [ 260 , 94 ] . Let @xmath be a
Hilbert space such that @xmath (with integers @xmath . A pure state
@xmath shared by two parties @xmath and @xmath is called separable if
and only if it can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath , in other words, if @xmath belongs to the
Cartesian product @xmath [ 279 ] . Otherwise we call @xmath entangled.

There is a simple way of determining whether a pure state is entangled
based on the Schmidt decomposition:

###### Theorem 1.2.1 (Schmidt decomposition [259, 94, 214]).

Let @xmath , then there exist orthonormal states @xmath and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . The coefficients @xmath are known as the
Schmidt coefficients. The number of non-zero Schmidt coefficients is
referred to as the Schmidt rank @xmath of @xmath . The state @xmath is
separable if and only if it has Schmidt rank one.

###### Proof.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a matrix of complex numbers. Recall that by the singular
value decomposition [ 126 ] every matrix @xmath can be written as @xmath
, with @xmath and @xmath unitary and @xmath a diagonal matrix with
nonnegative elements. So we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now putting @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we obtain the form ( 1.1 ). The
orthonormality follows from @xmath and @xmath being unitary. To check
whether a pure state is separable it is therefore sufficient to
calculate the rank of @xmath . ∎

Moving to mixed states, let us denote with @xmath the set of linear
operators on @xmath . Since we are working over a finite dimensional
space @xmath the space of complex matrices of order @xmath . The subset
of (Hermitian) positive semidefinite operators will be denoted @xmath .
The set of density operators on @xmath constitutes then the normalised
operators in @xmath and we will denote them with @xmath or simply @xmath
. A bipartite mixed state @xmath is called separable if and only if it
can be written as a convex sum of pure product states, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Otherwise the state is called
entangled. The set of separable states will be denoted @xmath and can
thus be identified with the convex hull of the normalised operators in
@xmath . If such a decomposition exists, then from the Caratheodory
theorem [ 146 , 247 ] follows that we can always replace it with a
decomposition of at most @xmath terms where @xmath . This definition was
first coined independently by Werner and Primas in 1983 ¹ ¹ 1 R. Werner,
LMS Workshop on quantum information and computation (York 2005). , but
popularised in Ref. [ 321 ] . The physical idea behind it is that a
separable state can always be constructed by two independent parties
with the aid of classical communication only (but again, a full physical
justification came first later).

#### 1.2.1 Hahn-Banach theorem and entanglement witnesses

To check whether a pure state is entangled it is sufficient to expand it
in its Schmidt decomposition. For mixed states the problem is much
harder as no such canonical decomposition can be obtained in a
straightforward way. However, by exploiting the convexity of the set of
separable states a useful characterisation can be obtained, which we
will use to construct some necessary conditions for separability.

The following theorem gives a geometrical characterization of the
problem of determining whether @xmath is contained in a certain convex
subset @xmath :

###### Theorem 1.2.2.

Let @xmath be a convex set of states in a Hilbert space @xmath , then
for each @xmath there exists a Hermitian operator @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

This theorem is an immediate consequence of basic theorems in functional
analysis [ 247 , 181 ] . Namely, the Hahn-Banach theorem states that a
convex set and a point lying outside it can be separated by a hyperplane
@xmath , and the Riesz-Frechet representation theorem then characterizes
such hyperplanes. The hyperplanes @xmath are commonly called witnesses [
284 ] (they witness states outside @xmath ).

###### Corollary 1.2.1 (Horodecki et al. [132]).

A state @xmath is separable if and only if @xmath for all Hermitian
operators @xmath such that @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . Such
operators @xmath will be referred to as entanglement witnesses.

We have encountered an entanglement witness when we discussed the CHSH
inequality. From our discussion, it is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

is an entanglement witness. Here @xmath is a vector containing the Pauli
spin matrices [ 163 , 284 , 161 ] . Note also that a general
entanglement witness @xmath can be measured locally, by decomposing it
as (non-convex) sum of product states. The problem of finding an
optimized decomposition both in the optimal number of projectors on
product vectors and in the optimal number of settings of the detectors
has been partially solved in Ref. [ 107 , 108 ] .

Let us now give two examples of entanglement witnesses, which will be
important for the sequel. The first one [ 132 ] is the so-called swap or
flip operator @xmath , which acts on state vectors as @xmath or in a
basis @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is not so hard to check that this operator is indeed positive on
product states. The swap operator is an entanglement witness because
@xmath has negative eigenvalues and will therefore necessarily act
negative on some state (for instance for @xmath ). The second example is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the projector onto the maximally entangled state @xmath .
Since the maximum overlap of a separable state with @xmath is @xmath ,
and since @xmath has negative eigenvalues, it is an entanglement witness
(for instance for @xmath ).

Intuitively the value @xmath can be associated with the distance of
@xmath to the set of separable states and in some way is related to the
degree of entanglement of @xmath . However, as such the minimum is
ill-defined as the set of entanglement witnesses is unbounded. This can
be overcome by imposing suitable constraints on the entanglement
witnesses @xmath , and it turns out that in this way a variety of
geometrical intuitive entanglement measures can be obtained [ 33 , 230 ]
. We will come back to the topic of geometrical entanglement measures
briefly in Chapter 2 .

#### 1.2.2 Jamiołkowski isomorphism and positive maps

In this section we will reformulate the characterisation of separable
states (Corollary 1.2.1 ) in terms of positive maps. This can be done by
making use of the Jamiołkowski isomorphism which establishes a
one-to-one correspondence between linear operators and linear maps
between operator spaces. We will outline the isomorphism and illustrate
it for Hermitian preserving, positive and completely positive maps. We
then apply it to the examples of last section, and obtain the reduction
and the partial transpose criteria, respectively. The results outlined
in this section date back to the 1970-80s’ [ 53 ] but have only recently
[ 132 ] been used in quantum information. This section is meant as an
introduction to the isomorphism and we will see more about positive maps
and the context in which they were studied in Section 1.2.3 .

A Hermitian map @xmath is a linear map that maps Hermitian operators
onto Hermitian operators. A positive map @xmath is a linear map that
maps positive operators @xmath onto positive operators @xmath . A @xmath
-positive map is a positive map such that the induced map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is positive for @xmath . A complete positive map (CP map) is a @xmath
-positive map for all positive @xmath .

In the proof of the Schmidt decomposition we found it useful to
interpret the coefficients @xmath in the expansion of @xmath as the
matrix @xmath of an operator @xmath . With this notation one can equally
write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This relation in effect establishes an explicit isomorphism between
@xmath and @xmath [ 25 ] and comes back frequently in quantum
information (see for example [ 296 , 295 , 340 ] ). Suppose now that we
have a general Hermitian operator @xmath , using the spectral
decomposition we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with all coefficients @xmath real. Using the above isomorphism we
associate with every vector @xmath the matrix @xmath and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Defining a map @xmath as acting as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , this can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is clear that when a linear map @xmath can be written in the form
of ( 1.4 ) it is automatically a Hermitian map. Conversely, using the
above correspondence ( 1.5 ), it is easy to see that any Hermitian map
@xmath will correspond to a Hermitian operator @xmath and therefore can
be written in the form ( 1.4 ). When @xmath is a positive operator, all
the coefficients @xmath will be positive and @xmath will become a
completely positive operator. Conversely, it is again easy to see that
any completely positive map can be written in the form ( 1.4 ). These
results were first derived by de Pillis [ 67 ] and Choi [ 49 ]
respectively (see also Ref. [ 276 , 124 , 232 , 178 , 131 , 174 , 296 ]
), we summarise them in the following theorem.

###### Theorem 1.2.3.

A linear map @xmath is Hermitian (completely positive) if and only if
for all operators @xmath it can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some operators @xmath , and real (positive) numbers @xmath .

In the proof of this theorem we made use of the relation @xmath which
associates with each linear map @xmath an operator @xmath . Note that
@xmath defines uniquely the map @xmath since a linear map is determined
by its action on the basis @xmath . Indeed, it is not so hard to see
that ( 1.5 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus in this way we have defined an isomorphism between linear maps
@xmath and operators @xmath . This is the famous Jamiołkowski
isomorphism and can also be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Jamiołkowski [ 166 ] derived this isomorphism in order to characterise
positive maps. As a positive map is Hermitian we can always write it in
the form of ( 1.4 ). However it is unclear how to distinguish between
Hermitian and positive maps from this. The trick is to associate with
the operator @xmath the linear functional @xmath , this linear
functional can be characterised as follows.

###### Theorem 1.2.4.

A linear map @xmath is positive if and only if the corresponding
functional @xmath on @xmath is positive on product vectors.

###### Proof.

We can prove this theorem solely by examining ( 1.6 ) for the special
case where @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is positive on product vectors then @xmath is positive on
projectors, and therefore on arbitrary positive operators also. If
@xmath is a positive map, then from the above equation follows that
@xmath is positive on product vectors. ∎

Thus in the language of the previous section, positive maps correspond
to entanglement witnesses. Figure 1.1 summarises the isomorphism and its
relations for different classes of linear maps. With this we are in the
position of stating the main result of this section, which was first
published in Ref. [ 132 ] (note that it can be extended to multipartite
systems, for details see Ref. [ 139 ] ).

###### Theorem 1.2.5.

A density operator @xmath acting on @xmath is separable if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive maps @xmath .

###### Proof.

With each linear map @xmath there is associated an adjoint map @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all operators @xmath . It is easy to verify that the adjoint map of
a positive map is again positive. Suppose now that @xmath is entangled,
then from Corollary 1.2.1 follows that there exists an entanglement
witness @xmath such that @xmath . By virtue of the Jamiołkowski
isomorphism and Theorem 1.2.4 this is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath is positive it follows that @xmath . Conversely, let
@xmath be a positive map such that @xmath has a negative eigenvalue with
corresponding eigenvector @xmath . With this we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is positive on separable states, the same applies to @xmath
. This shows that @xmath must be entangled. ∎

The proof of Theorem 1.2.5 reveals two important facts about the
relation between entanglement witnesses and positive maps. Namely, given
an entanglement witness @xmath , the corresponding positive map @xmath
will always detect more states than the witness, as it detects all
states detected by the class of witnesses @xmath for all operators
@xmath . Furthermore, if a certain positive map @xmath is negative on a
state @xmath , then the proof shows us how to construct an operator
@xmath such that the local transformation ² ² 2 See Section 3.1 for more
on quantum operations.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

will yield a state that can be detected by the entanglement witness
@xmath .

In the previous section, we have seen two important examples of
entanglement witnesses. The map associated with @xmath is given by
@xmath . From this follows that all separable states @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while this is not necessarily the case for entangled states. It is not
so hard to prove the positivity of this map directly. The associated
separability criterion is called the reduction criterion and was first
studied in Ref. [ 131 , 43 ] .

Another entanglement witness was given by the swap operator @xmath . It
is not so hard to see that the associated map is given by the
transposition. For a separable state @xmath we have that @xmath , while
this is not necessarily the case for entangled states. We write @xmath
and call this operation the partial transposition. When @xmath we say
that the state has a positive partial transpose (PPT), otherwise the
state has a negative partial transpose (NPT). The partial transposition
criterion was first discovered by Peres [ 223 ] independently of the
notion of positive maps. This criterion turns out to be powerful, in
particular, positivity of the partial transposition is necessary and
sufficient for separability when @xmath [ 132 ] . It was subsequently
shown also to be necessary and sufficient for states with low rank [ 151
] , in particular for pure states [ 284 ] , rank two states [ 153 ] and
rank three states [ 151 ] . In general though, it is not sufficient, and
there exist PPT entangled states. We will see an example of such a PPT
entangled state in the next section, where we also analyse the
importance of the partial transposition in the structure of positive
maps. We will denote the set of PPT states as @xmath . The set @xmath
is, just like the set of separable states @xmath , compact and @xmath .

It can be shown that the reduction criterion is strictly weaker than the
partial transposition criterion [ 131 ] , except when @xmath or @xmath
in which case both criteria are equivalent. This last statement follows
from the identity @xmath for two dimensional matrices @xmath . The
reduction and the partial transposition criterion are important in the
context of distillation, they will be studied in detail in Chapter 3 .

#### 1.2.3 Some deeper results

We start this section with the following classical theorem, which gives
a complete characterisation of positive maps between low dimensional
operators (for elementary proofs see Ref. [ 183 , 84 , 298 ] ):

###### Theorem 1.2.6 (Størmer and Woronowicz [277, 328]).

Let @xmath be a positive map, with @xmath . Then @xmath can be written
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath completely positive maps.

We call a positive map decomposable if it can be written as a
combination of a completely positive map and the combination of a
completely positive map and transposition. It is easy to see that
entangled states detected by a decomposable map will also be detected by
the partial transposition alone. Thus from Theorem 1.2.5 we obtain that
for all bipartite states @xmath acting on @xmath with @xmath ,
positivity of the partial transposition is a necessary and sufficient
condition for separability.

The first example of an undecomposable map was given by Choi [ 50 , 51 ,
52 ] . Let @xmath be the linear map defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath matrices @xmath . He originally proved that this map is
positive on real positive semidefinite (and thus symmetric) matrices ,
but it easy to see that this implies that the map is positive on all
positive semidefinite matrices [ 52 ] . With a counterexample, we will
show that this map is not decomposable. The example is due to Størmer [
278 ] but analysed in the context of entanglement in Ref. [ 138 , 149 ,
75 ] . Define for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . This state has a positive partial transpose for @xmath ,
for other @xmath the state is NPT entangled. Now it is easy to verify
that @xmath is not positive for @xmath and @xmath since it has an
eigenvalue @xmath . This immediately shows that @xmath is
non-decomposable and that @xmath is PPT entangled in these regions. For
the region @xmath , the state can be shown to be separable by virtue of
an explicit decomposition in terms of product states. Following Choi’s
example, many other non-decomposable maps have been found and studied in
the literature, see for instance Ref. [ 328 , 281 , 289 , 246 , 282 ,
217 , 187 , 179 , 111 , 200 , 115 , 56 ] .

The notion of decomposability can also be extended to entanglement
witnesses via the Jamiołkowski isomorphism. Namely it is easy to see
that any decomposable map @xmath corresponds to a witness

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath positive semidefinite (and vice verse). We will
refer to such witnesses as decomposable witnesses. There exists [ 186 ,
185 ] a canonical representation of indecomposable entanglement
witnesses, which we will derive now. Central is the idea of a so-called
edge state, which is a PPT entangled state @xmath such that for all
@xmath and all separable @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is not positive or does not have a positive partial transpose. Edge
states can be thought of as lying on the boundary between PPT and NPT
states, and thus in this sense, they are the most entangled PPT states.
From the definition it is clear that a state @xmath is an edge state if
and only if there is no product vector @xmath in the range of @xmath
such that @xmath is in the range of @xmath . If such a product vector
exists, we could subtract it from the state and still obtain a PPT
state. Repeating this process will eventually yield an edge state (see
also Figure 1.2 ):

###### Theorem 1.2.7.

Every PPTES @xmath can be decomposed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a separable state and @xmath an edge state.

The following theorem provides a canonical construction of an
entanglement witness that detects a given edge state. Conversely it
states that any non-decomposable entanglement witness can be written in
a similar form.

###### Theorem 1.2.8.

(i) Let @xmath be an edge state with @xmath and @xmath the projector
onto the kernel of @xmath and @xmath respectively. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is an non-decomposable entanglement witness which detects
@xmath .

(ii) Any non-decomposable witness @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath are positive semidefinite and satisfy @xmath for some edge
state @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i) As the range of @xmath contains no product vector @xmath such that
the range of @xmath contains @xmath , there must exist such a product
vector in their respective kernels, so that @xmath . By its very
definition, @xmath is positive on product states and since @xmath it is
an non-decomposable entanglement witness which detects @xmath .

(ii) Let @xmath with @xmath . We denote with @xmath the smallest @xmath
such that @xmath is decomposable. Since @xmath is decomposable we can
write it as @xmath and thus @xmath . Using the compactness of the set of
PPT states @xmath there will exist a state @xmath such that @xmath . Now
let @xmath , with @xmath an edge state, so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath this would lead to @xmath , contrary to the assumption that
@xmath is decomposable. So @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It follows that
@xmath . The theorem follows by putting @xmath , where the condition on
@xmath follows because @xmath is an entanglement witness. ∎

This theorem can be generalised straightforwardly to arbitrary convex
sets and associated witnesses [ 39 ] . In Ref. [ 186 , 185 ] it was
shown how to optimise a non-decomposable witness @xmath (for instance
constructed from an edge state). Optimising in this context means
iterative subtraction of decomposable witnesses from @xmath , yielding a
stronger witness. We refer to the original references for details.

With an entanglement witness @xmath or alternatively the positive map
@xmath we can associate the following bihermitian positive form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose now that @xmath has real coefficients in some basis, then for
real @xmath , @xmath is a so-called real biquadratic form. Hilbert’s
17th Problem is concerned with the question whether all real positive
semidefinite forms can be written as the sum of squares (SOS) of forms
(see Ref. [ 245 ] for an excellent overview on Hilbert’s 17th problem).
Choi [ 50 , 52 , 53 , 284 ] showed that non-decomposable maps with real
coefficients allow to construct counterexamples for biquadratic forms.

###### Theorem 1.2.9.

(i) Let @xmath be a real biquadratic form which cannot be written as a
SOS of linear forms, then the associated map @xmath is non-decomposable.
(ii) Conversely, if @xmath is a non-decomposable with real coefficients,
then @xmath cannot be expressed as a SOS.

###### Proof.

(i) Note that decomposable maps acting on (real) symmetric matrices act
as completely positive maps, so we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and with @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(ii) By reversing the argument of (i) it follows that if @xmath can be
expressed as a SOS, then @xmath is decomposable. ∎

Earlier in this section we have seen Choi’s example of an
non-decomposable map. The associated real form is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By inspection Choi showed the positivity of this form and showed that it
cannot be expressed as a SOS. This immediately proves the
non-decomposability of the associated map.

For a more abstract formulation of the separability problem, with
various connections to @xmath -algebras the reader is referred to the
series of papers by Majewski et al. [ 196 , 199 , 197 , 198 ] .

#### 1.2.4 PPT entangled states

In this section we provide several ways of constructing PPT entangled
states, with particular emphasis on the UPB construction and the range
criterion. Based on this, we construct two new entangled PPT states with
special ranks. For completeness, references will be listed to all other
PPT entangled states known to us.

In the previous section we have seen Størmer’s example [ 278 , 149 , 75
] of a PPT state, constructed such that it is detected by Choi’s
indecomposable map. In general given an indecomposable map, one can try
to guess from it some state which is PPT entangled [ 138 ] , see for
example the PPT states constructed in Ref. [ 18 , 226 , 36 ] . Recently,
it has been shown how to systematically construct PPT entangled states
from a given indecomposable map [ 112 , 113 , 114 ] . Yet despite this
advance, coming up with an indecomposable map is highly non-trivial and
very much a matter of trial and error.

Currently, the only systematic way of constructing PPT entangled states
is based on unextendible product basis (UPB) [ 23 , 73 ] . An UPB in a
Hilbert space @xmath is a set of pure orthogonal product states which do
not span ³ ³ 3 Therefore, an unextendible product basis is in fact not a
basis. @xmath and such that there is no product vector orthogonal to all
of them. This definition is readily extended to multipartite systems. As
an example, consider the following set of vectors @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now if this set of vectors is extendible, then there has to exist a
partition of this set of vectors @xmath , into two subsets @xmath and
@xmath , such that the local rank of the first subsystem for @xmath is
smaller than 3, and the local rank of the second subsystem for @xmath is
smaller than 3. In this case, one can construct a vector @xmath such
that @xmath is orthogonal to the first subsystem of @xmath and @xmath is
orthogonal to the second subsystem of @xmath . But this is impossible
since either @xmath or @xmath will contain at least three vectors, and
it is easy to see that any three vectors, seen by either party span the
full space of that party. We refer to the original papers and the review
[ 71 ] for a plethora of other examples.

From any UPB one can construct a bound entangled state as in the next
theorem.

###### Theorem 1.2.10.

Let the set of @xmath vectors @xmath be a UPB in @xmath , with @xmath ,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a PPT entangled state.

###### Proof.

The state @xmath has positive partial transposition as the set @xmath is
again a UPB. It is easy to see that @xmath is entangled and in fact an
edge state as, by definition, there is no product state in the space
orthogonal to the UPB. ∎

In Ref. [ 285 ] it was shown how to systematically construct
entanglement witnesses detecting UPB states. The generalisation of this
construction for general edge states is precisely the one we outlined in
the previous section (Theorem 1.2.8 ). Based on these witnesses, PPT
entangled states in the neighbourhood of UPB PPT entangled states can be
constructed [ 228 , 15 ] .

As we have seen, an edge state @xmath contains no product vector @xmath
in its range such that @xmath is in the range of @xmath . This condition
is clearly a sufficient for a state to be PPT entangled. We can make
this criterion slightly stronger as follows [ 146 ] :

###### Theorem 1.2.11 (Range criterion).

If a state @xmath is separable there must exist a set of product vectors
@xmath spanning the range of @xmath such that @xmath span the range of
@xmath .

Thus edge states violate the range criterion in the strongest way. The
range criterion was originally devised by Woronowicz [ 328 ] in the
context of indecomposable maps. This criterion is remarkable simple and
powerful, in particular for proving the PPT property of sparse matrices.
Examples of states violating the range criterion have been published in
Ref. [ 328 , 146 , 53 , 38 , 148 , 97 ] . Various other PPT entangled
states have appeared over the years [ 75 , 152 , 322 , 310 , 165 , 1 ,
79 , 129 , 128 , 11 , 332 , 227 ] . In most cases the states are shown
to be inseparable by showing that they can help performing some
non-classical tasks. In Section 4.4 we will say more about these
so-called activation processes.

We conclude this section with the presentation of two new PPT states [
62 ] . The new types are @xmath and @xmath edge states. Here in @xmath ,
@xmath denotes the rank of the state, while @xmath denotes the rank of
@xmath . The question of their existence popped up in the analysis of a
conjecture on 2-positive maps between @xmath matrices. We come back to
this conjecture in Section 2.3 .

##### A @xmath edge PPTES

Consider the following @xmath state:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and its partial transpose:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is not so hard to verify that both operators are positive
semi-definite and have rank 5. An analytical expression of their
eigenvectors and eigenvalues is however quite complex. To show that
@xmath is an edge state we will show that it violates strongly the range
criterion. For this we will use the ‘divide and conquer technique’ from
[ 146 ] .

From the matrix representation above we see that every vector in the
range of @xmath can be written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we have look at those vectors which can be written as a product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking these two conditions together we can therefore characterise all
product vectors in the range of @xmath .

From the condition @xmath we can distinguish the following sub cases:

1. @xmath , we have @xmath and therefore either @xmath or @xmath .
Without loss of generality we can also put @xmath .

1.1. @xmath , as @xmath we have @xmath . When @xmath , then @xmath and
we obtain the null vector. Thus the only case that remains is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath .

1.2. @xmath , from @xmath follows that @xmath (otherwise @xmath ) thus
this case is already covered in 1.1.

2. @xmath , from @xmath follows that @xmath . From @xmath follows that
either @xmath or @xmath .

2.1 @xmath , since @xmath we have that @xmath and @xmath , and thus
@xmath . Thus we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

2.2 @xmath , and thus @xmath so either @xmath or @xmath .

2.2.1 @xmath , and thus @xmath . Because @xmath we have that @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

2.2.2 @xmath and thus @xmath . Because @xmath we have that @xmath and we
arrive at 2.2.1.

We now do the same analysis for @xmath . It is easy to see that every
vector in its range can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . We need to take the intersection of these vectors with
those vectors which can be written as a product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the condition @xmath we can distinguish the following sub cases:

1. @xmath , and since @xmath we have that @xmath or @xmath

1.1. @xmath and thus @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath gives the null
vector we get @xmath . Now @xmath and thus @xmath , and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

1.2. @xmath , and since @xmath either @xmath or @xmath

1.2.1. @xmath and thus @xmath or since @xmath is trivial we get @xmath
and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

1.2.2. @xmath , and thus @xmath . Since @xmath is trivial we get @xmath
and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

2. @xmath and thus @xmath , we also have @xmath thus either @xmath or
@xmath , but this last case gives us again the trivial vector. From
@xmath we have @xmath . What remains is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with either @xmath or @xmath (but only one of those when @xmath ).

It is now straightforward to check that when @xmath belongs to the range
of @xmath that @xmath does not belong to the range of @xmath . This
concludes the proof that @xmath is a @xmath edge state.

##### A @xmath edge PPTES

Consider the following state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with partial transpose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be checked easily that both matrices are positive definite and
have rank 6. Following a similar strategy as in the previous section we
now proceed to show that @xmath is an edge state. Every vector in the
range of @xmath can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , whilst every vector in the range of @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The ‘divide and conquer’ method does not work so well here
as we have no zeros to start with. Instead we will show directly that if
the product vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

belongs to the range of @xmath , then @xmath does not belong to the
range of @xmath . Comparing equations ( 1.10 ) and ( 1.11 ) with their
product form we get the following set of equations:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We consider the following sub case

1. @xmath , and it follows that all parameters are different from zero.
Without loss of generality we can put @xmath and get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We now use @xmath and @xmath to eliminate @xmath and @xmath , after
which we can divide every equation by @xmath resulting in

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

From the first and the second equation we get @xmath , while from the
second and fourth equation we get @xmath or @xmath and thus @xmath .
From the third equation we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus @xmath which contradicts @xmath .

2. @xmath , in this case it is straightforward to see that @xmath .

3. @xmath and @xmath . From @xmath and @xmath follows that @xmath or
@xmath . In the first case we get @xmath or @xmath by the assumption. In
the second case follows from @xmath that @xmath .

4. @xmath and from @xmath and @xmath follows that @xmath or @xmath

4.1 @xmath , from @xmath follows that either @xmath or @xmath , but
@xmath by assumption.

4.2 @xmath , from @xmath follows that @xmath .

This concludes the proof.

#### 1.2.5 A numerical approach

In this section we give an example of a numerical approach to the
separability problem. Gurvits [ 110 ] reformulated the separability
problem as a weak membership problem (allowing some error in the
decision) and showed that even in this scenario the problem is NP-hard.
Yet, as demonstrated by the partial transpose criterion, this does not
exclude the existence of efficient algorithms for low dimensional
systems. There have been several algorithmic proposals, which can be
categorised in three classes:

  From the outside  

    Here a hierarchy of tests is devised which in every step detects
    entanglement of some states and provide a corresponding witness.
    Typically the first tests will detect highly entangled states, while
    further tests will detect more weakly entangled states. Ideally, the
    hierarchy should be complete, i.e. in the asymptotic regime every
    entangled state should be detected. Examples of such algorithms can
    be found in Ref. [ 32 , 35 , 75 , 76 , 74 ] .

  From the inside  

    In this approach, again a hierarchy of tests is devised, but this
    time able to deliver a certificate for separability. States detected
    in the first tests will be typically close to the maximally mixed
    state, while further tests will be able to detect states closer to
    the boundary of entangled states. The logic behind this is that for
    weakly (classical) correlated states there is more freedom in
    finding a convex decomposition in terms of product vectors. Examples
    of such algorithms can be found in Ref. [ 159 , 325 ] .

  Distance measure  

    The starting point here is to take an entanglement measure @xmath
    which satisfies @xmath for all separable states and @xmath for all
    entangled states. Examples of such measures include the entanglement
    of formation [ 21 ] , and geometric measures such as the best
    separable approximation [ 182 ] (see Section 3.3 for an introduction
    to entanglement measures). The algorithm typically works then by
    calculating @xmath to a certain accuracy. For examples see Ref. [
    182 , 93 ] .

An exhaustive review on algorithms for the separability problem, with
particular emphasis on comparing the different complexities of the
algorithms, can be found in Ref. [ 162 ] .

The most successful algorithms as of today use of optimisation theory,
and in particular semidefinite programming. Semidefinite programs (SDPs)
are convex optimisation problems which can be written as the
minimisation of a linear object function, subject to semidefinite
constraints in the form of linear matrix inequalities [ 32 ] :

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

where @xmath is a finite set of real variables, @xmath a constant vector
and @xmath some fixed Hermitian matrices. Semidefinite programs have two
appealing features. Firstly, efficient algorithms are available for
solving SDPs in polynomial time with arbitrary accuracy. Secondly, with
each (primal) SDP there is associated a dual SDP:

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

Here @xmath means that @xmath is a positive semi-definite (Hermitian)
operator. Now it is not so hard to see that @xmath is always larger than
@xmath , so that solving the dual problem gives a lower bound on the
primal problem. It is often the case that these values coincide, in
which case the SDP’s have the so-called strong duality property. Suppose
now that @xmath , then the primal problem becomes a feasibility problem.
Then a positive value of @xmath shows that the primal problem is not
feasible. In other words the operator @xmath gives a certificate for the
infeasibility. Needless to say that such certificates are of great value
in decision problems such as the separability problem.

The two most important algorithms that use SDP, as of today, are the
algorithms of Eisert et. al. [ 93 ] and Doherty et. al. [ 75 ] . The
first approach is based on calculating the distance of a state to the
set of separable states. In first instance this leads to a global
minimisation problem with polynomial constraints. Using Lasserre’s
method of semi-definite relaxations, this can then be reformulated as a
sequence of SDPs. The hierarchy of tests obtained is complete, as every
entangled state will be found at some stage in the hierarchy. Since a
global optimum will be found at some point also separability can be
detected [ 89 ] .

Doherty’s approach is based on the existence of symmetric extensions for
separable states. It works from the outside and is also complete;
furthermore, when a state is found to be entangled, the dual problem
yields a corresponding entanglement witness. These entanglement
witnesses turn out to have interesting algebraic properties, which is
why we will say a bit more about (without proofs though).

Suppose a state @xmath on @xmath is separable, then we know that it can
be written as @xmath . With @xmath , we can associate the following
state:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath . This extension is naturally symmetric under interchange of
the first and third party. It also has positive partial transposition
(with respect to any subsystem) and by tracing out the third party, we
recover the original state. An extension for an arbitrary state
satisfying these three properties will be called a symmetric extension.
Equally, we can consider a symmetric extension with 2 copies of the
first party. Using de Quantum de Finetti theorem one can prove the
following characterisation of separable states:

###### Theorem 1.2.12.

A state @xmath on @xmath is separable if and only if it has a symmetric
extension to any number of copies of subsystem @xmath .

Apparently this theorem has been around for some time, see Ref. [ 75 ]
for its history. The new result by Doherty et. al. was to show that the
feasibility problem of finding a symmetric extension to a fixed number
of @xmath copies can be cast into a semidefinite program. In this way,
one obtains a hierarchy of tests, in which each test is stronger than
the other. Indeed, when an extension to @xmath copies exist, then
naturally an extension to @xmath copies exists. The first test is the
usual partial transpose criterion, while further tests go beyond that
and are able to detect PPT entangled states. In practice, it turns out
that the algorithm detects all known PPT entangled states in the second
test of the hierarchy. The only major disadvantage is, that in practice,
it is limited to density matrices acting on @xmath with @xmath because
of memory constraints of existing implementations.

If the primal problem fails, the dual problem yields a corresponding
entanglement witness. In Theorem 1.2.9 we have seen that when a positive
map @xmath with real coefficients is decomposable, then the associated
real biquadratic form can be written as a SOS of linear forms. This
result readily generalises to arbitrary positive maps. Now remarkably we
have the following [ 75 ] :

###### Theorem 1.2.13.

Let @xmath be the bihermitian form associated with an entanglement
witness @xmath obtained from the @xmath th test of the hierarchy. Then
@xmath can be written as a SOS.

With this one can prove [ 75 ] the following characterisation of
entanglement witnesses.

###### Corollary 1.2.2.

Let @xmath be an entanglement witness in the interior of the set of
entanglement witnesses (that is @xmath for all separable @xmath ). Then
there is a @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a SOS.

Note that a similar characterisation can be deduced from it for positive
maps. As an example consider the Størmer state @xmath given by ( 1.9 ),
detected by Choi’s map @xmath ( 1.8 ). The second test of the hierarchy
yields just the entanglement witness @xmath associated with @xmath and
provides the SOS form for it:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.3 Permutation criteria

#### 1.3.1 From cross norm over realignment to permutation criteria

In this section we will introduce a class of separability criteria,
known as the permutation criteria. We will introduce them in the way
they have historically been found. Our starting point is a
characterisation of separable states known as the cross norm criterion [
249 ] . The greatest cross norm @xmath is defined on operators in @xmath
as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the trace norm (sum of the singular values). With this
Rudolph [ 249 ] proved the following theorem.

###### Theorem 1.3.1.

Let @xmath be a density operator on @xmath . Then @xmath is separable if
@xmath and entangled if @xmath .

The proof is technical and we omit it here. Note that the difference
@xmath satisfies all the usual basic requirements for an entanglement
measure [ 250 ] . Unfortunately the greatest cross norm is in practice,
with the exception of highly symmetrical states, very hard to calculate.

One can equally well define other cross norms, by using a different norm
in the definition. Let us denote by @xmath the cross norm induced by the
Hilbert-Schmidt norm @xmath . From @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 This is because @xmath
majorizes any unitarily invariant norm (hence the name greatest cross
norm). follows that a state @xmath with @xmath is entangled. It turns
out that @xmath is easily computable, the construction is the following
( [ 251 , 254 ] , see also [ 58 ] ).

In Section 1.2.2 we have seen an isomorphism between vectors @xmath and
operators @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The space @xmath is a Hilbert space, when furnished with the
Hilbert-Schmidt inner product @xmath for @xmath . It follows that the
isomorphism is a Hilbert-space isomorphism, i.e. isometric as @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath . We can decompose @xmath arbitrarily as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . Now we apply the above isomorphism to both
@xmath and @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Applying the isomorphism on @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The operator @xmath is independent of the chosen decomposition of @xmath
and in general @xmath . This is because we can interpret @xmath as an
element of @xmath , then with @xmath acting on @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as opposed to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the maximally entangled state with respect to the
@xmath division (and analogue for @xmath ). The next lemma is a well
known identity from the theory of operator norms (see e.g. [ 258 ] )

###### Lemma 1.3.1.

For any operator @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this lemma, we can prove that @xmath and from that we obtain an
easily computable necessary criterion for separability:

###### Theorem 1.3.2 (Realignment criterion).

For any state @xmath the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds. If @xmath , then @xmath is entangled.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , then @xmath (and similar for @xmath ). The theorem then
follows from the previous lemma together with the definition of @xmath
and inequality @xmath for separable states @xmath . ∎

From the discussion above it follows that @xmath is nothing more then a
rearrangement of matrix entries of @xmath . For this reason, it is often
referred to as the realignment criterion [ 44 , 252 , 218 ] . Some
analytical properties of the realignment criterion have been studied in
Ref. [ 253 ] . It turns out that the realignment criterion is
independent of the partial transposition and hence can detect PPT
entangled states. From our discussion it is easy to see that the
realignment criterion corresponds to the operation @xmath which acts on
basis states as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Due to linearity, this operation is well defined for arbitrary quantum
states. The partial transposition is also based on reordering of matrix
entries. In the same notation, we denote it as the operation @xmath
which acts on the second subsystem as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A state @xmath is entangled if the trace norm @xmath . Note that the
usual partial transpose criterion says that a state is entangled if
@xmath has some negative eigenvalues, but as @xmath is Hermitian this is
equivalent to saying that @xmath . This was first observed in Ref. [ 305
] , where it was shown that the quantity @xmath gives rise to a good
entanglement measure (see also [ 45 ] ).

This striking similarity between the two criteria led to the
consideration of general permutations of multipartite density matrices [
144 ] . Consider an @xmath -party state belonging to a Hilbert space
@xmath , whose subsystems have the same dimension @xmath . A general
state @xmath can be expanded as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where all indices run from @xmath to @xmath . Let @xmath denote the
symmetric group with @xmath elements, that is, the group of the
permutations of the set @xmath . We define for each permutation @xmath a
corresponding map @xmath on operators acting on @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will represent permutations as @xmath or in disjoint cycles. With
this notation the partial transpose criterion corresponds to the
permutation @xmath while the realignment criterion corresponds to the
permutation @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.3 (Permutation criteria for separability [144]).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -party state acting on a Hilbert space @xmath and
@xmath an arbitrary permutation. If

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the trace norm, then @xmath is entangled (that is, not fully
separable).

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a fully separable state on @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath the corresponding pure states. Then @xmath
corresponds to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath if @xmath and @xmath have different parity and @xmath
otherwise. We need to show that @xmath , but because of @xmath it is
sufficient to show that @xmath . But this follows easily from @xmath and
@xmath for normalised vectors @xmath and @xmath . ∎

As a corollary we will show here how to construct an entanglement
witness for a @xmath -party state @xmath given that @xmath for some
permutation @xmath . For this we generalise the bipartite construction
of Chen and Wu in Ref. [ 55 ] , see also Ref. [ 145 , 109 , 332 ] . Here
and elsewhere permutations are evaluated from left to right .

###### Theorem 1.3.4.

Let @xmath for some permutation @xmath , and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the global transposition and @xmath the inverse permutation
of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an entanglement witness with @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath are the
unitary matrices corresponding to the singular value decomposition of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

It is straightforward to check that @xmath from the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for arbitrary operators @xmath and @xmath . This identity can be
verified by explicitly writing the trace as a sum over matrix indices.

Now all that is left is to show that @xmath is positive on separable
states. We will use of the following variational characterisation of the
trace norm (see for instance [ 127 ] , p195):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary @xmath . Let @xmath be an arbitrarily separable state,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the singular value decomposition of @xmath . From ( 1.13 )
follows that @xmath is maximal when @xmath and @xmath and thus

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

For an @xmath -party state, there are @xmath permutation criteria, but
not all of them are inequivalent. For instance for bipartite systems it
is easy to see that partial transposition with respect to the first
system is equivalent to the partial transposition with respect to the
second. For bipartite systems all permutation criteria turn out to be
equivalent to either the partial transposition or the realignment
criterion [ 144 ] . For more than two parties the classification of
inequivalent permutation criteria is an open problem. First steps toward
such a classification have been made in Ref. [ 96 , 144 , 324 ] . For
three parties it was implied that there are @xmath inequivalent criteria
[ 96 , 324 ] , and for four parties at most @xmath inequivalent criteria
[ 324 ] .

In the next section we define exactly what we mean by independent
criteria and review the work of Wocjan and Horodecki [ 324 ] on
so-called combinatorially independent permutation criteria and introduce
their graphical notation. Then we point out that both papers [ 96 , 324
] overlooked an obvious fact. We show that for three parties there are
just @xmath independent criteria and @xmath for four parties. We prove
that the class of the combinatorially independent permutation criteria
contains some equivalent criteria which always occur in pairs. We
completely classify these criteria and give a new upper bound of the
number of independent criteria (this is Theorem 1.3.7 ). It will become
clear that most likely there are no more equivalences in the remaining
criteria, although we were unable to provide a complete proof of this. A
proof is presented for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath parties and numerical
evidence for up to @xmath parties is given. These results were first
published in Ref. [ 63 ] .

#### 1.3.2 Definitions, graphical notation and first results

Let @xmath and @xmath be two permutations in @xmath . We call the
corresponding entanglement criteria @xmath and @xmath dependent if and
only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all quantum states. Else, the permutation criteria are called
independent. Observe that if two permutation criteria @xmath and @xmath
are independent by the above definition, it could still be that they
detect exactly the same entangled states. This would occur if we had

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all quantum states @xmath . However, as we will see in the next
section, the condition in ( 1.14 ) is already good enough to reduce
significantly the number of permutation separability criteria.
Furthermore, we prove later that the criteria which are independent are
also truly independent (in the sense that no criterion is strictly
stronger than any other) for up to four subsystems.

Our necessary condition extends the necessary condition of combinatorial
independence introduced in Ref. [ 324 ] . The definition of
combinatorial independence is similar to the definition of independence.
The decisive difference is that two permutations are combinatorially
dependent if and only if equality in ( 1.14 ) is achieved for all
operators and not only quantum states. In this case, it is easy to see
that the maps @xmath and @xmath are related by a norm-preserving map
@xmath . That is @xmath with @xmath for all operators @xmath . Moreover,
it can be shown that if @xmath and @xmath are related via a
norm-preserving map @xmath , then @xmath must come from some permutation
@xmath . We call such a permutation a norm-preserving permutation.

An example of such a norm-preserving permutation is the global quantum
transpose (GQT), which transposes the complete system. It can be written
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Another example of a norm preserving map @xmath is the unitary
transformation @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are unitary operators.
Reordering the different parties in the density matrix representation is
an example of such a unitary transformation. Consider for instance the
transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This mapping can be implemented by means of multiplication on the left
and on the right by the swap operator [ 324 ] .

To illustrate the necessary condition of combinatorial independence let
us consider again a bipartite system. The operation @xmath induced by
the permutation @xmath gives rise to the same criterion as @xmath
induced by the permutation @xmath . Indeed, the permutation @xmath
transforms @xmath into @xmath , which up to reordering of the parties is
equivalent to @xmath . This is just the transformation defined by @xmath
.

###### Theorem 1.3.5 (Combinatorially independent criteria [324]).

The group @xmath of norm preserving permutations can be generated as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath as before denotes the GQT. The combinatorially
independent permutation criteria correspond to the right cosets @xmath
of @xmath in @xmath . The number of independent permutation criteria is
therefore not larger than @xmath In this number, the class of trivial
norm preserving criteria is also counted.

In the same paper, the authors also devised a graphical notion of the
criteria, which leads to a way of selecting a simple representative for
the right cosets. They decompose any permutation as a combination of 4
elementary permutations: the partial transpose, two types of realignment
or reshuffling, and the identity. The corresponding graphical notations
are loops from a subsystem to itself, arrows from one subsystem to
another and free subsystems (no loops or arrows), as graphically
depicted in Figure 1.3 . We call @xmath the head and @xmath the tail if
there is an arrow from @xmath to @xmath . If there is a loop in @xmath ,
then @xmath is both head and tail of the loop. We call the support of an
arrow or a loop the set containing its head and tail. A configuration of
arrows and loops is called disjoint, if the supports of all pairs and
loops are disjoint.

###### Theorem 1.3.6 (Canonical representation of combinatorially
independent criteria [324]).

The right cosets @xmath can always be represented by a disjoint
configuration of arrows, that is, they can be decomposed as a
combination of the 4 elementary permutations. It is always possible to
represent a random permutation @xmath by a disjoint configuration by
applying the following consecutive rules

  Rule 1: Pruning  

     Writing @xmath as a product of disjoint cycles, we can prune all
    cycles of @xmath such that there are no adjacent even or odd
    numbers.

  Rule 2: Chopping  

     We can chop up @xmath into disjoint transpositions.

  Rule 3: Exchanging heads  

     By exchanging heads we then obtain a disjoint configuration of
    arrows.

  Rule 4: GQT  

     By reversing the direction of all arrows and replacing loops by
    free subsystems and vice versa we obtain an equivalent disjoint
    permutation.

All criteria that can be represented by a disjoint configuration of
arrows are combinatorially independent up to a application of Rule 4,
and possible application of Rule 3.

This theorem differs slightly from the corresponding one in the original
paper [ 324 ] . They claimed that any two permutations represented by
disjoint configurations are independent, up to application of Rule 4. As
the following example illustrates, this is not always the case: by
exchanging heads of @xmath we obtain @xmath , which can be represented
by a different disjoint configuration. And both configurations are not
related via the GQT.

#### 1.3.3 Main theorem

It was shown in Ref. [ 324 ] that two permutations @xmath and @xmath are
combinatorially dependent if there is a norm preserving permutation such
@xmath that @xmath for all operators @xmath . One could assume that
therefore Theorem 1.3.5 cannot be sharpened, that is, that all
combinatorially independent criteria are independent. This is true when
one considers the permutation acting on arbitrary operators. In quantum
mechanics however, we deal with positive operators, which are Hermitian.
The following theorem exploits this fact and counts the new upper bound
to the number of independent criteria.

###### Theorem 1.3.7.

(i) The permutation criteria corresponding to the permutations @xmath
and @xmath are dependent.

(ii). Let @xmath be the subgroup of @xmath generated by the GQT @xmath .
Define the action of @xmath on the right cosets @xmath by multiplication
from the left of the cosets, that is, @xmath and @xmath . The new upper
bound on the number of independent criteria is the number of orbits
under this action. It is given by ⁵ ⁵ 5 The integer sequence generated
by the number of independent criteria equals the integer sequence
A045723 from Ref. [ 272 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath if @xmath is even and @xmath otherwise. This number
includes the trivial criterion given by the identity permutation.

###### Proof.

To prove (i), let us apply the permutation @xmath on an arbitrary
quantum state @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here we have used that @xmath because @xmath is Hermitian and @xmath
because @xmath only permutes the entries of the matrix.

Observe that multiplying a coset @xmath by @xmath from the left is the
same as conjugating it by @xmath because @xmath is contained in @xmath ,
that is, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is readily verified that conjugation of a permutation by @xmath
corresponds to exchanging heads (always odd numbers) and tails (always
even numbers). Therefore, the direction of all (true) arrows is reversed
and loops and free subsystems are not affected. An example is shown in
Figure 1.4 . Following the four rules presented in Ref. [ 324 ] , we
call this Rule 5. The new rule either glues two criteria together or
does not change them. More precisely, the orbits under the action of
@xmath have size @xmath or @xmath . The orbit of size two is generated
by the involution @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(ii). There are @xmath combinatorially independent criteria. With the
new rule, there are at most

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

independent criteria left. Here @xmath denotes the number of criteria
not affected by conjugating according to the new rule. Now note that the
only criteria (represented as disjoint arrow configurations) not
affected by conjugation with @xmath are

1.  criteria with no arrows and

2.  criteria containing only arrows and having no free subsystems.

If @xmath is odd, then situation (2) cannot occur. The number of these
criteria is readily counted:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used an identity of binomial coefficients. So when the
number of subsystems is odd, the number of criteria becomes (including
the identity)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case @xmath is even we need to take care of situation (2). Now
this number equals picking @xmath heads from @xmath choices, because
exchanging tails does not matter. But we have to divide by two since
exchanging all heads and tails does not matter either, so that the
number of criteria satisfying (2) is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We conclude that when @xmath is even, the number of criteria is given by
(including the identity)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To complete the proof, we have to show that the criteria in the orbits
of size @xmath are combinatorially independent. Let @xmath be a
permutation represented by a disjoint arrow configuration. Assume that
there is an arrow from subsystem @xmath to @xmath in the disjoint
configuration of @xmath . Then there is an arrow from @xmath to @xmath
in the disjoint configuration describing @xmath . Loops and free
subsystems are not affected. Using these observation we see that the
configuration describing @xmath has a closed path from @xmath to @xmath
and no loops. The closed path between @xmath and @xmath can be
transformed into a loop on @xmath and a loop on @xmath with the help of
Rule 3 (Exchanging heads) in Ref. [ 324 ] . Now if we apply these
arguments to all arrows of @xmath we see that the permutation @xmath is
not norm-preserving. Consequently, the permutations @xmath and @xmath
are combinatorially independent. This concludes the proof. ∎

Figure 1.4 shows an example of how the new rule glues two
combinatorially independent criteria together. In general, we have that
two permutations corresponding to disjoint arrow configurations are
related by the new rule if and only if they have the same (true) arrow
structure (up to exchanging heads) and a complementary loop/free
subsystem structure. The latter means that if the first criterion has a
loop on subsystem @xmath then the subsystem @xmath is free in the second
and vice versa.

#### 1.3.4 Illustrations

The different criteria resulting from our characterisation for two,
three and four parties are shown graphically in Figure 1.5 . In this
figure, we have adopted the simplified graphical notation of [ 324 ]
without arrows. Loops (QT) have been denoted by a little circle, @xmath
permutations (R) as a solid line and @xmath permutations (R’) as a
dotted line. In order to construct this figure one first draws all
disjoint configurations, and then eliminates those related by
application of Rules 3, 4 and 5.

Below we show that all listed criteria are truly independent, in the
sense that no criterion detects strictly more states than any other
criterion. A property we are going to use frequently is that the
permutation criteria are insensitive to adding an uncorrelated ancilla.
Let @xmath be an @xmath -party state and define the @xmath -party state
@xmath . Suppose @xmath and define @xmath , (the same permutation, but
now acting on an enlarged set of @xmath elements). Then from @xmath
follows that @xmath .

##### Two parties

For a quantum system consisting of two parties, there are only two non
trivial inequivalent permutation criteria: the partial transpose in one
of the subsystems and reshuffling between the two subsystems. For the
low dimensional systems @xmath and @xmath the positivity of the partial
transpose is a necessary and sufficient condition for separability [ 132
] , while this is not the case for the realignment criterion [ 253 , 44
] . For higher dimensional systems these criteria are truly independent,
as there exist bound entangled states that are detected by the
realignment criterion. As a curiosity, we have tested the realignment
criterion on all known bound entangled states @xmath in the literature.
The maximum value we have found for @xmath is @xmath and is achieved for
a particular chess-board state [ 38 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Three parties

For three parties we have proven that at most @xmath criteria are
independent, previous work [ 324 , 96 ] indicated that there were @xmath
. The @xmath criteria are the partial transposes (row QT) in the @xmath
subsystems and the @xmath reshufflings (row R) between any of the two
subsystems. On random states, it can easily be checked that the 6
criteria are indeed independent according to our definition; we now show
that no criterion is strictly stronger than any other.

To show that the criteria from row QT are truly independent from one
another, it is sufficient to note that there exist tripartite NPT states
which are separable with regard to two splits, but not to the third one.
An example of these kind of states for qubits can be found in Ref. [ 82
] . Such states will obviously be detected by only one criterion from
the row QT. To show the independence between the criteria in the row R,
we use the property (see also [ 253 ] ) that the trace norm of the
realigned density matrix remains invariant when an uncorrelated ancilla
is added. Now taking a bipartite entangled state which violates the
realignment criterion, and adding an uncorrelated ancilla, we find that
it is only detected by only one criterion from row R (since it is
separable in the other splits).

All what is left is to show that there are no dependences between the
rows R and QT. So let us take two arbitrary criteria, one from row R and
one from row QT. Here we can distinguish two cases, the first is where
the realignment works on different subsystems than the partial
transposition. As an example let us take realignment R @xmath between
subsystem 1 and 2, and partial transposition QT @xmath of subsystem 3.
Let @xmath be a bipartite entangled state detected by both the
realignment and the partial transpose criterion. Then the state @xmath ,
with @xmath an arbitrary state, will be detected by R @xmath , but not
by QT @xmath . Conversely the state @xmath will be detected by QT @xmath
but not by R @xmath . The second case, is where the realignment works on
a same subsystem as the partial transposition, such as R @xmath and QT
@xmath . To show their independence it is sufficient to consider
bipartite states that are detected by either R or QT (but not both), and
adding an uncorrelated ancilla.

Note that the realignment criterion, in contrast to the partial
transpose criterion can detect tripartite entangled states, that are
separable under any bipartite cut. This has been demonstrated
experimentally in Ref. [ 144 ] with the tripartite bound entangled
states from Ref. [ 23 ] .

##### Four parties

For four parties, there are at 22 non trivial independent permutation
criteria. As for three parties, it easy to show the independence of the
criteria within a fixed row, by starting from an entangled two or three
party state and adding uncorrelated ancillas. This is probably hardest
to see for the row R+QT, so we illustrate this with an example. Let us
take the two criteria R @xmath QT @xmath and QT @xmath R @xmath and let
@xmath be a bipartite entangled state which is detected by the
realignment criterion. The state @xmath (with @xmath arbitrary states)
is detected by QT @xmath R @xmath , but not by R @xmath QT @xmath , as
this criterion is equivalent to the criterion R’ @xmath QT @xmath .

Let us now focus on the criteria which contain only partial
transpositions. The rows QT and 2QT are easily shown to be independent
by adding uncorrelated ancillas. As an example consider the criteria QT
@xmath and QT @xmath . Let @xmath be an NPT state, and add an
uncorrelated ancilla @xmath ; clearly this state will be detected by QT
@xmath only. Conversely, constructing a state as the tensor product of
an NPT entangled state @xmath and a separable state @xmath will give a
state only detected by QT @xmath . The independence between the criteria
with only loops and the criteria with at least one realignment follows
easily from their independence in the bipartite case. As before this is
done simply by adding suitable uncorrelated ancillas.

To show true independence within the set of realignment criteria (rows
R, R+QT, 2R and R+R’), let us first consider the rows R and R+QT. Again,
we consider an example, whereas the other cases can be shown similarly.
Consider the criteria R @xmath and QT @xmath R @xmath . Let @xmath be a
bipartite entangled state which is detected by the realignment criterion
and @xmath a separable state. Then the state @xmath will be detected
only by R @xmath , while @xmath only by QT @xmath R @xmath . As for the
criteria 2R and R+R’, consider the non-trivial case R @xmath R @xmath
and R @xmath R’ @xmath . Their independence can be shown by applying the
criteria to the 4-qubit states @xmath and @xmath (the first is detected
by R @xmath R @xmath only, while the second by R @xmath R’ @xmath only).
All that is left, is to show that the criteria from row R and R+QT are
independent of the criteria from rows 2R and R+R’. Without loss of
generality we can take one representative from the rows 2R and R+R’, say
R @xmath R @xmath (the other criteria correspond to appropriately
swapping the subsystems). It is easy to find states that are detected by
the criteria in rows R or R+QT but not by R @xmath R @xmath . Consider
for example the criterion R @xmath QT @xmath . One can verify that it
will detect the entangled state @xmath ; while this state is not
detected by criterion R @xmath R @xmath . Finally an example to show
that the criterion R @xmath R @xmath can detect states not detected by
any criterion in the rows R or R+QT is given by @xmath .

##### Final remarks

In Ref. [ 144 ] a powerful class of separability criteria was devised
based on permutations. The class however contained many redundancies,
and to give a complete characterization of the independent criteria is
an open problem. In Ref. [ 324 ] a graphical representation for
permutations together with rules for simplifying them were introduced
based on a sufficient condition for two permutations to yield dependent
criteria. This equivalence meant that two combinatorially dependent
criteria yield the same value of the trace norm on all operators.
Combinatorially, density operators have a prominent Hermitian symmetry,
that is a global quantum transposition together with a complex
conjugate. We have exploited this symmetry and we have shown how this
led to the dependence of particular combinatorially independent
criteria. It is unlikely that there are more dependences in the criteria
from Theorem 1.3.7 .

Density operators differ from arbitrary operators also because they have
positive eigenvalues. But since permutations only reorder matrix
entries, it is unlikely that this positiveness would lead to more
criteria to be dependent. We have verified the independence of the
criteria numerically on a random state (using the algorithm outlined in
Ref. [ 342 ] ) for 2 up to 8 parties. In Appendix A.1 we have reproduced
the matlab program which implements a random permutation. In the same
way as we illustrated for three and four parties, it is easy to see that
the criteria with only loops (only partial transpositions) are
independent. These criteria are independent from the ones having at
least one realignment since those can detect bound entangled states. To
prove the independence within the class of criteria with at least one
realignment one could try to generalize the arguments from the previous
section.

## Chapter 2 Schmidt number for mixed states

In this chapter we introduce the Schmidt number for mixed states [ 286 ]
, as a generalisation of the Schmidt rank for pure states. It can be
thought of as a refinement of the entangled versus separable division,
where the set of mixed states is decomposed into a whole series of
nested convex sets. In the first section, we study briefly the use of
Schmidt witnesses to characterise these sets [ 257 ] . In the succeeding
sections we derive the corresponding characterisation in terms of
positive maps [ 286 , 95 ] and discuss a conjecture on the
decomposability of these maps in @xmath .

Robustness measures quantify the extent to which entangled states remain
entangled under mixing. In the final part of this chapter, we generalise
the notion of robustness of entanglement [ 304 ] and introduce the
Schmidt robustness and random Schmidt robustness [ 61 ] . The latter
notion is closely related to the construction of Schmidt balls around
the identity. In particular we derive upper and lower bounds to the
Schmidt robustness for pure states. We present two conjectures, the
first one is related to the radius of inner balls around the identity in
the convex set of Schmidt number @xmath -states. We also conjecture a
class of optimal Schmidt witnesses for pure states.

### 2.1 Introduction and Schmidt witnesses

In Ref. [ 286 ] the notion of Schmidt rank @xmath of pure bipartite
states @xmath was extended to the Schmidt number @xmath of mixed states
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath acting on @xmath is said to have Schmidt number @xmath if
there exists a decomposition of @xmath with all vectors @xmath having
Schmidt rank at most @xmath , and there exists no such decomposition
with all vectors having a Schmidt rank @xmath or lower. This definition
coincides with the Schmidt rank when @xmath is a pure state. It is clear
that separable states have Schmidt number one, whereas entangled states
have a Schmidt number larger than one. Recall that we denoted the set of
separable states as @xmath , and the complete set of states as @xmath .
We will denote the set of density operators that have Schmidt number
@xmath or less by @xmath . Sets of increasing Schmidt number are
embedded into each other as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The subsets @xmath are all closed and convex by construction. The
Schmidt rank of a pure state cannot increase under local operations and
classical communication [ 190 ] , and this holds true for the Schmidt
number as well. Furthermore, the Schmidt number of a state is trivially
invariant under local unitaries. This makes the Schmidt number @xmath of
a state @xmath , or equivalently the logarithmic Schmidt number @xmath a
legitimate measure of entanglement. Most surprisingly, Terhal and
Horodecki [ 286 ] showed that @xmath is not an additive quantity, that
is there exists states @xmath with Schmidt number @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that in general all we can say is that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For multipartite systems, there is no straightforward generalisation of
the Schmidt decomposition. However there have been a number of
proposals, both for pure and mixed states (see e.g. [ 40 , 90 ] ):

In analogy to entanglement witnesses the set of states in @xmath can be
characterised with the aid of the so-called Schmidt witnesses [ 257 , 39
] . We call a Hermitian operator @xmath a Schmidt witness of class
@xmath (for short @xmath -SW) if and only if

1.  @xmath for all @xmath ,

2.  There exists a @xmath such that @xmath ,

The existence of a @xmath -SW for a Schmidt number @xmath state follows
directly from Theorem 1.2.2 .

###### Corollary 2.1.1.

A state @xmath has Schmidt number @xmath if and only if @xmath for all
Schmidt witnesses @xmath of class @xmath .

In a completely similar way as the discussion in Section 1.2.3 on PPT
entangled states and their witnesses, every Schmidt number @xmath state
can be decomposed as the convex sum of a Schmidt number @xmath state and
a Schmidt number @xmath edge state (see Theorem 1.2.7 ). Furthermore for
every Schmidt number @xmath edge state there is a canonical witness that
detects the state and conversely, every @xmath -SW can be written in a
canonical form with the aid of an Schmidt number @xmath edge state (see
Theorem 1.2.8 ). Since the theorems and proofs are almost identical we
will not reproduce them here.

Consider the following example [ 286 ] of a one-parameter set of states
exhibiting all possible Schmidt numbers and a corresponding set of
@xmath -SWs.

###### Example 2.1.1.

Let @xmath be a maximally entangled state acting on a Hilbert space
@xmath and the unnormalized isotropic states [ 241 , 131 ] defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The isotropic state @xmath has Schmidt number @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

are @xmath -SW and detect in an optimal way the Schmidt number of the
states @xmath .

Let us for a moment assume that @xmath is indeed a @xmath -SW . Then it
is not so hard to verify that when @xmath , @xmath has Schmidt number
@xmath . The example then follows from a continuity argument, if we can
show that for @xmath the state has Schmidt number @xmath . This can be
done by virtue of an explicit decomposition in terms of pure states [
286 ] . Such a decomposition can be deduced from our results in Section
2.4 . The fact that @xmath is a @xmath -SW follows readily from the next
lemma [ 131 , 286 ] .

###### Lemma 2.1.1.

Define the fully entangled fraction of a state @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the maximum is taken over all maximally entangled states.

(a) For a pure state @xmath the fully entangled fraction is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the Schmidt coefficients of @xmath .

(b) For an arbitrary state with Schmidt number @xmath or less we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

(a) See Ref. [ 131 ] .

(b) Suppose we have a pure state @xmath with Schmidt rank @xmath , so
the problem is to maximise

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

subject to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We solve this using the method of Lagrange multipliers and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An extremum can be found by solving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first relation leads to @xmath , and thus @xmath , squaring this
equation and carrying out summation over @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the state is not pure, this inequality remains true, since a mixed
state of Schmidt number @xmath can be written as a convex combination of
pure states of Schmidt rank @xmath . ∎

In Ref. [ 160 ] a connection was made between Schmidt witnesses and
entanglement witnesses. The central idea in their construction can be
deduced from the following more general lemma [ 60 ] , of which special
cases have appeared in the literature over the years [ 177 , 83 , 310 ]
(see also the recent [ 227 ] ).

###### Lemma 2.1.2.

Let @xmath be a positive operator with Schmidt number @xmath acting on
@xmath and let @xmath be an operator acting on @xmath positive on states
with Schmidt number @xmath . Then the operator @xmath acting on @xmath
is positive on states with Schmidt number @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is clear that it is sufficient to prove the lemma for pure states
@xmath . So let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and take an arbitrary Schmidt rank @xmath state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we need to prove that @xmath . This trace operation can be composed
of tracing out the first pair, and then the second, as @xmath . Then
making use of the identity @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath is the projector onto the pure Schmidt rank @xmath state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which the lemma follows. ∎

Let @xmath be a given @xmath -SW and @xmath a maximally @xmath -level
entangled state, then from the above lemma follows that the operator
@xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an entanglement witness. Thus by enlarging the Hilbert space, any SW
can be mapped onto an entanglement witness; a trick which will come back
in Chapter 4 .

### 2.2 Main theorem

In this section we prove the main result on @xmath -positive maps: the
operators corresponding to @xmath -positive maps via the Jamiołkowski
isomorphism (see Section 1.2.2 ) are positive on Schmidt number @xmath
states and vice verse. This is a generalisation of Theorem 1.2.4 . Then
we derive a characterisation of @xmath in terms of positive maps,
similar to Theorem 1.2.5 . We start this section by giving some
alternative characterisations of positive maps.

Recall that a map @xmath is a @xmath -positive map if and only if it the
induced map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is positive for @xmath . The next lemma characterises @xmath -positive
maps purely on their action on pure states with Schmidt rank at most
@xmath (see for instance Ref. [ 95 ] ).

###### Lemma 2.2.1.

A Hermitian map @xmath is @xmath -positive if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all pure states @xmath with Schmidt rank at most @xmath .

###### Proof.

Trivial. ∎

An improvement is made by the following lemma, which states that it is
sufficient to test maximally entangled vectors of rank @xmath . Ref. [
72 ] contains a proof for @xmath . We present here an alternative, much
shorter proof for general @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.2.2.

A Hermitian map @xmath is @xmath -positive if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all maximally entangled states @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary state in Schmidt decomposition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In view of the previous lemma we need to show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But this follows immediately from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the diagonal matrix such that @xmath . ∎

Now we are in the position to prove the following theorem by Uhlmann.
The proof is from Ref. [ 286 ] .

###### Theorem 2.2.1.

A Hermitian map @xmath is @xmath -positive if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all orthogonal sets of vectors @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

From the preceding lemma we have that a Hermitian map is @xmath
-positive if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath with Schmidt rank @xmath and @xmath maximally
entangled. Using the Schmidt decomposition we set @xmath and @xmath
(note that this is always possible, since @xmath is maximally entangled)
and obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which the theorem follows. ∎

With this we can prove the main theorem, first published in Ref. [ 286 ]
.

###### Theorem 2.2.2.

A linear map @xmath is @xmath -positive if and only if the corresponding
operator @xmath acting on @xmath is positive on states @xmath acting on
@xmath with Schmidt number @xmath or less (belonging to @xmath ).

###### Proof.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have to show that @xmath -positivity is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath . It is sufficient to take @xmath as a pure state of
Schmidt rank @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this ( 2.3 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to the linearity of @xmath we have that @xmath , or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , where @xmath maps the vectors @xmath to @xmath where
complex conjugation is performed with respect to the @xmath basis.
Therefore ( 2.4 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it follows that @xmath is @xmath -positive if and only if @xmath for
all @xmath . Now the map @xmath corresponds to a unitary rotation which
maps the basis @xmath to the basis @xmath . Therefore @xmath is @xmath
-positive if and only if @xmath is. ∎

Thus in the language of Schmidt witnesses: A map is @xmath -positive if
and only the corresponding operator is a @xmath Schmidt witness. As an
example consider the @xmath -SW ( 2.2 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the corresponding map is given by @xmath . The positivity properties of
this map have been derived independently by Tomiyama [ 289 ] (see also
Ref. [ 281 ] ), but from our correspondence they follow directly. Note
that for @xmath we obtain just the reduction criterion.

###### Theorem 2.2.3.

Let @xmath be a linear map defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

be a linear map. Then @xmath is @xmath -positive for

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

but not @xmath -positive.

Next we give a characterisation of @xmath in terms of positive maps,
similar to Theorem 1.2.5 . For the proof one needs the following lemma.

###### Lemma 2.2.3.

A linear map @xmath is @xmath -positive if and only if @xmath is @xmath
-positive.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is @xmath -positive, then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary and both have Schmidt rank @xmath
. Applying the definition of an adjoint map yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for arbitrary @xmath and @xmath of Schmidt rank @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 2.2.1.

A density operator @xmath acting on @xmath belongs to @xmath if and only
if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath -positive maps @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from Theorem 2.2.2 and Corollary 2.1.1 in a completely
analogous way as we derived Theorem 1.2.5 . ∎

### 2.3 A conjecture

The detection of PPT entangled states is a difficult problem and this
suggests that PPT entangled states have generically a low degree of
entanglement. In particular we expect PPT entangled states to have a
relative low Schmidt number. In Ref. [ 257 , 84 ] evidence was given for
the following conjecture.

###### Conjecture 2.3.1.

All entangled PPT states on @xmath have Schmidt number two.

It is easy to see that this conjecture is equivalent to the statement
that all @xmath -positive maps on @xmath are decomposable. A first piece
of evidence is that the conjecture holds for PPT entangled states of
rank 4 [ 257 ] .

###### Lemma 2.3.1.

All entangled PPT states on @xmath of rank four have Schmidt number two.

###### Proof.

Obviously it is sufficient to show this for edge states. So let @xmath
be a rank four edge state. We will show explicitly how to write @xmath
as a convex sum of Schmidt rank two vectors, by iterative subtracting of
such vectors (in this context, see also Ref. [ 182 ] ).

Since in @xmath there exists a UPB of 5 product states there must exist
a product vector @xmath in the kernel of @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath we have that @xmath belongs to the kernel of @xmath .

Constructing an orthogonal basis @xmath we have that @xmath so that for
instance for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since this vector has at most Schmidt rank two and belongs to the range
of @xmath , we can subtract it and obtain a new state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The state @xmath has rank three and it is easy to verify that @xmath but

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This vector has again at most a Schmidt rank two vector, and we can
again subtract it to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The state @xmath has rank two and @xmath . From this follows that we can
write @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath effectively acts on @xmath it has Schmidt number two and
therefore @xmath has also Schmidt number two. ∎

In order to check the conjecture for arbitrary rank, first note that
again it is sufficient to check it for edge states. Let @xmath denote
the set of all entanglement witnesses detecting these edge states. Then
the conjecture is equivalent to the statement that for all @xmath on
@xmath there exists a Schmidt rank two vector @xmath such that @xmath .
Now in @xmath the sum of the ranks of @xmath and @xmath are not larger
than 13 for edge states [ 176 , 151 ] . For states with such a relative
low rank Sanpera et al. [ 257 ] gave an argument that such a @xmath
always exists (for a generalisation to higher dimensions, see Ref. [ 152
] ). Their argument is based on counting the degrees of freedom versus
the number of constraints in constructing such a @xmath . Their argument
is especially weak for ranks @xmath and @xmath since here only a finite
number of solutions can be found, for which it is by no means guaranteed
they will satisfy the constraints. When the conjecture was first
published only PPT edge states of rank @xmath and @xmath were known. In
view of the conjecture, there was special interest in constructing PPT
edge states with ranks @xmath and @xmath . In a recent paper Ha and Kye
[ 113 ] managed to find edge PPTES for all ranks except @xmath and
@xmath . It is for this reason we have specially constructed such states
in Section 1.2.4 .

For these states, we can construct witnesses in a number of different
ways. First note that both states violate the realignment criterion, and
thus using Theorem 1.3.4 we obtain @xmath . Secondly, there is the
canonical construction for edge states of Theorem 1.2.8 , which gives us
@xmath . Thirdly, one can use the algorithm [ 75 ] from Section 1.2.5
yielding @xmath . Numerically we calculated all three witnesses @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . After normalisation we found that all
witnesses are different and yield a different value on the states. In
total this gives us six different non-decomposable witnesses. We have
checked that these witnesses are negative on some Schmidt rank two
state. This provides additional evidence in favour of the conjecture. In
fact, we also verified this for the witnesses

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for arbitrarily small @xmath . These witnesses @xmath barely detect our
states and are therefore the best candidates to check the conjecture.
Note, however, that this is only evidence that the states have Schmidt
number two. A full proof would consist of an explicit decomposition in
Schmidt rank two states. However, finding such a decomposition is in
general a very hard problem and we did not attempt this.

### 2.4 Schmidt robustness

In this section we generalise the notion of robustness of entanglement
(see also Section 3.3 ) to the robustness of Schmidt number, which we
analyse for pure states. We start by recalling the definition of
robustness of entanglement [ 304 , 274 , 117 ] .

The @xmath - robustness of a state @xmath , @xmath is the minimal value
of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is separable, for some state @xmath . Thus robustness measures measure
how much mixing is required before a state becomes separable. With this
basic definition we have

  The robustness @xmath  

    Here @xmath , the set of separable states.

  The random robustness @xmath  

    Here @xmath , the maximally mixed state) ¹ ¹ 1 For simplicity we
    have chosen not to normalise @xmath in the definition, in contrast
    to the original definition of random robustness in Ref. [ 304 ] . .

  The generalised robustness @xmath  

    Here @xmath , the set of all states.

From the definitions it is clear that @xmath . Both the robustness and
the generalised robustness are entanglement monotones (see Section 3.3
). It is easy to see from the definition that the random robustness is
proportional to the so-called witnessed entanglement [ 35 ] , defined as
@xmath where @xmath is the set of all normalised entanglement witnesses.
The following theorem gives exact values for the robustness and the
random robustness for pure states.

###### Theorem 2.4.1 ([304, 274, 117]).

Let @xmath be a pure bipartite state with ordered Schmidt coefficients
@xmath . The robustness of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and equals its generalised robustness.

A separable state that washes out the entanglement in @xmath most
quickly is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The random robustness of @xmath is given by @xmath .

An alternative proof of this theorem can be obtained as a corollary of
our results (see Section 2.4.1 ). In what follows, we assume that all
states act on a Hilbert space @xmath . Throughout we also use local
operations and classical communication (LOCC, see Chapter 3 ), as they
do not increase the Schmidt number.

#### 2.4.1 Generalised Schmidt robustness

In this section we will extend the notion of generalised robustness to
generalised Schmidt robustness. Analogously to the generalised
robustness, the generalised Schmidt- @xmath robustness of a state @xmath
, @xmath is defined as the minimal value of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number smaller or equal than @xmath , for some @xmath .

Let us now analyse the generalised Schmidt robustness for pure states.
In Theorem 2.4.1 we have seen that for a pure state @xmath the state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

erases most quickly the entanglement present in @xmath . It is plausible
that this same state will also erase Schmidt number in an optimal way.
We were able to prove this for the maximally entangled state. For the
maximally entangled state @xmath , @xmath given by 2.7 reduces to @xmath
, with @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.4.2 (Generalised Schmidt robustness of the maximally
entangled state).

The state defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

has Schmidt number @xmath for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The generalised Schmidt- @xmath robustness of the maximally entangled
state @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the Schmidt number of @xmath and let @xmath . We first
show that @xmath .

(i) We will give an explicit decomposition of the state @xmath in terms
of Schmidt rank @xmath states. Equivalently, we show how one can
construct this state locally with the aid of Schmidt rank @xmath states.
In what follows we will often omit normalisation. Let us take a
maximally entangled @xmath -level state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a subset of @xmath . We can construct such a state in
@xmath possible ways, and clearly all these states have Schmidt number
@xmath . Now let us mix with equal weight the corresponding states
@xmath . Then for every @xmath and @xmath we will have @xmath terms of
the form @xmath and @xmath terms of the form @xmath , @xmath . Thus the
resulting state will be proportional to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we have proven that the state (see Ref. [ 59 ] for n=2)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number at most @xmath . It turns out that we can transform
this state in the form ( 2.8 ) by applying a certain partial twirl
operation. Consider the following twirl operation [ 131 , 241 , 309 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which maps any state @xmath into one of the form @xmath (an isotropic
state). Here @xmath is the uniform probability distribution on the
unitary group @xmath . Note that the twirl can be implemented locally,
both parties need to implement only one random unitary. Remarkably, it
has been shown [ 83 ] ² ² 2 In Ref. [ 83 ] the finite decomposition of
the @xmath twirl was given, but a similar decomposition can be deduced
from it for the @xmath twirl. that the integral can be written as a
finite sum (for qubits this was first shown in Ref. [ 21 ] ). This will
allow us to perform a partial twirl, just by considering a part of this
finite sum.

In the first step we apply the unitary transformation @xmath , with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is just the quantum Fourier transform. Since @xmath is unitary, it
acts as the identity on @xmath [ 131 ] , while it acts on @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The terms of the form @xmath for @xmath and @xmath will give a
contribution @xmath , while the @xmath for @xmath (for @xmath and @xmath
) will give a contribution of @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are terms not of the form @xmath or @xmath . Now these
contributions can be easily removed by repeated application of the
following mixing procedure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

First @xmath is chosen to act as @xmath for every @xmath . This defines
@xmath mixing procedures. Next @xmath is taken to act as @xmath (another
@xmath mixing procedures). One can readily check [ 83 ] that these
operations do not affect terms @xmath or @xmath but cancel out @xmath
completely.

Thus @xmath . Now for @xmath , the state @xmath is a convex combination
of @xmath and @xmath and therefore @xmath .

(ii) For the second part, we generalise the trick introduced in Ref. [
117 ] . For any state @xmath , suppose @xmath is a positive number such
that @xmath has Schmidt number @xmath . The operators @xmath witness
Schmidt number @xmath (see Example 2.1.1 ), so that we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath . Thus @xmath , and for @xmath it follows that @xmath for
@xmath .

For general @xmath , it follows that @xmath , but @xmath has Schmidt
number @xmath , so that @xmath . ∎

Note that the states ( 2.8 ) constitute one of the very few examples of
non-trivial one parameter states for which the Schmidt number is known.
To our knowledge, the only other example is that of the isotropic
states, Example 2.1.1 . This theorem allows us to present non-trivial
bounds to the generalised Schmidt robustness of arbitrary pure states.

###### Corollary 2.4.1 (Lower and upper bounds for the generalised
Schmidt robustness).

The generalised Schmidt- @xmath robustness @xmath of a pure state @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the generalised robustness of @xmath .

###### Proof.

In Theorem 2.4.2 we have seen that @xmath has Schmidt number @xmath .
Performing the filtering operation @xmath we hence obtain a state with
Schmidt number at most @xmath (this is because local filtering cannot
increase the Schmidt number of a state [ 286 ] ). If we take @xmath we
obtain that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number @xmath . Here @xmath as before. This gives the upper
bound. The lower bound can be readily proven using exactly the same
trick as in part (ii) of Theorem 2.4.2 . ∎

The lower and upper bound only coincide when @xmath is the maximally
entangled state or when @xmath . Note that the lower bound can be
negative. The upper bound depends on the dimension of the Hilbert space
in which the state is embedded, and hence will in general not match the
value of the generalised Schmidt robustness.

#### 2.4.2 Random Schmidt robustness

We define the random Schmidt- @xmath robustness of a state @xmath ,
@xmath as the minimum value of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number @xmath .

##### Upper bounds

As we have seen from Example 2.1.1 for @xmath we have @xmath . For
general pure states a (weak) upper bound to the random Schmidt
robustness can be obtained as follows. We know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number @xmath . Local filtering @xmath cannot increase the
Schmidt number. So that with @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the reduced density operator of @xmath , and because @xmath
is a separable state we get as an upper bound for the random Schmidt
robustness @xmath . The following theorem presents a non-trivial upper
bound.

###### Theorem 2.4.3 (Upper bound to the random Schmidt robustness).

The random Schmidt- @xmath robustness @xmath of a pure state @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the random robustness of @xmath .

###### Proof.

In this proof, we work again with unnormalised states. Note that, if we
add two unnormalised Schmidt number @xmath states together we end up
with a state of at most Schmidt number @xmath . Equivalently, this can
be shown by mixing the normalised states with different weights.

Analogously to the construction in Theorem 2.4.2 , let us take a
maximally entangled @xmath -level state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a subset of @xmath . Again, we can construct such a
state in @xmath possible ways, and mixing the corresponding
(unnormalised) states @xmath together, we end up with a state
proportional to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has at most Schmidt number @xmath . Now, in Corollary 2.4.1 we
have seen that the state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number at most @xmath . Adding these two states together we
find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number no more than @xmath . Mixing this state with the
separable state @xmath , we obtain finally

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Conjecture 2.4.1 (Schmidt balls around the identity).

Consider the unnormalized mixture

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath an arbitrary normalized state acting on @xmath . The state
@xmath has Schmidt number at most @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that it is a generalisation of the fact that @xmath is separable
for all normalised states @xmath [ 304 ] . The conjectured value ( 2.10
) can be obtained as follows. Starting from the identity, it is natural
to assume that we can go fastest to a higher Schmidt number by mixing
with some maximally entangled state. Taking @xmath (the maximally
entangled @xmath -level state) we have that @xmath , which reaches its
maximum for @xmath or for integer @xmath . Substituting this expression
in the expression for @xmath gives the upper bound from the conjecture.
Thus it looks like, starting from the identity, we can get most quickly
to a Schmidt number @xmath state by mixing with the maximally entangled
state in @xmath . Upper bounds on the random Schmidt number two
robustness are particularly useful as a distillability criterion can be
deduced from it, which we will discuss in Section 4.2 .

##### Lower bounds

Lower bounds on the random Schmidt robustness of a pure state @xmath can
be obtained from any Schmidt witness that detects @xmath . Indeed,
suppose @xmath is a normalised Schmidt number @xmath witness such that
@xmath , with @xmath . Then it is easy to see that @xmath . It follows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The question is now to determine this class of optimal Schmidt
witnesses. We have conducted a large numerical test and have found a
class which we conjecture to be optimal. The construction is the
following:

Consider the Schmidt witnesses @xmath from Example 2.1.1 . Performing
the filtering operation @xmath we obtain again a Schmidt number @xmath
witness. Let us consider the particular case where @xmath diagonal and
such that @xmath ; we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a given pure state @xmath we therefore conjecture:

###### Conjecture 2.4.2.

The random Schmidt robustness @xmath of a pure state @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

One can solve the minimisation problem with Lagrange multipliers [ 280 ]
. The solution is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the minimum eigenvalue of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the all-ones matrix, @xmath the diagonal matrix with @xmath
and @xmath the matrix with coefficients @xmath .

A first step in proving this conjecture would be to show that the class
of witnesses @xmath with @xmath arbitrary matrices, is no more powerful
than the class of witnesses @xmath , with @xmath diagonal. We have
numerically verified this for @xmath and @xmath . In Figure 2.1 we have
illustrated the minimization of ( 2.12 ) for a particular set of pure
states (see caption).

In conclusion, we have presented strong upper and lower bounds for the
generalised and random Schmidt robustness for pure states. The problem
of finding exact values is very hard, as in the end, one has to come up
with an explicit convex decomposition in Schmidt rank @xmath states on
the one hand, and on the other with a construction of optimal Schmidt
witnesses. We hope that our results may stimulate further work,
especially in proving or disproving Conjecture 2.4.1 .

## Chapter 3 Entanglement distillation: Introduction and classical
results

Distillation is the process of converting with some finite probability a
large number of mixed entangled states into a smaller number of
maximally entangled pure states. It relies on local collective
manipulation of the systems together with classical communication
between the parties (LOCC). It has become apparent that characterizing
and quantifying distillation is important in understanding the nature of
entanglement from a physical point of view. Considerable effort has been
devoted to the characterisation of distillable states, but even for
bipartite systems the matter is not settled. In the next two chapters we
analyse entanglement distillation in the bipartite scenario in great
detail.

This chapter is meant as an introduction, and most of the material
presented can be considered as literature review. In the first two
chapters entanglement was studied as static material, however
entanglement distillation involves manipulation of quantum states, so
that we start this chapter with a study of quantum operations (Section
3.1 ). In the following section, this is then applied to the study of
possible transformations between pure states both in the finite and
asymptotic regime, with particular emphasis on entanglement
concentration. In Section 3.3 we review the most important measures of
entanglement and some of their properties. These divide natural into two
classes, the geometrical entanglement measures, such as robustness
measures already encountered in the previous chapter, and operational
measures. An example of the latter is the entanglement of distillation,
which will be the main focus of our attention. We also show that in
general, entanglement is not conserved in the asymptotic regime for
mixed states. We discuss two examples of such irreversibility: the
maximally correlated states and the bound entangled states. We end this
chapter with a sketch of the most important distillation protocols for
mixed states in the asymptotic regime.

### 3.1 Quantum operations

#### 3.1.1 General quantum operations

A quantum operation @xmath is a physical operation which transforms a
state @xmath on @xmath into another state @xmath on @xmath . The aim of
this section is to give a unified mathematical representation (the
so-called Kraus formalism [ 178 , 215 , 77 ] ) of any quantum operation,
independent of how this operation is to be implemented physically.
Basically, there are two approaches to this [ 214 , 138 ] . The first is
the axiomatic one: we impose on the class of maps @xmath some physically
motivated constraints and define the remaining operations as quantum
operations. The second approach is constructive and the set of quantum
operations is defined as the one which can be obtained by combining
operations from a certain set of elementary operations. Both approaches
turn out to be equivalent; we will sketch the proof of the equivalence
here.

The standard quantum mechanical formalism allows us to carry out four
elementary operations on quantum states:

  (O1)  

    Unitary transformations: @xmath , with @xmath a unitary operator.

  (O2)  

    Adding an uncorrelated ancilla: @xmath , with @xmath a density
    operator.

  (O3)  

    Tracing out part of the system: @xmath , with @xmath .

  (O4)  

    Projective measurements with possibly postselecting: @xmath , with
    @xmath , pairwise orthogonal projectors such that @xmath with @xmath
    .

In general a quantum operation will only be successful with a certain
probability @xmath , so that @xmath , and @xmath does not increase the
trace. It is clear that the operations (O1)-(O3) can be represented as
trace preserving completely positive (CP) maps. As the composition of CP
maps is CP, we see that any quantum operation composed of operations
(O1)-(O3) can be represented by a trace preserving completely positive
map, these operations will also be called non-measuring operations. The
reverse turns out to be true: any trace preserving completely positive
map can be implemented by means of the quantum operations (O1)-(O3).
This result follows from the Stinespring dilation theorem [ 276 , 138 ,
174 , 77 ] . Now we invoke the Choi representation of CP maps (in this
context also called the Kraus representation), which says that any CP
map @xmath can be written as @xmath for all @xmath (see Theorem 1.2.3 ).
The operators @xmath are commonly called the Kraus operators. For a
trace preserving CP we have that @xmath . If we allow operations of the
type (O4), we have to relax this constraint to @xmath and renormalise
the density operator after application of @xmath . Another way is to
keep the constraint @xmath but allow postselecting on the particular
outcomes of @xmath . Thus we obtain (see for instance Ref. [ 77 ] ):

###### Theorem 3.1.1.

A quantum operation @xmath can be decomposed into operations of the form
(O1)-(O4) if and only if @xmath acts as a completely positive trace
non-increasing operator: @xmath , with @xmath .

From a physical point of view, the requirement that a quantum operation
is CP and trace non-increasing, is obvious. Thus we could equally have
started this section by demanding this, and we would also have arrived
to the elementary operations (O1)-(O4).

#### 3.1.2 Bipartite quantum operations

Consider now a bipartite system on @xmath . We will review some
important classes of local quantum operations where increasing degrees
of communication are allowed [ 242 , 77 , 22 , 58 ] .

@xmath Local operations . This is the class of operations generated by
the operators which have Kraus operators of the form @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath . In this restricted class of operations, the parties are
not allowed to communicate and the operations are non-measuring.
Combining them yields for an arbitrary local operation @xmath

@xmath 1-local operations . Suppose we allow local operations with
one-way communication from @xmath to @xmath . So let us suppose Alice
performs a generalised measurement on her subsystem, with Kraus
operators @xmath with @xmath . If the result of her operation is @xmath
the operation on the state acts as (notice that this is a trace
decreasing operation as it will occur only with a certain probability)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

She will communicate Bob that she found result @xmath , and depending on
that outcome he will perform a certain trace preserving operation
defined by @xmath operators, with @xmath . Here the index @xmath denotes
that the operation Bob implements depends on the result that he got from
Alice. Thus the state will change as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now if this same procedure is done on many particles the total ensemble
will change as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Of course postselection (for certain @xmath ) can occur in one or more
terms of this expression.

@xmath 2-local operations . This class is also known as the class of
local operations with two-way classical communication (LOCC). This
situation is somewhat more complicated, since in this case, it is useful
to do alternating measurements and communications. Following a similar
strategy as for 1-local operations, we focus on one particular outcome
of each measurement, and do the summation at the end. Alice starts off
with her measurements, and finds @xmath as result, therefore the
relevant operator is @xmath . She communicates her result to Bob and he
will then perform @xmath and communicate his result to Alice who will
perform @xmath . All these operators satisfy similar normalization
properties as in the previous paragraph. In that way we get at the end
of the series (for the total ensemble)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here also, postselecting can be done for particular choices of @xmath .

@xmath Separable operations . Separable operations are defined as any
operation which can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary operations (including
measurements). The normalization condition is @xmath . It is obvious
that any LOCC is also separable, but the reverse is generally not true [
22 ] . However, we do have the following theorem [ 58 ] :

###### Theorem 3.1.2.

It is always possible to simulate a separable operation using only LOCC,
but with probability possibly smaller than 1.

###### Proof.

So, [ 57 ] suppose we have two sets of operators @xmath and @xmath such
that @xmath and a state @xmath . In general we will have that @xmath and
@xmath . We renormalise @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath and @xmath .
Then we let Alice and Bob perform the generalized measurements
corresponding to these operators. They will obtain two measuring
outcomes @xmath and @xmath and communicate their result to each other.
Their strategy is to keep the state only if the outcomes of their
measurement coincide, if @xmath . Forgetting which outcome was obtained,
we see that @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath an appropriate normalisation factor. ∎

@xmath PPT preserving operations . Literally, these are operations which
map PPT states to PPT states. Or with Rains’ definition [ 241 ]
operations @xmath such that the induced map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is completely positive. All separable operations are PPT preserving, as
follows from [ 138 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

PPT preserving operations are the first class of operations which can be
regarded as non-local, as for instance creation of an entangled PPT
state is a PPT preserving operation. The key result on PPT preserving
operations is that they can be implemented using LOCC when both parties
share a specific entangled PPT state. This was first realised in the
seminal paper by Cirac et. al. [ 58 ] . They characterised completely
general quantum operations (and in particular entangling operations) on
bipartite systems by means of a generalised Jamiołkowski isomorphism.
Because of its importance, we briefly sketch the isomorphism in the next
section.

#### 3.1.3 Entangling operations

The Jamiołkowski isomorphism (Section 1.2.2 ) is an isomorphism between
a linear map from an input space to an output space and an operator
defined over the tensor product of these two spaces. As we have
illustrated, this correspondence is useful when the map acts on one part
of a bipartite system. For maps acting on compound systems it is not so
easy to interpret this duality. We now introduce an extension of the
Jamiołkowski isomorphism with a very nice physical interpretation [ 58 ]
.

Suppose we have two systems @xmath and @xmath , each consisting of two
@xmath -level subsystems @xmath and @xmath respectively. We will
establish an isomorphism between a CP map @xmath and an operator @xmath
acting on the total system @xmath . The isomorphism is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is understood to act only on the systems @xmath and @xmath
. Here @xmath is the projector on the maximally entangled state @xmath
(and analogously for @xmath ). Equivalently we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From ( 3.2 ) it follows that @xmath is the result of the action of
@xmath on two systems @xmath and @xmath which are prepared in a
maximally entangled state with two ancillary systems. The second form
has an equally simple interpretation: if both parties share a state
@xmath , then they can implement the map @xmath on a certain state
@xmath by simultaneous projecting @xmath and @xmath on the maximally
entangled states of @xmath and @xmath . From this isomorphism one can
easily deduce the following correspondences:

1.  @xmath is a separable operation if @xmath is separable, and
    conversely @xmath is an entangling operation if @xmath is entangled
    (with respect to @xmath and @xmath ).

2.  @xmath is a PPT preserving operation if and only if @xmath . Thus
    any PPT preserving operation can be implemented locally with the aid
    of a shared PPT state.

This isomorphism has a large number of applications (see the original
reference and [ 81 ] ) which would lead us too far to go into here. A
simple application is the classification of global unitaries according
to their entangling power on composite systems [ 314 , 336 , 337 ] .
Entangling power of a unitary is defined as the average entanglement a
unitary creates on product states. When @xmath is a unitary map, @xmath
is a pure state and there exists a closed expression of the entangling
power in terms of the entanglement of this state vector. Using this, we
were able [ 64 ] to show that the unitaries with highest entangling
power are special kinds of permutations, with possible exception for
@xmath . The isomorphism then immediately yields a construction of
generic examples of 4-qudit maximally entangled states for all
dimensions except for 2 and 6.

### 3.2 Pure states and the reversibility of entanglement

In this section we will study the distillation of entanglement of pure
bipartite quantum states, which is often referred to as entanglement
concentration. An arbitrary pure state @xmath can be represented by a
vector @xmath in @xmath . Without loss of generality we have taken the
dimensions of the two Hilbert spaces to be equal. A way of quantifying
the entanglement of @xmath is by looking at the local density operator
@xmath . For a separable state @xmath , the reduced density operator
equals @xmath , and is thus a pure state. The reduced density operator
of an entangled state will have a rank larger than one. If the reduced
density matrix is proportional to the identity matrix the state is
maximally entangled, as is the case for the EPR singlet. For such states
there is no information available locally, although the global state is
known exactly [ 260 , 295 ] . A way of quantifying the purity of a local
density operator @xmath is by calculating its von Neumann entropy @xmath
. We will call this quantity the entropy of entanglement or simply the
entanglement of @xmath . Note that the entanglement is a fully additive
measure: @xmath . Writing @xmath in the Schmidt basis

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath , the reduced density matrix can be written as
@xmath and the entanglement of @xmath as @xmath . Maximally entangled
states in a @xmath system have Schmidt coefficients @xmath and
entanglement @xmath .

Entanglement concentration is the process of converting partially
entangled states to maximally entangled states by LOCC. The reverse
process is called entanglement dilution. We will show how in the
asymptotic regime @xmath arbitrary states @xmath can be concentrated
into @xmath singlets for @xmath . Conversely, @xmath singlets can be
diluted into @xmath states @xmath for @xmath . From the above it follows
that the entropy of entanglement quantifies entanglement of pure states
in the most natural way since it is preserved in the asymptotic regime:
a collection of @xmath states @xmath can be converted into @xmath states
@xmath with LOCC and the ratio @xmath approaching @xmath for @xmath .
The entanglement of a singlet is given by @xmath and serves thus as a
proper unit of entanglement, the so-called ebit [ 19 ] .

In the first part of this section we discuss some elementary
entanglement concentration protocols, and present a dilution protocol.
Next, we list some celebrated theorems of general pure state
transformation in the finite and asymptotic regime.

#### 3.2.1 Pure state distillation protocols

##### Local filtering – the procrustean method

The procrustean ¹ ¹ 1 Procrustes is a giant from Greek mythology.
Allegedly he would capture people and tie them to an iron bed. He would
then hack off their legs or stretch them to make them fit the bed.
method is conceptually maybe the simplest entanglement concentration
protocol [ 19 ] . It works even when both parties only share one single
copy of the state. So let Alice and Bob share the state @xmath with
@xmath , then we can define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now the protocol consists of Alice performing the measurement
corresponding to these operators and communicating the result to Bob.
The protocol will be successful when Alice obtains the outcome
corresponding to @xmath , in this case, occurring with probability
@xmath , the output state will be a maximally entangled singlet. This
protocol is optimal for single qubits and we will later see an extension
of this protocol which is optimal for any pure bipartite state. Such a
one-sided generalised measurement, where the state is conditionally kept
will be called filtering. This is a technique which will be useful for
mixed states as well.

An analogous protocol works for entanglement dilution: if Alice and Bob
start out with a maximally entangled singlet and Alice applies the
operation defined by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

then they obtain the state @xmath with probability one.

##### Schmidt projection

Following [ 19 ] we illustrate this method for qubits. As the method
does not work for one copy we suppose that Alice and Bob share @xmath
copies of the state @xmath , so that the combined system is described by
the state vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The binomial expansion of this will have @xmath terms of which @xmath
will have different coefficients and the @xmath corresponding subspaces
will be orthogonal. Let us label these subspaces by @xmath corresponding
to the power in which @xmath appears. Now Alice can perform a von
Neumann measurement corresponding to these subspaces. The probability of
projecting upon the @xmath -th subspace is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

She can then communicate her result of the measurement to Bob or Bob can
perform a similar measurement (which will have the same outcome). In
either case they will end up with a maximally entangled state in a known
@xmath -dimensional space. After distilling many such states, they can
be converted to singlets without loss of entanglement. In the asymptotic
regime this protocol can be shown to be optimal: the ratio of singlets
that can be distilled per input state @xmath approaches @xmath for the
number of input states going to infinity. To achieve this, the Schmidt
projection protocol has to be applied @xmath times on batches of @xmath
states, with both @xmath and @xmath going to infinity.

##### Entanglement swapping

The phenomenon of entanglement swapping [ 338 , 334 ] was first studied
in the context of coincidence count rates of entangled pairs of photons.
In the experimental setup, two different sources emit pairs of entangled
photons and two halves of the pairs are being measured simultaneously.
The remaining halves then become entangled. Thus entanglement swapping
is the phenomenon of two particles getting entangled without direct
interaction (see Ref. [ 220 ] for an experiment demonstrating this
effect). This phenomenon also occurs in a multipartite setting [ 335 ,
29 ] , but has to our knowledge only been demonstrated for qubits.

The idea of using entanglement swapping as an entanglement concentration
procedure was first introduced in Ref. [ 30 ] . Consider the following
two states of photons

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose @xmath is shared by both parties Alice and Bob, and in addition
Bob has the state @xmath . When Bob measures particles 2 and 3 in the
Bell basis @xmath , the resulting state for particles 1 and 4 will be
one of the four states

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

the first two occurring with probability @xmath and the last two with
probability @xmath . In the first two cases, the entanglement is lower
than in the original pair, but in the last two cases Alice and Bob end
up with a maximally entangled state. In any case, however, the procedure
can be repeated. Repeating the whole protocol over and over again,
yields on one hand a group of maximally entangled pairs, and on the
other, completely separable states. The fraction of maximally entangled
pairs achievable in this way turns out to be @xmath . This number just
equals the maximal probability of the initial state to be converted into
a maximally entangled state. In this sense, the entanglement swapping
protocol is optimal. Note that since the second pair belongs to Bob, he
has complete control over it, and he could in principal use any
two-qubit state. It turns out that when he uses a state which is less
entangled, the protocol does not concentrate entanglement but destroys
it. When the state he uses is more entangled, no entanglement is
destroyed, but the concentration is less efficient. (Here the
entanglement is measured as the amount of singlets distillable from the
state). Extensions of this protocol have been proposed in Ref. [ 158 ,
264 ] which do not rely on such an iterative procedure since the second
step of their protocol is just the procrustean method.

With this we conclude our discussion of elementary pure state
entanglement concentration protocols. Various other protocols have been
proposed, as for instance in Ref. [ 13 ] . Noteworthy is the protocol
outlined in Ref. [ 221 ] which demonstrates that entanglement
concentration is possible using the effects of quantum statistics of
indistinguishable particles only.

#### 3.2.2 Finite regime

In this section we will discuss the more general question of feasibility
of arbitrary transformations between pure states. The first work on this
subject was done by Lo and Popescu [ 190 ] , in particularly they proved
the following:

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

The Schmidt number of a pure bipartite state cannot increase under local
quantum operations and classical communication. Entanglement
manipulations of pure bipartite states with only one way communication
are as powerful as those with two way communication, but they are more
powerful than those with no communication. In other words, we can
replace any LOCC protocol on pure states, no matter how complex, by a
single local generalised measurement.

The groundbreaking work on pure state entanglement transformation was
carried out by Vidal in Ref. [ 299 ] , where he introduced the notion of
an entanglement monotone. His work was significantly extended by several
authors in a series of papers [ 213 , 301 , 116 , 169 , 170 , 306 ] .
Recently it became apparent that their proofs can be simplified by
making use of the quantum steering theorem as recognized by Verstraete [
295 ] to which we refer the reader for full proofs. An entanglement
monotone @xmath is defined as a quantity associated with a quantum state
which on average does not increase under local transformations. That is,
if an LOCC maps a state @xmath with probability @xmath into states
@xmath then @xmath . The following theorem by Vidal [ 299 ] is crucial:

###### Theorem 3.2.2.

The restriction of an entanglement monotone @xmath to pure states @xmath
is given by a unitarily invariant concave function of the local density
operator @xmath .

This theorem implies that any entanglement monotone acting on pure
states

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

can be expressed as a concave function of its Schmidt coefficients ² ² 2
For convenience Schmidt coefficients in this section denote the ‘normal’
Schmidt coefficients squared. @xmath . An important class of
entanglement monotones @xmath , for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where as usual @xmath . The concavity of this function can be proven
using the variational characterization of eigenvalues of a Hermitian
matrix [ 126 ] .

Clearly we have that if we can convert @xmath to @xmath with certainty
then we need to have @xmath for every entanglement monotone @xmath , and
in particular this has to be the case for @xmath . A surprising result
by Nielsen [ 213 ] is that the converse is true:

###### Theorem 3.2.3.

A necessary and sufficient condition for the transformation @xmath to
@xmath to be possible with certainty is that @xmath for @xmath .
Alternatively, in terms of majorization, this can be expressed as @xmath
, where @xmath stands for the vector consisting of the Schmidt
coefficients of @xmath in decreasing order.

For anyone who is familiar with unitarily invariant norms, this result
will be reminiscent of Ky Fan’s dominance theorem for unitarily
invariant norms and the dual representation in terms of symmetric gauge
functions [ 127 , 25 ] . In fact, something much stronger can be proven
[ 301 , 169 , 116 ] :

###### Theorem 3.2.4.

The probabilistic transformation from a pure bipartite state @xmath into
the ensemble @xmath can be accomplished using LOCC if and only if @xmath
or equivalently @xmath for all @xmath .

Note that from the theorem follows that the maximum probability @xmath
of transforming @xmath into @xmath can be written as @xmath or @xmath .
The non-trivial part of these theorems is to show that there is an
actual protocol achieving the transformation. The reader is referred to
[ 295 ] for an elementary proof. It is there shown how the protocol
achieving the transformation can be built from a few simple generalised
measurements.

Let us now return to entanglement concentration. The above theorem gives
us the optimal probability of converting a pure state to a maximally
entangled state of arbitrary dimension. When we allow the concentration
of entanglement into different maximally entangled states (of different
dimensions), we can ask how much entanglement can be distilled on
average. This is answered in the following theorem [ 169 , 116 ] :

###### Theorem 3.2.5.

The optimal entanglement concentration procedure for a single pure
bipartite state @xmath with Schmidt coefficients @xmath is one that
produces a maximally entangled state @xmath of @xmath levels with
probability @xmath . The corresponding optimal average distilled
entanglement is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof of this theorem uses techniques from linear optimization,
showing that there exist optimal @xmath compatible with Theorem 3.2.4 .
The protocol achieving these probabilities can be obtained by going
through the proof of this theorem. However, in view of Theorem 3.2.1
there exists a single local generalised measurement which does the job.
The measurement operators corresponding to Alice’s generalised
measurement are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

indeed it is easy to verify that @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This protocol, a generalised procrustean method, thus turns out to be
optimal.

Another application of Theorem 3.2.4 is the idea of catalysis [ 170 ,
290 ] , where a pure state is used to help converting one state into an
other, such that the pure state is recovered at the end of the
procedure. Mathematically this means that there exist states @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally note that one can broaden the discussion about pure state
transformations by including questions about the approximate
transformation of one state into another, see Ref. [ 306 ] .

#### 3.2.3 Asymptotic regime

In the introduction we have already sketched the main result in the
asymptotic regime, which we now state formally [ 19 , 236 , 78 ] :

###### Theorem 3.2.6.

In the asymptotic regime @xmath arbitrary states @xmath can be
concentrated into @xmath singlets for @xmath . Conversely, @xmath
singlets can be diluted into @xmath states @xmath for @xmath . Thus the
entropy of entanglement is conserved in the asymptotic regime and hence
quantifies entanglement of pure states in a unique way.

One can prove the distillation rate using Theorem 3.2.5 [ 169 ] , or
using the Schmidt projection distillation protocol [ 19 ] . The dilution
rate can be proved using the teleportation idea [ 19 ] . Both the
dilution and distillation rate can also be proven using Nielsen’s
theorem (Theorem 3.2.3 ). The crucial part of the latter exploits the
asymptotic equipartition theorem which implies that @xmath can be
approximated by @xmath terms in the Schmidt decomposition.

In Ref. [ 191 ] Lo and Popescu showed that pure state entanglement is a
truly interconvertible, in the sense that the amount of classical
communication needed in the asymptotic regime vanishes. This is trivial
for the entanglement concentration, as the Schmidt projection method
works without communication. The dilution step is the nontrivial part,
and it can be shown that @xmath singlets can be diluted into @xmath
pairs @xmath with @xmath classical bits of communication. Recently other
asymptotically optimal protocols have been proposed, some of which are
universal ³ ³ 3 Sometimes also called blind protocols as neither prior
knowledge of the state nor any form of quantum tomography is required.
(see for instance [ 205 , 119 ] ).

The entanglement concentration protocols we studied in the previous
subsection are all of probabilistic nature, with the notable exception
of Nielsen’s result. As a result, the protocols reaching the
entanglement yield @xmath in the asymptotic limit are all probabilistic
in a finite number of copies and only become deterministic in the
asymptotic limit. The following theorem gives an upper bound to the
asymptotic yield of singlets we can distill from a pure state @xmath if
we only use protocols that are deterministic for any given number of
copies [ 211 , 212 ] .

###### Theorem 3.2.7.

Let @xmath be a pure state with Schmidt decomposition @xmath , then the
maximum number of singlets that can deterministically be concentrated is
given by @xmath . When @xmath is a two-qubit state this bound can be
obtained by a series of two-pair manipulations.

Note that @xmath just like @xmath is a fully additive measure. The upper
bound follows from Nielsen’s theorem. The surprising result here is the
situation for qubits where two-pair manipulations are sufficient. This
is in sharp contrast with the probabilistic concentration protocols
which generally need to be applied on a very large number of pairs. The
values of @xmath and @xmath do not coincide, although both yields can be
reached with probability one in the asymptotic limit. One can generalise
this and ask for the distillable entanglement as a function of an error
exponent, representing the rate of decrease in failure probability as
the number of copies tends to infinity [ 120 , 118 ] .

### 3.3 Mixed states and the irreversibility of entanglement

As we have seen in the previous section, for pure states there are
essentially a finite number of entanglement measures in the finite
regime and a unique measure in the asymptotic regime. There are two
obvious ways of quantifying mixed state entanglement, operational and
geometrical. Operational entanglement measures are directly related to
the physical applicability of entanglement. Geometrical measures can
loosely be described as those quantifying the distance from a state to
the set of separable states. As excellent reviews [ 130 , 230 , 54 ]
have appeared recently in the literature, we do not attempt to give an
extensive review of the subject here. In particular the geometrical
entanglement measures will be treated in brief, while for the
operational measures we focus mainly on the entanglement of
distillation. For simplicity, entanglement measures here are defined
simply as entanglement monotones and thus all presented measures vanish
on separable states and are on average non-increasing under LOCC, unless
otherwise stated.

#### 3.3.1 Geometric measures

The first rigorous study of entanglement measures based on distance was
carried out in Ref. [ 294 , 293 ] . Intuitively, the quantity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a suitable distance measure, can be regarded as a measure of
entanglement. The most important measure of this kind arises when @xmath
is the quantum relative entropy @xmath [ 291 , 261 , 255 ] . The
associated measure will be called the relative entropy of entanglement
and denoted @xmath . Note that for pure states, @xmath reduces to the
entropy of entanglement @xmath . Although the relative entropy of
entanglement is a distance measure, it stretches much further as it has
several operational interpretations (see also next section).

A related measure [ 293 ] can be defined by using as a distance measure
the Hilbert-Schmidt distance @xmath . Although this quantity has
received considerable interest, it was shown not to be an entanglement
monotone [ 219 ] . We will call this measure the best separable
approximation in the Hilbert-Schmidt norm analogous to the best
separable approximation @xmath in the trace norm [ 182 ] , which can be
shown to be a proper measure of entanglement. It is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The geometric measure of entanglement (GME) is historically the first
example of an entanglement measure. It was originally introduced by
Shimony in Ref. [ 266 ] for pure states only as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the GME is proportional to the maximum overlap with a separable
state. This measure was extensively analysed in Ref. [ 317 ] , including
for multipartite and mixed states. The mixed state generalisation of the
GME was done by the usual convex roof construction, that is as a
minimisation over all convex expansions of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Dual to the distance measures are the robustness measures. While
distance measures quantify the distance of a set to the set of separable
states, robustness measures quantify to which extend entangled states
remain entangled under mixing. Recall (Section 2.4 ) that the robustness
@xmath relative to a set @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking @xmath to be either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath we obtain
respectively the robustness @xmath , the random robustness @xmath and
the generalised robustness @xmath . Note that the random robustness
@xmath was shown not to be an entanglement monotone [ 117 ] . However,
for a given dimension, the maximum random robustness over all entangled
states gives rise to a lower bound on the volume of separable states [
304 ] .

All the previous entanglement measures are very hard to evaluate for a
general mixed state. For a NPT entangled state @xmath , one can envisage
that the sum of the negative eigenvalues, the so-called negativity
@xmath , quantifies to some extent the distance of @xmath to the set of
PPT states [ 342 ] . And indeed, it can be shown to be an entanglement
monotone. However, it is often more convenient to work with the
logarithmic negativity [ 305 ] , defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The reason is that @xmath is fully additive by construction and also has
considerable operational meaning, some of which we will outline in the
next section (see also [ 9 ] ).

With this, we conclude our roller coaster through the main geometric
entanglement measures. Note that they also can be approached in a more
unified way using either base norm Ref. [ 309 , 230 ] or entanglement
witnesses Ref. [ 33 ] .

#### 3.3.2 Operational measures

Having a unique measure for pure states in the asymptotic regime, it
would be natural to ask if one can generalise this to mixed states. We
have seen that for pure states, this measure quantifies both the amount
of entanglement that can be distilled from them in the asymptotic regime
and the amount of entanglement needed to construct the state in the
asymptotic regime. Initially, the idea was to define two different
measures for these quantities for mixed state: the distillable
entanglement @xmath and the entanglement cost @xmath respectively.

A first attempt to the entanglement cost was made in Ref. [ 21 ] as the
convex roof of the entanglement

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the minimum is taken over all convex decomposition @xmath . This
quantity is now known as the entanglement of formation. The evaluation
of @xmath for a general mixed state is very hard, and analytical results
are only known for high symmetric states [ 309 , 287 ] (see also [ 46 ]
and reference therein). The notable exception is for 2 qubit systems,
where an exact analytic formula is known in terms of the concurrence [
327 , 326 ] .

It is however not clear that @xmath has the operational meaning we want
it to have [ 122 ] . In particular @xmath quantifies the entanglement
needed to construct @xmath via a specific procedure . Namely, given a
decomposition @xmath , one chooses with probability @xmath a particular
@xmath . Then, one constructs @xmath out of singlets (costing in the
asymptotic regime @xmath ebits) and forgets the particular @xmath
chosen. In this way, we obtain one copy of @xmath . Repeating this
process over and over, then to construct @xmath on average we need
@xmath ebits. Other procedures might be more efficient, such as
constructing more than one copy at the time. In particular it is easy to
see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This quantity @xmath is known as the regularised entanglement of
formation.

In Ref. [ 122 ] it was rigorously proven that @xmath equals the
asymptotic value of @xmath such that @xmath qubits can be converted into
@xmath copies of @xmath . This asymptotic yield, we call the
entanglement cost and is formally defined as (see Ref. [ 230 ] )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the second infimum is taken over all trace preserving LOCC @xmath
and @xmath is the maximally entangled singlet state. We have used the
trace norm in this definition, but some other measures work as well.
Note that the equivalence @xmath is highly non-trivial as @xmath gives
rise to a protocol with a variable number of input singlets, while
@xmath works with a fixed number of input singlets. Now even more
surprising, it is conjectured that the entanglement of formation is
additive, in which case we would have @xmath . This additivity is one of
the major open problems in quantum information theory (see Ref. [ 268 ,
10 , 207 ] and references therein). Calculating the entanglement cost is
very hard problem, and its value is only known so far in cases where one
can prove the additivity [ 307 , 333 , 207 , 206 , 265 , 140 ] . Both
the entanglement of formation and the entanglement cost can be proven to
be convex [ 78 ] .

We now move on to the entanglement of distillation [ 21 , 241 , 242 ] ,
quantifying how much pure state entanglement we can extract from a state
@xmath . Analogously to the entanglement cost we define

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.6)
  -- -- -- -------

where the second supremum is taken over all trace preserving LOCC @xmath
and @xmath is the maximally entangled singlet state. Note that just like
in the definition of @xmath , the maximisation is over all protocols
where the output has a fixed number of singlets. But similar to the
entanglement cost, it has been proven rigorously [ 242 ] that allowing
stochastic protocols does give rise to the same value for @xmath . To
elaborate a bit more on this point, suppose we have a protocol that from
@xmath copies of a state @xmath produces @xmath singlets for half of the
time and no singlets at all for the other half. However, the above
definition only allows deterministic protocols, that is in our case we
would like to replace this stochastic protocol by a deterministic
protocol which produces exactly @xmath singlets. The equivalence of both
definitions says that in the asymptotic regime this can always be done.
The proof of the equivalence exploits the law of large numbers, as when
a stochastic protocol is repeated a large number of times, it can be
approximated with a deterministic protocol on a larger input.

From the above, it will be clear that @xmath . The following theorem [
78 , 135 ] pushes this observation further, stating that under some
reasonable conditions the entanglement cost and the entanglement of
distillation are extremal measures.

###### Theorem 3.3.1.

Let @xmath be a positive functional on the set of states @xmath
satisfying for all states @xmath

1.   Normalisation: For any d-level maximally entangled state @xmath ,
    @xmath .

2.   Weak LOCC monotonicity: For any trace preserving LOCC map @xmath :
    @xmath .

3.   Continuity: Let @xmath and @xmath be any two sequences of states on
    @xmath and @xmath respectively. If @xmath then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Then:

(i) If @xmath is additive ( @xmath for all @xmath ) then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(ii) If the regularisation @xmath exists for all @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In some sense this theorem is a weakened version of the asymptotic
reversibility for pure states. The above theorem can be used to provide
both lower bounds to the entanglement cost and upper bounds to the
entanglement of distillation. The conditions for the latter can be
slightly relaxed [ 135 ] .

###### Theorem 3.3.2.

Let @xmath be a positive functional on the set of states @xmath
satisfying for all states @xmath

1.   Weak LOCC monotonicity: For any trace preserving LOCC map @xmath :
    @xmath .

2.   Partial sub-additivity: @xmath .

3.   Continuity for the isotropic state ( 2.1 )

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    That is, if we have a sequence of isotropic states @xmath when
    @xmath , then we require that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Then @xmath for all @xmath .

Thus for an entanglement measure to be an upper bound to the
entanglement of distillation it is enough to be continuous in the
neighborhood of the maximally entangled state. We proceed by giving some
examples of entanglement measures that are strictly larger than @xmath .
The relative entropy of entanglement @xmath was the first example of an
upper bound to @xmath [ 294 , 293 , 135 , 241 ] , this follows
relatively easily from the previous theorem. Another early upper bound
to @xmath is given by the logarithmic negativity @xmath [ 305 ] , and
again one easily verifies that it fulfills the conditions of the
previous theorem. Note that both @xmath and @xmath do not satisfy the
requirements of Theorem 3.3.1 .

Rains showed in a seminal paper [ 238 ] that the previous two measures
can be combined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

providing an upper bound to the distillable entanglement. Note that here
the minimum is taken over all states, not just the separable ones. The
Rains bound gives an upper bound to the PPT distillable entanglement,
that is the entanglement that can be distilled via PPT preserving
protocols. Since these protocols include LOCC operations, the Rains
bound provides also an upper bound to @xmath . Despite this, @xmath is
probably the strongest known upper bound known on @xmath . Note that
when @xmath in the definition, we simply recover @xmath . A weaker bound
can also be obtained by minimising just over the PPT states, so that the
last term vanishes. The resulting quantity is known the relative entropy
of entanglement with respect to PPT states [ 241 , 239 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Measures that satisfy the requirements of Theorem 3.3.1 are the
regularised version @xmath of the entropy of entanglement @xmath and the
regularisation of @xmath , @xmath . There is some evidence that @xmath ,
based on the equality for Werner states, although all that is known is
that for qubits @xmath [ 164 , 8 , 7 ] .

Lower bounds to the entanglement of distillation are much harder to
obtain. One way of obtaining a lower bound is by providing an explicit
distillation protocol (see Section 3.4 ) and calculating the rate. The
most important lower bound up to date is given by the hashing inequality
[ 137 , 70 , 21 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the one-way distillable entanglement, that is the
entanglement of distillation where classical communication is only
allowed in one direction (for instance only from Alice to Bob). Note
that this relation also has important implications on the theory of
quantum channel capacities. For some states the value of @xmath
coincides with this bound, and thus allows for exact calculation of
@xmath . Examples will be given in the next section.

From our treatment, it is easy to see that (see also [ 54 , 230 ] for
excellent treatments on entanglement ordering)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As an example, in Figure 3.1 we have plotted known values of
entanglement measures for the Werner states ( @xmath ). The Werner
states [ 321 , 138 ] are states of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , which are entangled @xmath or @xmath . We will study this
class of states extensively in the context of distillability in Section
4.3 , see also Section 4.1 . Because of their prominent symmetry the
value of some important entanglement measures can be calculated exactly.
In particular we have @xmath = @xmath and @xmath [ 8 , 7 , 310 ] .
Despite this, an analytical expression for both @xmath and @xmath is
still out of reach. It is not even known whether the distillable
entanglement for all entangled Werner states is strictly positive (see
Section 4.3 )! In Section 3.4 we redraw the graph for @xmath for which
the situation is somewhat simplified and for which good lower bounds are
known on @xmath .

#### 3.3.3 Irreversibility

##### Bound entanglement

For pure states, entanglement is reversible in the sense that @xmath for
all pure states @xmath . In this section we will show that this is not
necessarily the case for mixed states. The first indication of this was
the discovery of bound entangled states, that is entangled states from
which no entanglement can be distilled at all [ 134 ] . The class of
bound entangled states includes the set of PPT states. We present the
direct proof from Ref. [ 138 ] .

###### Theorem 3.3.3.

For any PPT state @xmath the distillable entanglement is zero. PPT
states are therefore bound entangled.

###### Proof.

As we have seen in Section 3.1 the set of PPT preserving protocols
includes all LOCC transformations. Therefore LOCC cannot map a PPT state
to an NPT state. Now we prove that PPT states are bounded away from the
maximally entangled state. Let @xmath be a @xmath -level PPT state. We
have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

now since @xmath is PPT, @xmath is also a legitimate state and thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the inequality follows because the swap operator @xmath has
eigenvalues @xmath only, and therefore has a mean smaller than one on
any state. Thus whatever LOCC protocol we apply, PPT states can never
achieve a higher overlap than @xmath with the maximally entangled state.
Note that @xmath can be achieved by a product state. ∎

We come back to the question of the existence of NPT bound entanglement
in Chapter 4 . Now the above theorem would imply irreversibility if we
could prove that @xmath for PPT entangled states @xmath . However likely
this might seem, it is not straightforward to prove this formally. This
is because, all we know for entangled states is that @xmath , but in the
asymptotic regime, it might be possible to construct PPT entangled
states with an arbitrary small amount of entanglement. In Ref. [ 302 ]
Vidal and Cirac obtained the following lower bound on @xmath (the proof
is straightforward and we omit it here).

###### Theorem 3.3.4.

Let @xmath denote the projector onto the range of a state @xmath on
@xmath . If

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all product vectors @xmath , then @xmath .

This lower bound is relatively easy to calculate for some states [ 302 ,
303 ] , in particular it was shown to be positive for some bound
entangled state. The breakthrough however came with Ref. [ 331 ] which
showed that @xmath for all entangled states. Note that this was the one
crucial piece missing in the original definition of entanglement (see
Section 1.2 ). The proof is relatively elaborate and proceeds in two
steps. First a functional @xmath is derived which is positive on all
entangled states and zero on all separable states. Although this
quantity @xmath is by no means easy to evaluate, it serves the purpose
as it is a lower bound to @xmath .

##### Generic irreversibility: maximally correlated states

Irreversibility in entanglement transformation is not limited to bound
entangled states. Consider for instance the class of maximally
correlated states (MCS) [ 241 , 239 ] which can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A necessary and sufficient condition for a state @xmath to be equivalent
to a MCS after a possible local unitary transformation is given in Ref.
[ 125 ] . The tag MCS reflects that when both parties perform the same
measurement, they will obtain the same result. The Rains bound for this
state is relatively easy to calculate and one obtains [ 241 , 239 , 329
, 47 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by virtue of an explicit distillation protocol it can be proven [
238 , 240 ] that this value equals the PPT distillable entanglement.
Note that the relative entropy is additive when acting on maximally
correlated states. In view of the hashing inequality we have:

###### Theorem 3.3.5.

The distillable entanglement of a maximally correlated state @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we derive a sufficient condition for the additivity of the
entanglement of formation, which allows for an exact expression of the
entanglement cost @xmath of some MCS. Central is the notion of an
entanglement breaking map [ 267 , 256 , 142 ] , this is a map @xmath
such that for all @xmath the state @xmath is separable. A map @xmath is
entanglement breaking if and only it can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is some set of density operators.
With this we have [ 307 ] the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.3.6.

Let @xmath be a subspace of @xmath . Define a map @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . If @xmath is entanglement breaking, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and all @xmath . In particular, for all @xmath we have
@xmath .

Let us now apply this to the maximally correlated states [ 140 , 307 ,
312 ] . Any MCS is supported on the span of @xmath , so let @xmath ,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, the map @xmath associated to @xmath is entanglement
breaking, and thus @xmath for all MCS @xmath . The entanglement of
formation can be calculated exactly for qubits, and comparing the
entanglement cost with the entanglement of distillation, one obtains
generic irreversibility for all two-qubit MCS. In view of these results
it would be worthwhile investigating whether a closed expression for the
entanglement of formation can be obtained for MCS of arbitrary
dimension. There is no reason however to suspect that irreversibility in
higher dimension would not be generic.

##### Reversibility and Distinguishability

The previous section raises the question if there are any reversible
mixed states. Trivial examples constitute the so-called quasi-pure
states [ 91 , 312 , 270 , 123 ] of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simple measurement of both parties in the @xmath basis will result in
the collapse @xmath , therefore @xmath . Note that the process of
identifying the tag @xmath is reversible in the asymptotic regime, hence
the reversibility. More general quasi-pure states take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a set of separable and orthogonal states which are locally
distinguishable. This latter condition is necessary as there are
separable orthogonal states that cannot be distinguished locally [ 22 ,
330 , 141 ] with probability one. It seems to be an open question
whether there are reversible truly mixed states which are not quasi-pure
(see also [ 150 ] ).

Distinguishability has far deeper implications on distillation. We start
with an example [ 101 , 48 ] . Let @xmath denote the set of the four
Bell states @xmath and @xmath , and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We focus on the case where @xmath is even. The state @xmath is separable
and therefore @xmath is also separable. The relative entropy for @xmath
is bounded by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This last step follows by direct verification. Now the set of two copies
of all four Bell states can be locally distinguished [ 313 ] , so that
by sacrificing two copies, one can distill @xmath ebits from @xmath .
Since the entanglement of distillation is bounded by the relative
entropy we have @xmath . Other examples of using explicit LOCC
distinguishing in a distillation process can be found in Ref. [ 102 ] .

The link between distinguishability and distillation can be formalised
as follows. First we start by recalling the Holevo bound (see for
instance [ 214 ] , Chapter 11 and 12). Suppose Alice prepares a state
@xmath with probability @xmath and hands it over to Bob. He performs a
measurement, with measurement outcome @xmath . The random variable
@xmath with values @xmath is characterised by the entropy @xmath and
similarly @xmath is characterised by @xmath . The joint entropy is then
characterised by @xmath . With these definitions the mutual information
is defined by @xmath and quantifies how much information @xmath and
@xmath have in common. The accessible information @xmath is the maximum
mutual information over all possible measurement strategies of Bob. As
an example, suppose that Alice prepares a state in @xmath possible
orthogonal states, then clearly Bob can always access this information
completely, and therefore @xmath . When Alice prepares non-orthogonal
states, this value will be smaller. Now, the Holevo bound is an upper
bound to the accessible information:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , and @xmath . In particular it follows that @xmath qubits
can be used for information transmission of at most @xmath bits. Now we
generalise this in the scenario that Charlie prepares a bipartite state
and gives a half both to Alice and Bob, who can only perform LOCC [ 12 ,
103 , 143 ] . Note that the local accessible information is bounded by
the accessible information @xmath . A Holevo-like bound can be obtained
in this way (we present a strongly simplified version):

###### Theorem 3.3.7.

The local accessible information of a quantum state @xmath is bounded by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Here @xmath is the residual state, the state left-over by
Alice and Bob after a particular measurement process. The amount of
entanglement @xmath that may be extracted during the process satisfies
@xmath .

Thus to some extent, the entanglement (both initial and final) and local
accessibility are complementary quantities. In our example above, the
local accessible information @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath , so that
@xmath in the process of information extraction. The bound is here
saturated; as in the process of information extraction, we distill
@xmath ebits and the extraction of locally accessible information is in
this case the best distillation procedure (see above). The upper bound
of local accessible information hence gives an upper bound on the
entanglement of distillation that can be obtained through local
distinguishing (see also [ 262 ] ). We will encounter distillation
protocols based on local distinguishing in the next section.

### 3.4 Some important distillation protocols

In this section we review some important distillation protocols. We
analyse them in some detail for bipartite qubit systems, and only point
to the relevant literature for higher level systems as already in the
bipartite qubit scenario the main principles of distillation can be
captured. From a practical point of view, it is also probably the most
interesting. Note however that we discuss distillation protocols from a
theoretical point of view, with disregard for practical limitations and
operational simplicity. The foundations of all current distillation
protocols have been set out in two brilliant papers Ref. [ 21 , 20 ]
which we will follow closely. It is somehow remarkable how relatively
little progress has been made since these were originally published.

#### 3.4.1 Recursive protocols

##### The recurrence protocol (IBM protocol)

Being the first protocol [ 21 , 20 ] , the recurrence protocol is also
the simplest. Alice and Bob start with a large pool of identical qubit
states with fidelity @xmath . In every round of the protocol two pairs
@xmath get consumed, and with some probability, a single pair @xmath is
produced with @xmath . Doing this a large number of times, the original
pool of states @xmath will be transformed into a smaller pool of states
@xmath . Repeating the protocol, this time on the new pool of states,
they can increase the fidelity further, and so on (hence the name
recurrence protocol).

So let Alice and Bob take two identical pairs with fidelity @xmath . In
the first step of the protocol, they will bring both pairs in the
standard isotropic form (see also Chapter 2 and Section 4.1 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

States of this form are invariant under local bilateral unitaries @xmath
and it follows that we can bring any state into the isotropic form by
performing a random local unitary (this is the so-called twirling
operation) without changing its fidelity.

The unitary XOR (or CNOT) [ 214 ] defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

behaves just like a classical XOR, flipping the second bit,
conditionally on the first. Now the second step of the recurrence
protocol consists of both parties implementing the local unitary XOR on
their two halves. For the sequel we will call the first pair the source
pair and the second pair the target pair. This local unitary operation
called BXOR (bilateral XOR) entangles both Alice’s and Bob’s local
halves, while it leaves the global entanglement between Alice and Bob
unaltered.

Finally, Alice and Bob measure the second pair in the basis @xmath . If
the outcomes of their measurement coincide, it is not so hard to show
that the fidelity of the first pair will change as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Figure 3.2 illustrates this relation, and it can be seen that the
fidelity strictly increases when @xmath . The first pair will no longer
be isotropic, so that for further rounds in the protocol, the first step
(twirling) will have to be repeated. When the measurement outcomes do
not coincide, the first pair has to be disregarded, and the protocol was
unsuccessful. It is important to note at this point that the exchange of
the measurement outcomes requires two-way communication.

As remarked at the start of this section, this round of the protocol
will have to be repeated many times, until a sufficiently large pool of
states with fidelity @xmath has been obtained. Then a new round can be
started, using the new pool of states. In this way the recurrence
protocol is able to transforms states with fidelity @xmath into states
with fidelity arbitrary close to one. The probability of doing so
however tends to zero as @xmath , as in every round at least half of the
states are disregarded.

##### The QPA protocol (Oxford protocol)

The QPA protocol [ 69 , 194 ] was introduced in the context of quantum
cryptography (Quantum Privacy Amplification) and is an improved version
of the recurrence protocol. It achieves a certain fidelity with higher
probability and does not require twirling. In fact it works in an
identical fashion as the recurrence protocol, except that the twirling
operation is replaced by a rotation. For completeness, the protocol
consists of the following steps:

1.  Denote @xmath and define a unitary operator @xmath . Then Alice
    implements @xmath on each of her qubits and Bob implements @xmath on
    his qubits. It can be verified that this amounts to ordering the
    coefficients @xmath (see below), such that @xmath [ 68 ] .

2.  The parties implement the unitary BXOR on their two halves.

3.  Alice and Bob measure the second pair in the basis @xmath and keep
    the first pair if and only if their measurement outcomes coincide.

To see that this is a distillation protocol, let us write an arbitrary
state in the Bell basis

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here the first index will be called the phase index, and the second the
shift index.

In this way, we can describe one step in the protocol as the mapping
@xmath . Now by going through the algebra it can verified that the
coefficients @xmath only depend on @xmath , more precisely:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with @xmath . It is not completely straightforward, but it can be proven
[ 194 ] that when @xmath the protocol converges to @xmath (that is
@xmath ).

##### Local permutations

Several improvements of the early recursive protocols have been proposed
[ 209 , 157 , 201 , 216 , 210 ] . It has also been realised that the
recurrence and the QPA protocol can be interpreted as coming from a
quantum stabilizer code, and how to convert an arbitrary quantum
stabilizer code to a distillation protocol [ 208 , 315 , 3 ] . As it
turns out, all these different schemes can to a large extend be captured
in the so-called local permutations schemes [ 68 , 155 ] .

The main idea is to start with @xmath pairs every round, and at the end
measure @xmath pairs. Such a protocol will be called an @xmath
-protocol, the QPA and recurrence protocols are thus @xmath protocols.
Naturally, for @xmath the XOR operation will have to be replaced by some
multipartite unitary entangling operator. One way of doing this stems
from analysing the BXOR operation in a bit more detail. Note that the
XOR operation can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath addition modulus 2. From this follows that the BXOR
operation acts on two Bell states as (note that as usual the two Bell
states are shared by both parties) [ 311 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus although BXOR is an entangling operation, it happens to be
non-entangling on Bell states ⁴ ⁴ 4 To see that BXOR, or thus XOR is
entangling it is sufficient to consider an example such as @xmath . . In
view of the above we write @xmath and interpreting @xmath as a
bitstring, we can attach a number from 1 to @xmath to it. It is then not
so hard to show that in this sense the BXOR corresponds to a permutation
of @xmath elements. Generalising to @xmath pairs, one can consider
permutations of @xmath elements, such that the corresponding unitary is
local. The aim of working with this restricted set of unitaries, rather
than say, all local unitaries or even all permutations is to make
optimisation easier. Furthermore, an elegant closed expression for these
special permutations is known [ 68 ] . The problem of finding an optimal
@xmath -protocol is highly non-trivial, as a trade off has to be found
between the increase in fidelity and the probability at which this
happens. Also, in general, the choice of the permutation will be state
dependent. Once a suitable permutation has been found, the distillation
protocol is identical to the QPA protocol, except that in the second
step the BXOR need to be replaced with the corresponding local unitary
and in the third step, @xmath pairs need to be measured.

Note that recurrence protocols can be readily generalised to higher
level states @xmath with @xmath by replacing the XOR by some multilevel
entangling unitary [ 2 , 131 , 202 , 28 ] .

#### 3.4.2 Hashing and breeding

The hashing protocol [ 21 , 269 ] , unlike the recurrence schemes has a
strictly positive yield for Bell diagonal states with @xmath . Somewhat
contradictorily, the protocol does only need 1-way communication. In
this section we present a simplified version, the breeding protocol [ 20
] , which assumes that Alice and Bob share initially @xmath pure
singlets (we call them here pre-distilled singlets) per pair of @xmath .
However as it turns out, both protocols give rise to the same yield.

In the breeding protocol Alice and Bob share an arbitrarily large amount
@xmath of identical Bell diagonal states:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Note that any state can be made Bell diagonal by a certain
discrete twirl operation (see Section 4.1 ). The main idea of the
breeding/hashing protocols is now to interpret the above as Alice and
Bob sharing @xmath with probability @xmath . This way of reasoning is
perfectly valid as the density operator contains all physical observable
information, independently of the preparation procedure, and the state
@xmath can be thought of as prepared in this way. The goal of Alice and
Bob is then to identify the specific sequence @xmath , after which Bob
can simply apply local unitary transformations to obtain @xmath .

The breeding protocol uses pre-distilled singlets as target states for
BXOR operations to gain information on the source states characterised
by the sequence @xmath . If Alice and Bob implement a BXOR with a pure
target @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the shift index of the target pair toggles when the source pair has
shift index @xmath , while the source pair remains unchanged. So when
Alice and Bob perform BXOR operations on each pair of a subset of @xmath
pairs with a pure singlet as a fixed target state, they can identify the
number of source pairs with shift index 1, by measuring (locally) the
shift index of the target state. Thus, this procedure allows them to
identify the parity of the shift indices in the subset. Similarly, by
replacing BXOR by a different local unitary, they can determine the
parity of the phase indices in the subset.

The question is now how many parity checks are needed to gain complete
information of the sequence @xmath . This is important, as each parity
check consumes 1 pair of their initially pre-distilled singlets. A total
random sequence of @xmath pairs needs @xmath parity checks to uniquely
identify, so in doing so we would lose more entanglement than we gain.
However, for @xmath the sequence will belong to the class of @xmath
typical sequences with probability going to one. It can be shown that
the probability that two different sequences have the same parities
after @xmath checks on random subsets is smaller than @xmath . So
typically, after every parity check the list of typically sequences
reduces by a factor @xmath and thus @xmath parity checks will be
sufficient to identity the sequence in the asymptotic regime (see Ref. [
20 ] for a rigorous analysis). The yield of the breeding protocol is
therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which agrees with the hashing inequality ( 3.7 ). Both hashing and
breeding can be generalised to multilevel systems [ 311 ] . As a side
remark, note that there is a close correspondence between 1-way
distillation protocols and quantum error correcting codes. The most
important implication of this correspondence is the quantum noisy coding
theorem, which follows from the hashing inequality (recall that this
inequality gives a lower bound on the 1-way distillable entanglement) [
21 , 269 , 137 , 70 ] .

In Figure 3.3 , the value of distillable entanglement by the hashing
protocol (denoted @xmath ) has been plotted for the Werner states. As
can be seen from the figure, the hashing protocol works only for @xmath
. This can be bypassed by preceding the hashing protocol by a few
recurrence steps, increasing the fidelity above this threshold. While
the recurrence protocol exploits two-way communication, only the hashing
protocol is a proper asymptotic protocol. By introducing two-way
communication on the asymptotic level, small improvements can be made [
308 , 156 ] . The currently best known distillation rate for the Werner
states @xmath has been plotted in Figure 3.3 .

## Chapter 4 Distillability, activation and NPT bound entanglement

Having encountered PPT bound entangled states in the previous chapter,
this chapter deals with the more general question of distillability of
general quantum states. We call a state distillable if and only if the
distillable entanglement is strictly larger than zero. In three seminal
papers [ 131 , 133 , 134 ] the Horodeccy derived the fundamentals of the
theory of distillability. Namely they showed that (i) any two-qubit
entangled state can be distilled; (ii) any general @xmath -level state
@xmath is distillable if and only if there exists a two-qubit subspace
on which @xmath is entangled for some @xmath ; (iii) any state violating
the reduction criterion can be distilled. The second statement has a
number of nontransparent reformulations. Here we present a unified
presentation of these and other distillability theorems, using tools
borrowed from the separability problem. This allows us to systematically
construct positive maps, with the same properties as in (iii) of the
reduction criterion [ 59 ] . We give several other applications,
including a numerical method for checking distillability which we apply
to estimate the volume of distillable states. (Sections 4.1 - 4.2 ).

In the next section we address the question of NPT bound entanglement in
detail. After reviewing previous results [ 72 , 316 , 83 ] , we show
that this question is equivalent to a specific Schmidt number problem
and to a separability problem. In particular, we show it is equivalent
to the existence of a certain class of PPT entangled states. We end this
section with a set of one parameter states which we conjecture to
exhibit all forms of distillability (the rainbow states) [ 60 ] .

As bound entangled states are not directly useful for typical quantum
information tasks such as teleportation, the question arises whether
they have any non-classical use at all. We will see that bound
entanglement can be activated. That is, bound entanglement can be
released with the help of other (possible bound) entangled states. A
first activation-like effect was presented in Ref. [ 149 ] , but the
main results were obtained in Ref. [ 87 , 203 ] . This is the topic of
Section 4.4 .

### 4.1 Classic results

#### 4.1.1 States symmetric under local unitaries

In previous chapters we have encountered the isotropic states and the
Werner states. These states are invariant under certain local unitaries,
and because of their symmetry they have been exhaustively used in the
study of distillability. In this section, we review briefly the general
theory of states symmetric under local unitaries, as developed in Ref. [
309 ] .

Let @xmath be a subgroup of the unitaries, or possibly the whole group
of the unitaries. Then we can define the group @xmath of the unitaries
consisting of all pairs of the form @xmath acting on a Hilbert space
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is some given function of @xmath . The
set of bipartite states left invariant by the group @xmath will also be
denoted as @xmath -invariant instead of @xmath -invariant. An arbitrary
state can be projected onto an @xmath -invariant state by twirling it

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the integral is performed according to the Haar measure on @xmath .
In particular, for a finite group, the integral can be replaced by the
sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The commutant @xmath of the group @xmath is defined as the set of all
operators invariant under @xmath -twirling, or equivalently the set of
all operators @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . It follows that
the set of bipartite states left invariant by @xmath is just the
intersection of the state space with the commutant @xmath of the group
@xmath . Note that there always exist a finite basis of operators @xmath
spanning the commutant @xmath . Now for any operator @xmath it is
straightforward to check that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This relation has a number of important consequences:

1.  A @xmath -invariant state @xmath is uniquely determined by the
    expectation values @xmath for all @xmath . In particular, if @xmath
    is finite, then the set of @xmath -invariant states can be
    characterised by a finite set of parameters @xmath , for all @xmath
    .

2.  For an arbitrary state @xmath , the parameters @xmath , for all
    @xmath , are invariant under twirling. From the previous point it
    follows that in order to calculate the image of @xmath under
    twirling it is sufficient to calculate these parameters.

3.  Suppose we need to calculate an extreme for some @xmath -invariant
    state @xmath such as @xmath , where the operators @xmath belong to
    some set @xmath . It is then sufficient to minimise over the
    (smaller) set) @xmath .

For the Werner states [ 321 ] , which are @xmath -invariant, the
commutant is spanned by @xmath and @xmath . The isotropic states [ 131 ,
241 ] are @xmath -invariant and a basis is given by @xmath and @xmath .
Note that for qubits, the Werner and isotropic states are related via a
local unitary, while this does not hold for higher dimensions. As we
have seen in the previous section, some distillation protocols make
extensive use of twirling. As remarked in Section 2.4.1 for the Werner
and isotropic states, it can be shown that the twirl can be written as a
finite sum ( [ 83 , 21 ] ). In practice however, twirling can be done
simply by performing a single random @xmath or @xmath transformation and
forgetting which specific unitary was used.

The Bell diagonal states encountered in the previous chapter are
invariant under the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with as usual @xmath the Pauli matrices. A generalisation of Bell
diagonal states and their symmetry group for arbitrary dimensions is
presented in Ref. [ 311 ] .

From basic symmetry groups one can generate others using tensor
products. Consider the case where we have two symmetry groups @xmath and
@xmath acting respectively on @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
be a basis for the @xmath - and the @xmath -invariant states
respectively. Then a basis for the @xmath -invariant states acting on
@xmath will be given by @xmath . In what follows, we will number the
systems belonging to party @xmath with odd numbers and party @xmath with
even numbers. As an example, a basis for the @xmath -invariant states is
given by the operators @xmath . Imposing the extra condition that the
coefficients of @xmath and @xmath should be the same, we end up with the
so-called @xmath -invariant states as introduced in Ref. [ 309 ] , where
they were used as a counterexample to the additivity conjecture for the
relative entropy of entanglement. We return to this set of states in
Section 4.3 .

#### 4.1.2 Fundamental theorems

In this section we present the three basic theorems (Theorems 4.1.1 ,
4.1.2 and 4.1.3 ) on distillability by the Horodeccy [ 131 , 133 , 134 ]
, as mentioned in the introduction. We also present a first result [ 131
] on NPT bound entanglement. Because of their importance we present full
proofs.

###### Theorem 4.1.1.

All entangled two-qubit states @xmath are distillable ( @xmath ).

###### Proof.

The proof consists of locally transforming @xmath into a state @xmath ,
which has a singlet fraction larger than a half. In Section 3.4.2 we
have seen that for such states the distillable rate is strictly
positive.

Since @xmath is an entangled two-qubit state it has an negative partial
transposition @xmath . We use the same technique as in ( 1.7 ) to
transform the state such that it is detectable by a suitable
entanglement witness. Let us denote the eigenvector corresponding to the
negative eigenvalue of @xmath with @xmath , so that @xmath . Now any
vector @xmath can be written as @xmath (see ( 1.3 )). With this we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let Alice perform a filtering operation corresponding to the Kraus
operators @xmath . Then the state becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this way we have transformed the state such that @xmath , as @xmath .
Now in @xmath the swap operator can be written as @xmath , with @xmath
the projector upon the state @xmath . So that we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a simple local rotation can then map @xmath onto a state @xmath such
that @xmath . ∎

The next theorem is the fundamental theorem of distillation, we present
a slightly different proof as compared to Ref. [ 134 ] .

###### Theorem 4.1.2.

A state @xmath on @xmath is distillable if and only if there exist two
dimensional projectors @xmath and @xmath such that for some @xmath the
state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

is entangled. Since the resulting state acts on @xmath , this is
equivalent to @xmath having a negative partial transposition.

###### Proof.

The condition is clearly sufficient, as when such projectors can be
found, many copies of @xmath can be produced, and from the previous
theorem it follows that these can be distilled. Suppose now that the
state @xmath is distillable, and thus @xmath . Let us fix arbitrarily
small @xmath . From the definition of distillable entanglement ( 3.6 ),
it follows that for any @xmath there exists a number @xmath and a trace
preserving LOCC @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the maximally entangled two-qubit singlet. This implies
that, by choosing @xmath small enough, and disregarding all but one
approximate copy of @xmath , we can find an LOCC protocol @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We write this LOCC protocol in the separable form (with @xmath a
normalisation factor)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since this is approximately @xmath we know that @xmath is entangled and
we can assume that all @xmath project onto the same two-qubit space.
Thus every @xmath and @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, since @xmath is entangled, at least one term in this sum ( 4.2
) must be entangled, for instance for @xmath . We denote the projector
on the space spanned by @xmath as @xmath and the projector on @xmath as
@xmath . We have thus shown that the following two-qubit state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is entangled. It follows that also the two-qubit state @xmath must be
entangled. ∎

If the condition of the theorem is satisfied for a particular number
@xmath , then we call the state pseudo- @xmath -copy distillable or in
short @xmath -distillable [ 83 , 72 ] . This result has proven to be
extremely useful and is often used as a definition of distillability.
For completeness, we state the following corollary (see Ref. [ 131 , 72
] ):

###### Corollary 4.1.1.

A state @xmath on @xmath is @xmath -distillable if and only if there
exist some local operators @xmath and @xmath mapping onto @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath acting on @xmath .

###### Proof.

This corollary follows directly from the previous theorem and the fact
that any entangled two-qubit state violates both the partial transpose
and reduction criterion. Via local filtering, see equation ( 1.7 ) and
the subsequent discussion (see also the proof of Theorem 4.1.1 ), one
can then transform these states such that they are detected by the
witnesses @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 4.1.3.

All states violating the reduction criterion are distillable.

###### Proof.

In a similar fashion as in the proof of the previous corollary, a state
@xmath violating the reduction criterion can be locally transformed into
a state @xmath , which can be detected by the witness @xmath , or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As remarked in Section 3.4.1 , for such states a recurrence protocol is
available. To get a finite yield, one can then use a multilevel
generalisation of the hashing protocol, see Section 3.4.2 .

Another way [ 138 ] of showing this is to @xmath -twirl the state @xmath
, after which it will become isotropic. The fidelity remains invariant
under @xmath -twirling so that the state is still entangled. Now both
parties apply on their half the operation @xmath . This projects the
state @xmath onto a two-qubit isotropic state @xmath with @xmath , and
such states are distillable, as we have seen in the discussion of
distillation protocols (Section 3.4 ). ∎

The second proof implies that all states violating the reduction
criterion are distillable if and only if all entangled isotropic states
are. A dual result can be obtained for the partial transpose criterion
and the Werner states:

###### Theorem 4.1.4.

All entangled NPT states can be distilled if and only if all entangled
Werner states can be distilled.

###### Proof.

Since entangled Werner states have a negative partial transposition, one
direction is trivial. To prove the other direction, note that as before,
any NPT state @xmath can be locally transformed into a state @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now twirling this state, we obtain an entangled Werner state @xmath
(because @xmath ). If we are able to distill all Werner states, then
also the original state is distillable. ∎

In Section 4.3 we will present strong evidence that some of the
entangled Werner states cannot be distilled, and hence for the existence
of NPT bound entanglement.

We end this section on the fundamental theorems with a remark on finite
copy distillation. We have seen that any distillable state is (pseudo)-
@xmath -copy distillable. The prefix @xmath reflects that if we project
upon a two dimensional subspace, we are only half way through our
distillation process. Indeed, in the next step we would like to repeat
this procedure @xmath times on batches of @xmath copies of @xmath ,
giving us @xmath copies of the qubit pair @xmath . Finally we can use
existing protocols to extract maximally entangled singlets from @xmath
for @xmath . Thus in general, even when a state is @xmath -distillable
we might need an infinite number of copies to get a finite yield of
distillation.

It is then natural to ask whether there are any states which can be
distilled using a finite number of copies, and in particular if there
are any states which are single copy distillable. Clearly, pure states
are single copy distillable and so are the quasi-pure states encountered
in Section 3.3.3 . For generic qubit mixed states, it has been proven [
189 , 172 ] that this is not possible. For qubits the best strategy to
increase the entanglement of formation is transforming the state into a
Bell diagonal state [ 173 ] .

The explicit form of this transformation was found in Ref. [ 298 , 42 ]
. See Ref. [ 147 ] for bounds on single copy distillation of arbitrary
level systems. Despite that in general single-copy distillation is not
possible, the Horodeccy showed the existence of an effect which they
called quasi-distillation [ 136 ] (see also [ 298 ] ). In this scenario,
it is possible to extract a pure maximally entangled singlet from some
(specially constructed) single mixed state, but with probability going
to zero, as the fidelity of the output state approaches this maximally
entangled singlet.

The problem of finite copy distillation for more than one copy of the
state has been solved for qubits in Ref. [ 168 ] . It was shown that
@xmath copies of a two-qubit mixed state @xmath can be distilled into a
pure entangled state if and only if the range of @xmath cannot be
spanned by product states. Surprisingly, this result is independent of
@xmath . This result is important as it shows that for entangled qubits,
which are all 1-distillable, we need typically an infinite number of
copies to distill pure entangled states. The reason is that although we
can get a state with very high fidelity given a large number of copies
(for instance by means of the recurrence protocol), in general this
final state will still be mixed entangled. Only in the asymptotic limit
of the number of copies, it is then possible to obtain a pure state.

### 4.2 Uniform treatment of distillability

This section contains an original contribution first published in Ref. [
59 ] . The motivation behind this work was an attempt to answer the
following questions:

  What is the special role the reduction criterion plays in the story of
  distillation? Are there any other positive maps with the same
  property? Can we find a decomposable map which is stronger than the
  reduction criterion, but so that all states detected by it are still
  distillable?

#### 4.2.1 Borrowing tools from the separability problem

We have seen in Chapter 1 that separable states form a convex set, from
which follows that there exists an entanglement witness for each
entangled state. Using the Jamiołkowski isomorphism between operators
and maps, this can be translated in terms of positive maps. The idea is
to apply a similar reasoning to the set of distillable states. The crux
is that 1-undistillable states also form a convex set. Indeed, from
Theorem 4.1.2 and the linearity of the partial transpose, it follows
that mixing 1-undistillable states can never yield a distillable state.

The question is now to determine the corresponding witnesses. Notice
that from Theorem 4.1.2 it follows [ 83 ] that distillability is
equivalent to the existence of a Schmidt rank two state @xmath , with
@xmath two orthonormal vectors in @xmath and @xmath two orthonormal
vectors in @xmath , and some @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus @xmath , with @xmath Schmidt rank two, can be interpreted as a
distillability witness. The following observation generalises this.

###### Observation 4.2.1.

A state @xmath is 1-undistillable if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all operators @xmath with @xmath a Schmidt number two state.

This observation is compatible with the fact that PPT states cannot be
distilled as @xmath is decomposable by construction. Note that to study
the phenomenon of distillation it is sufficient to characterise the
1-distillable states; @xmath -distillable states @xmath can be
characterised by looking at one copy of @xmath .

Now in a similar fashion as the separability problem and Schmidt number
problem, we have to look at map @xmath associated with the operator
@xmath as given by the Jamiołkowski isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us start with the simple case where @xmath . As @xmath is a
decomposable operator, the map @xmath is decomposable and of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

What more can we say about this completely positive map @xmath ? Recall
that the general form of such a map is given by (see Theorem 1.2.3 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are arbitrary operators. Now let @xmath be an arbitrary
Schmidt rank @xmath state, we obtain after some algebra that the
associated map ¹ ¹ 1 This fact was independently obtained in Ref. [ 4 ]
. is given by @xmath , with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In our case @xmath , so that @xmath will have rank 2.

Let us now move to the case where @xmath , with @xmath an arbitrary
Schmidt number two state. A similar line of reasoning shows that the
associated map is given by @xmath , with @xmath a CP map with rank two
Kraus operators @xmath . We call maps @xmath defined in this way
two-decomposable ² ² 2 This term has different meaning in other
contexts, such as in Ref. [ 179 ] . . Note that the adjoint map of a
two-decomposable map is two-decomposable. It is now an easy exercise to
derive the necessary and sufficient condition of one-undistillability in
terms of two-decomposable maps. For completeness, we present the
derivation.

###### Theorem 4.2.1.

A state @xmath is 1-undistillable if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all two-decomposable maps @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is 1-distillable, so that there exists a @xmath , with
@xmath a Schmidt rank-2 vector such that @xmath . Using the associated
map this can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath is positive it follows that @xmath , i.e. we have found
a two-decomposable map that detects the state. To prove the converse,
let @xmath be a two-decomposable map such that @xmath has a negative
eigenvalue. Denoting by @xmath the corresponding eigenvector, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is sufficient to consider @xmath , with @xmath a rank-2 operator,
therefore @xmath , with @xmath Schmidt rank 2. Thus @xmath , and @xmath
is 1-distillable. ∎

When @xmath the associated map is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is instructive to compare this to Theorem 4.1.2 . The above mapping
is basically a projection of the partial transposed state on a @xmath
(this special case was also derived in Ref. [ 72 ] ). Theorem 4.1.2
characterizes distillability in an analogous manner, but instead
projects onto @xmath . Thus regarded in this way, the above theorem is
both a generalisation and a simplification of the main theorem of
distillability.

Note that given a two-decomposable map @xmath , the above result implies
that undistillable states must satisfy both @xmath and the dual
criterion ( @xmath . As the reader might have guessed, the reduction
criterion is just an example of a two-decomposable map, which we will
show below. We also give numerous other applications of our Theorem
4.2.1 and Observation 4.2.1 , starting with an elementary derivation of
some alternative formulations of distillability.

#### 4.2.2 Application 1: Derivation of other distillability theorems

In this section we rederive two distillability theorems. The original
derivations were quite lengthy, and as we will show, both theorems
follow straightforwardly from our Observation 4.2.1 and some basic
theorems on Schmidt numbers from Chapter 2 . The following theorem was
first derived in Ref. [ 72 ] , see also the related characterisation in
Ref. [ 257 ] .

###### Theorem 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be a state and @xmath be the completely positive map defined
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the transpose map. Then @xmath is 1-undistillable if
and only if @xmath is two-positive, and more generally @xmath
-undistillable if and only if @xmath is two-positive.

###### Proof.

For undistillable states @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath having Schmidt number two. From the isomorphism between
states positive on Schmidt number @xmath states and @xmath -positive
maps (Theorem 2.2.2 ), we deduce that the map associated with @xmath is
two-positive for undistillable states. This map is just given by @xmath
as defined in the statement of the theorem. Thus @xmath is
1-undistillable if and only if @xmath is two-positive. The second part
follows trivially by applying the first part on @xmath and some
elementary algebra. ∎

The second theorem is a slightly simplified version of the one presented
in Ref. [ 177 ] .

###### Theorem 4.2.3.

Let @xmath be the projector onto a maximally entangled state acting on
@xmath . Then for an arbitrary operator @xmath acting on @xmath we can
define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

A state @xmath acting on @xmath is @xmath -undistillable if and only if
@xmath is an entanglement witness.

###### Proof.

From Observation 4.2.1 we have that @xmath is 1-undistillable if and
only if @xmath is positive on Schmidt number two states. The theorem
then follows directly from Lemma 2.1.2 , and from the fact that @xmath
is @xmath -undistillable if and only if @xmath is 1-undistillable. ∎

#### 4.2.3 Application 2: A plethora of reduction-like maps

In this section we show that the map associated with the reduction
criterion is two-decomposable, which immediately proves that all states
violating the reduction criterion can be distilled. This greatly
simplifies the original proof which relied on a series of protocols:
filtering, twirling and distillation of isotropic states. Let us
construct the operator @xmath from the Schmidt rank-2 vectors @xmath ,
@xmath . Adding the corresponding projectors we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this follows that @xmath is positive on undistillable states. The
associated map is given by @xmath . This is just the map used by the
reduction criterion for entanglement. Thus if a state @xmath satisfies
@xmath or @xmath then it is 1-distillable. In this way we have also
proven that the map is decomposable [ 131 ] , and using our results one
obtains readily the explicit Choi-Kraus form of the map. Next, we
construct some other elementary examples by combining different Schmidt
rank-2 vectors:

@xmath Taking our vectors @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Therefore @xmath and the associated map is given by @xmath
. The map @xmath maps all off-diagonal elements to zero and leaves the
diagonal itself invariant.

@xmath For Schmidt rank-2 vectors of the form @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus @xmath ; the associated map is given by @xmath .

@xmath If we take Schmidt rank-2 vectors of the form @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus @xmath ; the associated map is given by @xmath .

@xmath In fact, every operator with Schmidt number 2 gives us a strong
distillability witness. In Chapter 2 we have seen that the special
isotropic state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

allows a Schmidt rank-2 decomposition. We find @xmath and for the
corresponding map @xmath .

It is worth noting that although these maps are just like the reduction
map two-decomposable, they lack any physical interpretation. The
reduction criterion on the other hand, has several intuitive properties,
linking with other notions in quantum information (see for instance [
231 , 43 ] ). As an example, note that the hash inequality only gives a
non-trivial lower bound on the entanglement of distillation for states
violating the reduction criterion [ 137 ] . We believe therefore that
the presented maps deserve further investigation.

There are however a few general statements we can make about the
introduced maps. As we have seen for the separability problem, given an
entanglement witness @xmath , the dual positive map @xmath will detect
much more states (see the discussion after Theorem 1.2.5 ). In a similar
fashion as is shown there, the map @xmath corresponds to the class of
witnesses @xmath , for arbitrary @xmath . It also implies that the
criteria @xmath and @xmath are insensitive to local transformations by
one of the parties (thus to filtering operations). Indeed, suppose Alice
performs a general measurement, with measurement operators @xmath and
@xmath satisfying @xmath . Then the state @xmath will be transformed
into @xmath . It follows that, if the original state did not violate the
criteria, then the transformed state does not either. The map
corresponds to the operator witness, together with all possible local
filtering operations by one of the parties.

We have shown how to construct maps that detect distillability,
applicable in arbitrary dimensions, which can be easily evaluated on
states. There is however a catch. As can be seen from the reconstruction
of the reduction criterion, the witness from which the map is derived,
is a convex combination of many witnesses. So it is possible that one of
those witnesses (and the associated map) detects a state, while the sum
does not. In other words, the map could be weaker than expected at first
sight. The sum of the negative eigenvalues of @xmath , or the
entanglement of @xmath , can be seen as a measure for the strength of a
certain map.

The basic requirement for a distillability witness @xmath to detect a
two-distillable state @xmath which is not 1-distillable is that @xmath
must be entangled with respect to the first and second pair. Indeed
suppose @xmath with @xmath separable, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the vectors @xmath have at most Schmidt rank 2. Consider the
witness for the reduction criterion on two pairs:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But from Ref. [ 138 ] we can write @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath projection operators onto the symmetric and antisymmetric
subspaces respectively. Substitution yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath is separable with respect to the different pairs. Note
that this property is not adhered by the map since @xmath could be
entangled with respect to the two pairs, even if @xmath itself is not.
So it is not at all obvious that collective application of the reduction
criterion (for instance on @xmath ) does not yield a stronger criterion.

It was proven in Ref. [ 131 ] that it is not the case, namely, if @xmath
then @xmath . It is readily verified that all introduced maps share this
property. In the case of the reduction criterion, the reverse is also
true. This can be proven as follows. From Ref. [ 131 ] we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now suppose @xmath is not a positive operator, so that there exists a
vector @xmath with negative expectation value. From the above expression
follows that @xmath , with @xmath . So applying the reduction criterion
to one or more pairs is completely equivalent. A similar statement and
proof applies for @xmath , but for the other maps, this reverse
statement is not true.

#### 4.2.4 Application 3: Random Schmidt-2 robustness and distillability

The following proposition, first presented in Ref. [ 61 ] uses upper
bounds to the random Schmidt-2 robustness as defined in Section 2.4.2 to
construct a distillability criterion:

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary bipartite state, such that @xmath has
negative eigenvalues. Let @xmath be the eigenvector corresponding to a
negative eigenvalue @xmath and let @xmath be an upper bound to its
random Schmidt-2 robustness. Then @xmath is 1-distillable if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

From the definition, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Schmidt number two. Now from Observation 4.2.1 follows that @xmath
is 1-distillable if @xmath . This can we rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

This proposition provides an important reason to find an exact
analytical formula for @xmath . Note that this distillability criterion
only depends on the minimum eigenvalue and the corresponding
eigenvector. It is easy to see that it is independent of the reduction
criterion as we show by means of an example. Consider the state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is easy to check that the reduction criterion is not useful here. The
partial transposition @xmath has an eigenvector @xmath and corresponding
eigenvalue @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath is distillable.

An unconditional distillability criterion, which does only depend on the
minimum eigenvalue of @xmath would follow from Conjecture 2.4.1 .
Pending on the proof of this conjecture, we have that @xmath is
distillable whenever @xmath has an eigenvalue @xmath .

#### 4.2.5 Application 4: Volume of 1-distillable states

In this section we will outline a powerful algorithm for the detection
of distillable states (first published in Ref. [ 60 ] ). As before, it
is clear that we can confine ourselves to the study of 1-distillability.
A first numerical method for this problem was devised by Dür et al. [ 83
] starting from the basic minimisation over Schmidt rank two vectors
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

They convert this problem into a minimisation of the minimum eigenvalue
of certain matrices. Their method involves also calculating an inverse
of a matrix in every step.

In view of our discussion above, we will perform this minimisation not
over the distillability witnesses, but over the much stronger associated
two-decomposable maps. Thus for a given state @xmath , we can reduce the
problem (see also again Ref. [ 72 ] ) to checking whether there exists
an operator @xmath , with @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One way of doing this is to parametrize a countable subset of vectors
which is dense within all vectors, such as the one introduced in Ref. [
159 ] . Explicitly their set takes the form @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Thus for every @xmath , we can construct sets of pairs
@xmath and @xmath , and taking @xmath increasingly large we will detect
all 1-distillable states, except those arbitrary close to the boundary
of the convex set of 1-undistillable states.

In practice two improvements can be made which greatly enhance the
performance. First note that the countable subset above will yield
vectors @xmath and @xmath not necessarily orthogonal. Furthermore,
clearly such a countable subset will in general not pick vectors
uniformly distributed according to the Haar measure. One way of
overcoming this is to take for @xmath and @xmath two columns of a random
unitary. Here orthogonality and uniformity are automatically guaranteed.
The associated algorithm works well for low dimensional density
matrices. For higher dimensions, a local optimisation of the @xmath and
@xmath yielding the minimum after a certain cut-off number of tests
turns out to work well. The explicit algorithm has been reproduced in
Appendix A.2 .

Let us apply this to give a numerical estimate of the volume of
1-distillable states for low dimensional quantum states. A similar
numerical estimate has been carried out for entangled states [ 342 , 339
] . When talking about volumes on the set of density operators, it is
clear that the results will depend on the measure. We choose the measure
applied in Ref. [ 342 ] as it seems very natural.

A general bipartite quantum state @xmath acting on @xmath can be
expanded by virtue of the spectral decomposition as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath diagonal and @xmath unitary. The measure we are going to use
is the product measure @xmath . Here @xmath represents the uniform
distribution of the points on the manifold given by @xmath . A simple
method for generating such a distribution from independent uniformly
distributed random numbers chosen in the interval @xmath is outlined in
Appendix A of Ref. [ 342 ] . Similarly, @xmath is chosen to be the
uniform measure on unitary matrices (the Haar measure). To generate
random unitaries according to this measure one can use the algorithm
from Ref. [ 341 , 237 ] which relies on a decomposition of a general
unitary in two-dimensional unitary transformations. A simpler method for
generating Haar unitary matrices is as follows [ 275 , 86 ] . Take a
random matrix @xmath , whose entries are complex numbers which are
independently normally distributed with mean zero. The polar
decomposition @xmath , with @xmath positive, then yields @xmath
distributed according to @xmath .

We have tested the our method on @xmath density matrices acting on
@xmath for @xmath . The estimated probability for proving the
distillability of a state as a function of the test number is displayed
in Figure 4.1 . A striking feature is that the vast majority of the
distillable states were detected in the first few tests. This is
especially true for low dimensional states. For example for @xmath about
half of the NPT states are found to be distillable in the first test.
For @xmath the probability of finding a distillable state in the first
test is about @xmath .

In Figure 4.2 the probability of an NPT state being 1-undistillable is
plotted versus the dimension @xmath . To obtain sufficient precision we
carried out @xmath random tests per state, and in addition @xmath
optimisation steps seeking for a local minimum. Of course, this method
does not guarantee to detect every 1-distillable state, but we obtain an
upper bound of the number of undistillable states. The figure suggests
that the volume of 1-undistillable states drops to zero for high
dimensions. In Figure 4.3 the same graph is drawn, but now PPT states
are included.

It is tempting to conclude from this numerical evidence that bound
entangled states are primarily a phenomenon present in low dimensional
quantum systems. In high dimensional systems most undistillable states
are therefore situated in the immediate neighbourhood of the set of
separable states. Our results are consistent with the fact that bound
entanglement for continuous variables is a rare phenomenon [ 152 ] . In
particular it was shown that the subset of undistillable states is
nowhere dense in the set of bipartite continuous variable states. From
this it follows that the set of undistillable continuous variables
states does not contain any open ball, an argument which was made
explicit for separable states in Ref. [ 92 ] . Given an infinite
dimensional separable state one can construct sequences of closer and
closer states all of which are entangled. Following the same methods one
can explicitly construct a distillable state in any @xmath
-neighbourhood in the trace norm of any state [ 89 ] . However, note
that in Ref. [ 121 ] a parametrized family of measures on states was
introduced, which in some region yields states primarily
1-undistillable.

### 4.3 The question of NPT bound entanglement

#### 4.3.1 Early results

As we have seen in Theorem 4.1.4 , the question of the existence of NPT
bound entanglement is equivalent to the existence of undistillable
entangled Werner states. Numerical evidence seems to suggest that some
Werner states are indeed undistillable. However, the problem is still
open, and constitutes one of the major challenges in quantum information
theory. What has been shown [ 72 , 83 ] is that there are entangled
Werner states that are @xmath -undistillable for every @xmath , however
the range of states for which one is able to prove this, vanishes as
@xmath goes to infinity. We will prove this partial result following the
method presented in Ref. [ 83 ] . We start with the following key lemma.

###### Lemma 4.3.1.

Let @xmath be the projector onto the maximally entangled @xmath -level
state and @xmath , then for any Schmidt rank two vector @xmath we have:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

###### Proof.

(1) For @xmath , this is clearly the case, as the overlap of the
maximally entangled state and a Schmidt rank two vector is at most
@xmath (see Lemma 2.1.1 ). For @xmath this follows from the case @xmath
and @xmath .

(2) This follows from @xmath .

(3) For @xmath , this follows directly from (1) and the definition
@xmath . We prove it for arbitrary @xmath by induction, so let it be
true for a certain @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Writing this trace as @xmath , where we first trace out over the first
pair, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now since @xmath is separable (see ( 2.1 )), it is easy to verify that
@xmath can be written as @xmath with @xmath Schmidt rank two. Also from
the case @xmath follows that @xmath . ∎

This lemma is practically all we need to present the main result of this
section.

###### Theorem 4.3.1.

The Werner states

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath are entangled for @xmath or @xmath . They are 1-distillable
if and only if @xmath and @xmath -undistillable for @xmath , for some
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The first part follows from the fact that positivity of the partial
transposition is a necessary and sufficient condition for separability
of the Werner states [ 309 ] . The Werner states are 1-distillable for
@xmath , as follows from the overlap of the partial transposition with a
Schmidt rank two vector @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used Lemma 2.1.1 . For @xmath copies let us put @xmath and
@xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath consists of all the other terms in the tensor product
expansion. Note that all these terms contain at least one @xmath . From
the previous lemma follows then that for any Schmidt rank two vector
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying again the previous lemma, we also have that we can calculate a
lower bound for @xmath . Thus we can always choose @xmath sufficiently
small so that @xmath for which @xmath will be @xmath -undistillable. We
refer to the original reference and our next section for qualitative
results on the value of @xmath . ∎

From this theorem it was conjectured that all Werner states with @xmath
are undistillable, although @xmath for @xmath . Apart from some
numerical evidence, the main reason was that at the time these results
appeared, not a single example of a state was known which is
2-distillable but 1-undistillable. In the meantime, several such states
have appeared [ 270 , 87 , 310 ] . These first examples arose in the
context of activation (see Section 4.4 ). Important progress was made by
Watrous [ 316 ] who constructed a one-parameter set of distillable
states which are @xmath -undistillable in some range. We will discuss
these states in the next section. Watrous’s result does not seem too
unlikely, as the notion of @xmath -distillability, as we explained
before, is really as much a mathematical as a physical notion. A
distillation process will typically require a very large number of
copies, even if the state is @xmath -distillable.

#### 4.3.2 The UUVVF-invariant states

In this section we will discuss the distillability properties of a
certain class of highly symmetric two-parameter states, which includes
the Watrous states and two copies of the Werner states, and hence is
ideal for the study of distillability. We will see that over a wide
range of the parameters, the states are probably undistillable. Other
examples of conjectured NPT bound entangled states can be found in Ref.
[ 14 ] .

The set of states we are going to study are the @xmath -invariant states
introduced in Section 4.1 . A convenient parametrisation of the set of
@xmath -invariant states is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set of density operators is restricted by the following inequalities

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This set of states includes the Werner [ 321 ] states (2 pairs in @xmath
for @xmath and 1 pair in @xmath for @xmath ) and the Watrous [ 316 ]
states ( @xmath ). The PPT states are just the separable states (see
Ref. [ 309 ] ). The states are entangled for @xmath or @xmath which
follows from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with as usual @xmath .

Let us now investigate the distillation properties of these states. To
prove distillability, all we need to do is to find Schmidt rank two
vectors @xmath such that @xmath . We present three such vectors, which
we conjecture to detect all 1-distillable states:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which detect distillability for the states respectively satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This set of states is shaded dark grey in Figure 4.4 .

Now let us derive results in the other direction, namely which states
are undistillable? First let us show that for arbitrary @xmath we can
find NPT states which are @xmath -undistillable. We will use the
inequalities from Lemma 4.3.1 . From ( 4.9 ) it follows that all
potentially negative terms contain at least one @xmath term. But we will
also have a term @xmath , and this term can always dominate when we
choose @xmath and @xmath small enough. Thus for each @xmath , as long as
we choose @xmath or @xmath small enough (but one or both negative), we
obtain an @xmath -undistillable NPT state.

Next, let us derive states that are definitely 1-undistillable. From (
4.9 ) and the given inequalities it follows straightforwardly that the
states satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are 1-undistillable. Note that this set does not touch the set of
1-distillable states. The reason for this is that although the
inequalities are sharp, the sum of such inequalities are not. In some
regions we can get a better bound by rewriting ( 4.9 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we find that all states such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are 1-undistillable. This second set of states is depicted in Figure 4.4
.

To conclude our discussion of the distillation properties we will
discuss the Watrous states [ 316 ] of which the general form is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The states are entangled if and only if @xmath and
definitely 1-distillable if @xmath . We will show that all entangled
Watrous states are distillable. Suppose now we have two pairs of
entangled Watrous states, the second pair having indices @xmath and
@xmath . Using the identities

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

it can be verified that projecting upon @xmath will yield a new Watrous
state @xmath with parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath for @xmath , the state will be more entangled than the
state we started from for each @xmath . One can repeat this protocol on
many pairs until finally @xmath , at which point we obtain a
1-distillable state. More generally the protocol can be applied to the
whole set of states; a straightforward but tedious calculation leads to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The states which are 2-distillable with this protocol are depicted in
Figure 4.4 . Repeating the protocol recursively, it is not hard to show
that all states satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are distillable (see again Figure 4.4 ). In Section 4.2.3 we have seen
that the basic requirement for a distillability witness @xmath , to
detect 2-distillability of a state @xmath (or thus 1-distillability of
@xmath ) which is not 1-distillable, is that @xmath be entangled with
respect to the two pairs. The Watrous states allow us to illustrate
this. Indeed from the above protocol we can deduce that @xmath on @xmath
will detect 2-distillable states that are not @xmath -distillable, with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the normal transposition, @xmath is the transposition
with respect to the subsystems @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is the
projector onto @xmath defined in ( 4.10 ). The projectors @xmath are
responsible for the entanglement between the first and second pair.

Using the numerically method outlined in Section 4.2.5 we have checked
numerically the distillability of the @xmath -invariant states over the
complete range of parameters for 1 and 2 copies for @xmath . We easily
recovered the proposed boundaries for 1-distillability. For two copies,
the states act on a @xmath Hilbert space and numerical matrix
manipulations in a space of this magnitude seem very hard. Fortunately,
the states are sparse and our method only requires minimisation of the
minimum eigenvalue of a @xmath matrix. We were able to detect
distillability for the Watrous states in @xmath readily and exhaustive
testing suggest that also the proposed boundary for 2-distillability is
correct. This for the first time provides strong evidence that the
Werner states are 4-undistillable for @xmath .

#### 4.3.3 As a Schmidt number problem

As we have seen, the NPT bound entangled conjecture is equivalent to the
statement that there exists no Schmidt rank two vector @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and @xmath . In other words, it seems that affirmation of
the conjecture would have to be in the form of an impossibility proof as
opposed to a constructive proof. We will reformulate this conjecture in
a more tractable form, namely as a special instance of the separability
problem, for which a large number of tools are present. As a
steppingstone we first show how to translate the distillability problem
into the problem of detecting Schmidt number 3. In the next subsection
we then reformulate it as a separability problem. We will do so for one,
two and @xmath copies of the Werner states.

Let us start with one copy of @xmath , for which the answer is known. As
@xmath belongs to the set of @xmath -invariant states, @xmath will
belong to the set of @xmath -invariant states (the isotropic states) and
hence will be invariant under the @xmath -twirl: @xmath . From this
follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

here @xmath is the operator @xmath after application of the @xmath
-twirl. Thus we do not need to check over the whole set of Schmidt rank
two vectors, but instead over the restricted set of isotropic states
with Schmidt number 2. Recall (see ( 2.1 ) and Ref. [ 286 , 257 ] ) that
if we parametrise the isotropic states as @xmath then @xmath has Schmidt
number @xmath when

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this follows that @xmath is 1-distillable if and only if @xmath ,
with @xmath . Going through the algebra we recover that all Werner
states @xmath with @xmath are 1-distillable.

Let us now look at two copies of the Werner states @xmath ; as pointed
out before, these states belong to the larger class of the @xmath
-invariant states. Thus the relevant dual set is the set of the @xmath
-invariant states. For convenience we write the operators in the order
of the indices 1,2,3,4 and omit these indices. With this in mind we
parametrise the @xmath -invariant states as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . These states are separable for @xmath and @xmath as
depicted in Figure 4.5 . The set of Schmidt number 2 states contains at
least the convex hull of the points @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

obtained by twirling the Schmidt rank two vectors from equation ( 4.10
). All the states lying above the @xmath -line have a Schmidt number
larger than two. This follows from the fact that the operator @xmath is
positive on Schmidt number 2 states. If the Werner states are
2-undistillable then also all the states lying to the right of the
@xmath -line have Schmidt number at least three. This follows easily by
evaluating the expectation value of @xmath at @xmath . Note that it is
sufficient to show that all the states @xmath on for instance the @xmath
-segment (see Figure 4.5 ) have Schmidt number 3. This can be seen as
follows: let @xmath approach @xmath , and suppose we can show that each
@xmath has Schmidt number 3. This would imply the existence of a
hyperplane @xmath separating @xmath from the set of Schmidt number 2
states. For @xmath arbitrarily close to @xmath this hyperplane would be
parallel to the @xmath -segment, otherwise cutting it. Therefore this
would show that all the states lying to the right of the @xmath
-hyperplane have Schmidt number at least three.

For the general case we need to consider the set of @xmath -invariant
states. Here the subindex in @xmath refers to the subsystem the unitary
operator is acting and the @xmath denotes any permutation of the
subsystems. In what follows we will call these states @xmath -invariant
states. We parametrise them as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have found it convenient to now use the normalised @xmath . The
relevant hyperplane is given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We can also write this as @xmath with @xmath . From now on we will
continue to work in these normalised variables. Next we will generalise
the idea developed for two copies. First we need to show that the
hyperplane is spanned by Schmidt number 2 states. Then in order to check
distillability, it will be enough to find the boundary between two and
three Schmidt number along a line from the origin to an interior point
of the points spanning the hyperplane.

An independent set of Schmidt number 2 states spanning the hyperplane is
easily obtained as follows (compare to the case for two copies). Let
@xmath . Twirling this state will yield an @xmath -invariant state with
coordinates @xmath . Similarly, twirling @xmath will yield an @xmath
-invariant state with coordinates @xmath . In general

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

will yield a state with coordinates @xmath for @xmath @xmath for @xmath
. It is evident that all points will lie on the hyperplane and that they
form an independent set, spanning the hyperplane. An interior point can
for instance be obtained from the first point, as @xmath for
sufficiently small @xmath . It can readily be verified that this point
belongs to the hyperplane by using the identity @xmath .

Thus @xmath -undistillability of the Werner states beyond the
1-distillability boundary is equivalent to the statement that the @xmath
-invariant state with coordinates @xmath has Schmidt number 3 for @xmath
small enough and all @xmath .

#### 4.3.4 As a separability problem

In this section we cast the distillability problem as a special instance
of the separability problem. Theorem 4.2.3 provides the key ingredient
to this, which applied to the conjecture implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an entanglement witness for all @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . We
will again use the local symmetry, and present a dual positive
formulation of the conjecture. The analysis will be analogous to the
reformulation as a Schmidt number problem and a continuous comparison of
this section with the previous one is very instructive.

For one pair, we need to prove that @xmath is an entanglement witness.
As before, it will be sufficient to characterize the subset of the
separable states of the general @xmath invariant states. Here @xmath
acts on a two-dimensional Hilbert space. We parametrize the @xmath
-invariant states as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The separable states are a subset of the states with
positive partial transpose, which satisfy the inequalities

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
     @xmath               
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

Thus the states with positive partial transposition are contained in the
polyhedron spanned by the points OABCDE as in Fig 4.6 . By twirling the
pure separable states @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath one obtains
the states represented respectively by the points @xmath and @xmath .
Note that @xmath is not in this list. Indeed, as we know that @xmath is
an entanglement witness, all states satisfying @xmath are entangled. In
particular the states in the tetrahedron spanned by the points @xmath
are PPT entangled. Conversely, knowing that the polyhedron @xmath is PPT
entangled immediately proves that @xmath is an entanglement witness.

For two copies, we need to consider the @xmath -invariant states which
we parametrise as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will not attempt to completely classify the separable subset, instead
it is enough to look at what happens in the neighbourhood of the
hyperplane

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now show that this hyperplane is spanned by separable states.
Consider the following pure separable states and their coordinates
@xmath after action of the @xmath twirl:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

These coordinates can be verified after a tedious but straightforward
calculation.

A point in the interior of the convex hull of these points can be
obtained by averaging these coordinates. In this case one obtains the
state with coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
From this follows that the Werner states are 2-undistillable if and only
if the @xmath -invariant states with coordinates @xmath are entangled
for all @xmath .

Let us now move to @xmath copies. The relevant set of states is the set
of @xmath -invariant states

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The relevant hyperplane is given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Renormalising @xmath , this can be rewritten as @xmath with @xmath .
Next we will show that this hyperplane touches the set of separable
states by constructing a set of @xmath separable states spanning the
hyperplane. The first @xmath states are obtained by twirling

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . The twirled state will be @xmath -invariant and will
satisfy @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath . The last @xmath states are obtained by twirling

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . The twirled state will be @xmath -invariant and the @xmath
coordinates will satisfy @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
Therefore the coordinates of the @xmath states are linearly independent
and the choice of @xmath guarantees that the states will lie in the
hyperplane.

An interior point in the convex hull of these @xmath points can be
obtained by choosing @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath sufficiently small.
One verifies that this point belongs to the hyperplane using the
identity @xmath . From this follows that the conjecture is equivalent to
the statement that the @xmath -invariant states with coordinates @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , are entangled for @xmath
small enough and all @xmath .

##### Discussion

The general separability problem has been proven to be NP-hard [ 110 ] .
However, above we showed that the distillability problem can be
reformulated as the question of entanglement of a particular set of one
parameter states. The first and by far still the most elegant tool for
detecting entanglement is the partial transposition criterion [ 222 ] .
However, it is not useful to solve the dual entanglement problem, as it
was proven in Ref. [ 177 ] that @xmath is a decomposable entanglement
witness if and only if @xmath has positive partial transposition. Hence
@xmath will be either a non-decomposable witness or no entanglement
witness at all depending on whether @xmath is 1-undistillable or
1-distillable. Thus in order to solve the dual problem, we will either
need some powerful tool for detecting PPT-entanglement or a tool for
proving separability. However, in the latter case, the original
formulation (see ( 4.11 )) seems easier, and for this purpose we
presented an efficient algorithm for detecting distillability in Section
4.2.5 .

Probably the most powerful method for detecting entanglement is the
complete family of separability criteria introduced by Doherty et al. [
74 , 75 ] , as reviewed in Section 1.2.5 . Recall that their method
yields an analytical provable entanglement witness from the output of
the algorithm. In principle therefore, the distillability problem can be
solved for any number of copies, using our dual formulation together
with the algorithm associated with the complete family of separability
criteria. The numerical method introduced by Eisert et al. [ 93 ] can
also be employed for this goal. However, note that the reformulation of
the distillability problem as a separability problem is unnecessary
here, as their method allows for a simple way of checking whether or not
an operator is an entanglement witness. Using analogous techniques, it
can be extended to testing whether or not an operator is a Schmidt
number 3 witness [ 89 ] . It should be stressed that the family of
criteria introduced by Doherty et al. has the major advantage that an
analytical canonical entanglement witness can be extracted.
Unfortunately, we were unable to test either algorithm, as both methods
seem only practical for low dimensional systems. The interesting case,
two copies of the Werner states for @xmath , could hence not be tested.
It would be worth investigating whether these numerical methods could be
simplified for the highly symmetrical states we are interested in.

Numerical solutions are one option, another possible approach would be
one of a more indirect nature. A powerful method for proving that a
certain state is entangled is to show that, when shared by two parties,
the state can enhance typical quantum operations such as teleportation
or distillation. We will come back to this topic in Section 4.4 . One of
the main results is [ 203 ] that every entangled state can enhance the
so-called conclusive teleportation fidelity of some other state. This
characterisation of entangled states is promising as a way of proving
that a certain state is PPT entangled. In Ref. [ 165 ] a class of PPT
states was constructed which was shown to provide overall convertibility
of pure entangled states. In particular it was shown to be able to
increase the Schmidt number of a pure state. Now the PPT entangled
states we obtained for one copy of the Werner states (tetrahedron ABCO
in Figure 4.6 ) are of a similar form, and although not necessarily in
an optimal way, they too can help increase the Schmidt number of a pure
state. Similar activation effects can be expected from the conjectured
PPT states derived from two copies of the Werner states.

#### 4.3.5 The rainbow states

In this section, as a curiosity, we present a set of states which we
conjecture to exhibit all the different forms of distillability. The set
of states was inspired by the results of Ref. [ 165 ] .

The states are @xmath -invariant, but with subsystems of unequal
dimension (we omit the indices @xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In what follows we will assume that @xmath . The set of density
operators is restricted by the following inequalities

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The partial transpose is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it is easy to see that the states are NPT iff @xmath or @xmath . Now
we will show that these states also include some PPT entangled ones. It
is easy to see from equation ( 2.1.1 ) in Section 2.1 , that @xmath is
positive on Schmidt number @xmath states; it then follows from Lemma
2.1.2 that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an entanglement witness. The partial transpose of an entanglement
witness is again an entanglement witness:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying this entanglement witness on @xmath we find that the states
satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are (PPT) entangled.

Let us now look at the distillation properties. Similar arguments to the
ones we used for the @xmath -invariant states apply here. For @xmath or
@xmath sufficiently small, one can find @xmath -undistillable states.
The following vectors provide apparently the optimal boundaries for the
1-distillable states (we will only be interested in the states having
@xmath ).

1. @xmath gives rise to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

2. @xmath gives rise to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let us take two pairs

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking both pairs together, and projecting upon @xmath , we end up with
a @xmath -invariant state in @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now we know when these states can be distilled. The states distillable
with this protocol are shown in Figure 4.7 . One verifies that
projecting upon @xmath performs worse. The set @xmath contains states of
all kinds: 1-distillable, @xmath -undistillable but @xmath -distillable,
NPT undistillable (conjectured), PPT bound entangled and separable.

### 4.4 Activation of bound entanglement

As bound entanglement cannot be distilled, it cannot be directly used
for typical quantum information tasks, such as teleportation. Activation
of bound entanglement is any use of bound entanglement that allows for
operations which are not possible by means of LOCC only.

The first of these effects was discovered by the Horodeccy [ 149 ] .
They showed that a specific state can be quasi-distilled with the aid of
an unlimited supply of particular PPT bound entangled states, while this
is not possible without them. Although this is a relatively weak result,
it was the first indication that bound entanglement can be activated.
After this first result, a series of negative results were obtained.
Linden and Popescu [ 188 ] showed rigorously that some PPT bound
entangled state cannot teleport states with better than classical
fidelity. Vedral [ 292 ] subsequently demonstrated that the PPT
distillable entanglement (that is the distillable entanglement of a
state in the presence of an unlimited supply of bound entangled states)
is still bounded by the relative entropy of entanglement (see also Ref.
[ 73 ] ).

Major progress on activation was made by Shor et al. [ 270 ] , and their
results were later generalised by Eggeling et al. [ 87 ] . We discuss
this last paper in some detail and sketch the main proofs. Their work is
based on the following theorem by Rains [ 238 ] , which gives a
characterisation of the maximal PPT fidelity of distillation @xmath .
This quantity is defined as the maximum overlap a state can have with
the maximally entangled state @xmath after application of a PPT and
trace preserving operation.

###### Theorem 4.4.1.

The maximal PPT fidelity of distillation of a @xmath -level bipartite
state @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the maximum is taken over all PPT and trace preserving maps @xmath
or all Hermitian operators @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(sketch) Since @xmath commutes with all unitaries of the form @xmath we
may assume without loss of generality that @xmath is an isotropic state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where it is easy to see that the coefficients can always be written as
linear functionals on @xmath . By the definition of @xmath , the
operator @xmath has to be a proper quantum state, so we have to require
that @xmath and @xmath . All that is left to do is account for the PPT
property of @xmath , that is if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that this is equivalent to @xmath . ∎

We are now in the position of proving the main result of Eggeling et al.
Ref. [ 87 ] .

###### Theorem 4.4.2.

With the aid of a bound entangled state any bipartite NPT state is
1-distillable.

###### Proof.

Denoting @xmath the projector onto the negative eigenspace of @xmath we
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath the operator norm (the maximum singular value).
It is easy to check that the operator defined in this way meets the
conditions of Rains’ Theorem. So that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the negativity. Therefore Rains’ theorem implies that
there exists a PPT and trace preserving operation @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and such states are 1-distillable (see Theorem 4.1.3 ). The proof ends
by noting that any PPT preserving map can be implemented locally using a
shared PPT bound entangled state (see Section 3.1.3 ). ∎

An alternative proof using entanglement witnesses can be found in Ref. [
177 ] . It was later also shown that any NPT state can be 1-distilled
using only an infinitesimal amount of bound entanglement, as this is
possible for the Werner states [ 310 ] .

The implications of this result are non-trivial. As pointed out in Ref.
[ 270 ] , it probably implies the superadditivity of the distillable
entanglement. Indeed, assuming the existence of NPT bound entanglement
we have that there exist states @xmath (NPT) and @xmath (PPT) such that
@xmath , but

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the inequality follows from the previous theorem. This effect is
called superactivation, and has been proven to exist in a multipartite
setting [ 271 ] (see also Ref. [ 80 , 273 ] ). Equally it follows from
the existence of NPT bound entanglement that the distillable
entanglement is nonconvex, as convexity would imply

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The last inequality follows from the fact that the states @xmath and
@xmath can be locally discriminated. So that when Alice and Bob are
given a large number of states @xmath they can recover a large supply of
@xmath and @xmath , which they can then distill by tensoring them
together. In any case, such states @xmath are examples of 2-distillable
states which are not 1-distillable. In Ref. [ 130 ] Michał Horodecki
brilliantly argues on why convexity of the distillable entanglement is
not to be expected. The argument is based on the fact that the
distillable entanglement is a measure characterising the entanglement of
source rather than that of individual states (see also [ 300 ] ).

Another activation effect was demonstrated by Ishizaka [ 165 ] , who
showed that with the aid of specific bound entanglement, pure
entanglement is completely interconvertible: all pure entangled states
can be converted into each other with some probability, regardless of
the Schmidt rank (this was already implicit in Ref. [ 9 ] ). Theorem
4.4.2 implies that all NPT bound entanglement can be activated, as well
as some particular PPT entangled states. The question remains if every
PPT bound entangled state can be activated. Recently, this question was
answered affirmatively by Masanes [ 203 ] . He showed that any entangled
state can enhance the teleportation fidelity of some other state. A
special case can be formulated in the context of distillation:

###### Theorem 4.4.3.

For any entangled state @xmath there exists a 1-undistillable state
@xmath such that @xmath is 1-distillable.

Although this result is of tremendous importance, the proof works by
contradiction, and reveals nothing about the state @xmath . Not
surprisingly, as if this was the case, it would solve the separability
problem! A generalisation of this result to multipartite systems was
presented in Ref. [ 204 ] . Related results were obtained in [ 297 , 34
] , where it was shown that the generalised robustness (which is nonzero
for entangled states) has an operational meaning as the maximum
percentual increase an entangled state can provide in the fidelity of
teleportation of another state.

## Appendix A Two Matlab programs

### a.1 General permutation

The @xmath -file below is a simple implementation of an arbitrary
permutation of a density matrix, as defined in ( 1.12 ). It is listed
here, as some complicated implementations of for instance the partial
transpose criterion are circulating. The procedure below is transparent
and general. It can also be used to exchange subsystems within a density
matrix.

    function rho2=permcrit(rho,p)
    %permcrit(rho,[1 2 4 3]) calculates the partial transposition
    %permcrit(rho,[2 4 1 3]) calculates the realigned matrix
    %permcrit(rho,[3 4 1 2]) exchanges the first with the second subsystem
    %permcrit(rho,[3 5 4 2 6 1]) random permutation for tripartite system
    [d1,d2]=size(rho); [s,t]=size(p); n=t/2; d=round(d1^(1/n)); q(p)=1:t;
    if s~=1 || floor(t/2)~=ceil(t/2) || ~isequal(q(p),1:t) || length(q)~=t
    error(’Not a valid permutation’); end;
    if d^n~=d1 || d1~=d2, error(’Incompatible dimensions’); end;
    rho2=zeros(d1,d1); vec=zeros(t,1); dnw=power(d,n-1:-1:0);
    for i=0:d1-1, for j=0:d1-1
     r=1; c=1; i2=i; j2=j;
     for w=1:n, vec(w*2-1)=floor(i2/dnw(w)); vec(w*2)=floor(j2/dnw(w));
     i2=i2-vec(w*2-1)*dnw(w); j2=j2-vec(w*2)*dnw(w); end;
     vec=vec(p);
     for w=1:n, r=r+vec(w*2-1)*dnw(w); c=c+vec(w*2)*dnw(w); end;
     rho2(r,c)=rho(i+1,j+1);
    end; end;

### a.2 Distillability test

The @xmath -file below checks whether a state is 1-distillable with the
algorithm outlined in Section 4.2.5 . Input parameters are the partial
transposed state, the dimension of the Hilbert spaces of the parties and
the number of tests. As the tests involve randomisation, it is
recommended to set the number of tests at least to @xmath , and to
repeat the test a number of times. If the output is negative, however,
the state is guaranteed to be distillable.

    function mineig=distest(rhotb, d, nrtests)
    idxs=zeros(1); mineig=1; precision=-10^(-8);
    for yy=1:d
     idxs(2*yy-1)=(yy-1)*d+1; idxs(2*yy)=(yy-1)*d+2;
    end;
    if issparse(rhotb), EE=sparse(d*d,d*d);
    else, EE=zeros(d*d,d*d); end;
    for aa=1:nrtests
     [UU,R]=qr(randn(d)+i*randn(d));
     UU=UU*diag(exp(2*pi*i*rand(d,1))); UU(3:d,:)=0;
     for k=1:d:d*d, EE(k:k+d-1,k:k+d-1)=UU; end;
     B=EE*rhotb*EE’; mreig=min(real(eig(full(B(idxs,idxs)))));
     if mreig<mineig, mineig=mreig; UUb=UU; end;
     if mineig<precision, return; end;
    end;
    for loop=1:nrtests/d
    for counter=1:2
     te1=UUb(counter,:);
     for mn=1:d
     UUb(counter,mn)=randn(1,1)+i*randn(1,1);
     UUb(counter,:)=UUb(counter,:)/norm(UUb(counter,:));
     for k=1:d:d*d, EE(k:k+d-1,k:k+d-1)=UUb; end;
     B=EE*rhotb*EE’; mreig=min(real(eig(full(B(idxs,idxs)))));
     if mreig<mineig, mineig=mreig; te1=UUb(counter,:);
     else, UUb(counter,:)=te1; end;
     end;
     if mineig<precision, return; end;
    end; end;
    mineig=1;