space of @xmath , we get a Möbius covariant local net. However, there is
also a way, with which, starting from a subnet, we can get a new subnet
(and thus a new example). Consider the net of algebras defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, as usual, @xmath . It is not hard to see, that it is again a
Möbius covariant subnet. It is called the coset of the subnet @xmath .

In the previous point the @xmath models were introduced. If @xmath ,
then we have a natural embedding @xmath , which, in turn, gives the
natural embedding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the sense of Möbius covariant subnets. The coset of this, and other
similar, naturally arising embeddings in loop group models, are known to
provide interesting new examples for Möbius covariant local nets.

Finally, we shall discuss one more abstract construction. Suppose @xmath
is a Möbius covariant local net which is not strongly additive. Consider
its real restriction, @xmath , and set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is not hard to see, that @xmath is still a translation-dilation
covariant local net on the line, which fulfills the conditions explained
in Sect. 2.3 , ensuring the existence of a unique extension to a Möbius
covariant local net. (In fact, note that @xmath for any half-interval
@xmath , while if @xmath is a bounded interval, then the dual contains
the original algebra.) The resulting Möbius covariant local net is
called the dual of @xmath . It is not isomorphic to the original net, as
it is strongly additive , see [ GLW ] . (On the other hand, it is
evident, that the dual of a strongly additive net is itself.)

In the last section, the derivatives of the @xmath current models were
introduced. It was mentioned, that they not strongly additive, as in
fact, they are not even @xmath -regular. Thus by applying the dual
construction, we get a new net. However — as it was noticed there — by
the way these models were constructed, it is clear, that they can be
brought to the Hilbert space of the @xmath current model in such a way,
that they will have the same vacuum vector as the @xmath current model,
and on the real line, they will even have the same local algebra
associated to any half-interval @xmath . Hence it is clear, that the
dual of any of the derivatives is isomorphic to the @xmath current
model. Thus in this case we did not manage to generate interesting new
examples.

In what follows, some knowledge about diffeomorphism covariant local
nets (e.g. central charge, Virasoro nets) will be assumed, although they
will be only introduced in the next chapter. (This overview, in some
sense, is not causal.)

The Virasoro net with central charge @xmath is not strongly additive,
thus its dual is not just itself. Unlike in the previous example, in
this case (to the knowledge of the author) there is little known about
the dual. It is not known whether it is isomorphic with one of the
already known examples. In fact, it is not even clear, whether it will
be diffeomorphism covariant, and/or split.
