### 3.1.4 Operations

Operations on Graphical Objects :
These operations only change the visual properties of the graphical
objects, the real objects are not changed. Visual operations can be
performed on the graphical objects or on the views. The following
operations on graphical objects are supported:

-   rotation, zooming, translation, scaling

-   viewpoint changing

-   object hiding/unhiding

-   sub-view creation

-   redefinition of visual properties of graphical objects

Operations on Real Objects :
Operations on real objects can access information about the objects or
change the state of these objects. In addition, visual properties of the
corresponding graphics objects can also be changed as a result of
changing real objects. The following operations on real objects are
supported:

-   access to public member functions for an object from the EVD

-   obtaining the detailed information on an object properties (for
    example, for tracks one can access information on number/type of
    hits in COT/Silicon detectors, dE/dx, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath etc.)

-   access to event record information (data banks and collections)

-   application of identification cuts

-   interface to a histogramming package

### 3.2 CDF Run II Application Framework

The design of the EVD is based on the belief that both requirements and
graphics software abilities will be very broad at any time and will
constantly evolve. The EVD is designed to accommodate that diversity and
change. This can be accomplished only by sufficient flexibility and
modularity of the core control structure [ 53 ] .

An application framework, in the context of a high energy physics
experiment, is a ”system” that allows physicist-developed code to be
combined with code developed by other people and to be used in both the
online and offline environments. Either real or simulated data can be
used as the input and the output can include (modified) copy of the
input as well as additional reconstructed quantities. This output then
forms the input in the next stage of a multi-stage data reduction
environment. CDF Run II Application Framework (AC++) is based on the
ROOT object oriented analysis framework [ 52 ] , which is incorporated
in CDF Run II C++ software.

The AC++ provides a unified framework for event reconstruction,
post-production analysis and online monitoring, triggering and
calibration. The goals of the framework is to provide a simple and
straightforward means of combining any number of independent classes,
called modules, into a single executable and to provide a flexible
system for specifying (either interactively or in a batch mode) how
these modules are run.

Therefore, EVD has the flexibility to enable/disable different modules,
so that one can work with unprocessed data for the immediate feedback.
Alternatively, one can also run reconstruction modules inside the EVD
with user-defined parameters for debugging purposes.

### 3.3 Graphical User Interface

The start of the EVD is signalled by the appearance of the manager
window (Figure 3.1 ,a). From the manager window user select one of the
event displays, and control automatic looping through events, as is done
in the CDF Run II control room at @xmath . The name of the input file is
displayed at the bottom.

Clicking the Panel button brings up the EVD control panel (Figure 3.1 ,
b). The control panel allows user to configure the behavior of the EVD.
User may select which data to read using the DataMenu (Figure 3.1 , c)

Complicated events might be cleaned by selective presentation of parts
of the data and the detector. User can specify cuts on physical
quantities of the displayed objects, such as the @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath of tracks or the energies deposited in the calorimeter towers.
This helps to clean up the event by removing low- @xmath tracks and low-
@xmath towers, or to debug reconstruction problems by requiring EVD to
show objects which pass some cuts (e.g. number of COT or Silicon hits,
or tracks with large @xmath etc.). Figure 3.2 shows sample Cut Manager
session.

### 3.4 Displays

#### 3.4.1 @xmath and @xmath Views

In layered projections, each geometry object acquires a 2-dimensional
shape which can be different in each projection. For example, the drift
chamber outline is a circle in the @xmath view and a rectangle in the
@xmath view.

The @xmath view (COT Display, Figure 3.3 ) shows hits in the
subdetectors (COT, Silicon trackers, Muon Chambers, TOF, XTRP etc.),
energies in the central EM and HAD calorimeter towers (summed over
@xmath ), missing @xmath information, information about CDF
reconstructed objects, such as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , jet
candidates. It also gives the information about run/event number, as
well as trigger information.

Figure 3.3 is an example of a schematic view (Section 3.1.3 ), and it is
obtained from a realistic @xmath projection by applying a fish-eye
transformation to a COT volume.

A fish-eye view introduces a nonlinear transformation of radius in the
layered @xmath projection, with the aim to enable simultaneous
inspection of tracking chambers, calorimetry and muon system within the
same picture (Figure 3.3 ).

The @xmath view (Figure 3.4 ) is designed to show the same information
as @xmath view, but in @xmath projection. The only exception are COT
hits, which do not have z coordinate and therefore are displayed in
@xmath projection only. Energies in the central EM and HAD calorimeter
towers are summed over @xmath . Figure 3.4 is an example of a realistic
view (Section 3.1.3 ).

User can “slice” the detector by selectin pair of opposite wedges
(”Select Slice” option at the bottom of the RZ display menu, Figure 3.4
) to reduce the amount of information displayed. In this case one will
have only those wedges’ tracks, hits, bits, and calorimeter towers.
There are 24 15 @xmath wedges, which are displayed in 12 opposite pairs.
The default slice value is -1, which folds all upper wedges onto the top
and all lower wedges onto the bottom, which is the way the RZ display
used to work in CDF Run I.

#### 3.4.2 Lego Displays

These are generic LEGO plot windows (Figure 3.5 ) showing a variable (E,
@xmath , ADC counts) as a function of eta-phi. Figure 3.5 is an example
of an abstract view (Section 3.1.3 ). @xmath grid corresponds to @xmath
segmentation of CDF calorimeter system (Section 2.2.3 ); each bin on the
lego display represents a tower. Towers corresponding to CDF Run II
particle candidates (e, @xmath , @xmath , jets) have been added to LEGO
views to improve the display (see Figure 3.5 ). User can interactively
rotate LEGO display/change default settings to obtain a better view of
an event.

There also many other LEGO-based views, used to monitor/debug specific
subdetectors, such as the PLUG/PPR Views to visualize Plug Calorimeter
information, and the CES View to show the sums of energies for CES
Strips and Wires. In addition to the views itself there is an interface
to a histogramming package to obtain specific distributions. For
example, one can see distributions of measurements in strips/wires of
the CES. Views are designed to give a general idea about an event, and
histograms allow to see more detailed picture for a part of a
subdetector.

#### 3.4.3 3D Displays

Perspective 3-dimensional views with hidden lines and hidden surface
removal are very useful for understanding detector geometry, and provide
attractive pictures for public relation (PR) purposes (Figure 3.6 ).
Analyzing the event itself is often less successful in this mode, since
the complicated geometry tends to obscure the tracks and hits.

Figure 3.6 is an example of a realistic view (Section 3.1.3 ). There are
several available 3D views which one can use separately for specific
needs or combine to obtain a complicated view.

-   CDF 3D display
    – 3-dimensional view of the CDF detector with tracks/silicon
    hits/muon hits and stubs)

-   3D calorimeter display
    – central and plug calorimeter towers together with tracks

-   SVX 3D display
    – dedicated silicon detector display, which shows the silicon
    hits/strips together with tracks). SVX 3D display is designed to
    obtain detailed information for all silicon hits associated with a
    given track, which is helpful for debugging purposes.

Three-dimensional Views with hidden lines and surface removal are
possible through the special OpenGL viewer which is integrated in view.
Figure 3.6 has been obtained using OpenGL. In this mode live rotations
are possible given a suitable hardware acceleration for the
instantaneous response.

#### 3.4.4 Other Displays

There many other views (see Figure 3.7 ), used to monitor different CDF
Run II subsystems and to analyze real and simulated data:

-   Wedge Display
    – CES/CPR information together with central calorimeter information

-   Trigger Display
    – Level 1, Level 2, Level 3 trigger bits and corresponding names

-   BSC Display
    – shows ADC counts from beam shower counter subdetectors

-   CLC Display
    – shows ADC counts from Cherenkov Luminosity Counters

-   MC Decay Tree Display
    – decay tree constructed from HEPG information for the simulated
    data

### 3.5 Live Events

The Live Events page has been designed to provide attractive pictures
for PR purposes [ 12 ] . The Views displayed on Figure 3.7 from the top
to the bottom are as follows:

-    1st row:
    COT Display. COT Display zoomed to access central outer tracker
    information. COT Display zoomed to access silicon tracker
    information

-    2nd row:
    RZ Display. SVX 3D Display. Calorimeter LEGO Display

-    3rd row:
    East Plug LEGO Display. Calorimeter 3D Display. West Plug LEGO
    Display

-    4th row:
    East CLC Display. BSC Display. West CLC Display

### 3.6 Conclusions

From the very beginning of Run II data taking EVD is in continuous use
for the online monitoring and for the analyses. This answers the
question whether a presentation of data via visual techniques is
possible for complicated events at the Tevatron. More importantly,
features of the EVD make it to be one of the most important tools for a
better understanding of the events which could possibly be New Physics
candidates in a CDF Run II data.

## Chapter 4 @xmath Selection

### 4.1 Datasets

The data presented in the thesis was taken between March 21, 2002, and
August 22, 2004 and represent @xmath for which the silicon detector
(Section 2.2.2 ) [ 38 ] , and all three central muon systems (CMP, CMU
and CMX), described in Section 2.2.4 were operational.

The @xmath candidates are taken from a logical ‘OR’ of the inclusive
high- @xmath muon sample and the inclusive high- @xmath photon sample;
this was done to ensure a high and stable trigger efficiency for the
muons. For consistency, @xmath candidates are also obtained from a
logical ’OR’ of the inclusive high- @xmath electron sample and the
inclusive high- @xmath photon sample. Each of the samples ¹ ¹ 1 We used
bhel0d as high- @xmath electron sample; bhmu0d as high- @xmath muon
sample; and cph10d as high- @xmath photon sample was ntupled using the
UC flat ntuple [ 54 ] .

To accept an event from the inclusive high- @xmath lepton sample we
require the event to have a loose lepton and a photon, or two leptons
(either tight or loose), or a tight lepton and @xmath (see Tables 5.1 ,
6.1 , 6.2 and 7.1 ).

To accept an event from the inclusive high- @xmath photon sample we
require the event to have a tight photon (see Table 7.1 ) and a loose
lepton. The muon selection criteria are listed in Table 5.1 ; the
electron selection criteria are listed in Tables 6.1 and 6.2 ;

We check data integrity during the run by plotting the stability of the
event yields for the control samples. We use the 8 time intervals
defined in Table 4.1 [ 55 ] . The boundaries of the intervals have been
chosen to correspond to shutdowns or to major changes in the trigger
table. The luminosity in each bin is plotted in Figure 4.1 .

To summarize, in the resulting inclusive electron and muon samples every
event contains either a @xmath candidate, or a candidate for the @xmath
and @xmath control samples, described in detail below in Chapters 5 and
6 .

### 4.2 Selection Overview

Events with a high transverse momentum ( @xmath ) lepton or photon are
selected by a three-level trigger [ 43 ] that requires an event to have
either a lepton with @xmath or a photon with @xmath within the central
region, @xmath . The trigger system selects photon and electron
candidates from clusters of energy in the central electromagnetic
calorimeter. Electrons are further distinguished from photons by
requiring the presence of a COT track pointing at the cluster. The muon
trigger requires a COT track that extrapolates to a reconstructed track
segment (“stub”) in the muon drift chambers.

We use the same kinematic event selection as in the Run I analysis:
inclusive @xmath events are selected by requiring a central photon
candidate with @xmath @xmath , a central lepton candidate ( @xmath or
@xmath ) with @xmath @xmath passing the “tight” criteria listed below,
and a point of origin along the beam-line not more than 60 cm from the
center of the detector.

A muon candidate (Chapter 5 ) passing the “tight” cuts has the following
properties: a) a well-measured track in the COT; b) energies deposited
in the electromagnetic and hadron compartments of the calorimeter
consistent with expectations; c) a muon “stub” track in the CMX detector
or in both the CMU and CMP detectors [ 43 ] consistent with the
extrapolated position of the COT track; and d) COT timing measurements
consistent with a track from a @xmath collision and not from a cosmic
ray.

An electron candidate (Chapter 6 ) passing the “tight” selection has the
following properties: a) a high-quality track with @xmath of at least
half the shower energy, unless the @xmath @xmath , in which case the
@xmath threshold is set to 25 @xmath ; b) a transverse shower profile
consistent with an electron shower shape and that matches the
extrapolated track position; c) a lateral sharing of energy in the two
calorimeter towers containing the electron shower consistent with that
expected; and d) minimal leakage into the hadron calorimeter.

Photon candidates (Chapter 7 ) are required to have no track with @xmath
@xmath , and at most one track with @xmath @xmath , pointing at the
calorimeter cluster; good profiles in both transverse dimensions at
shower maximum; and minimal leakage into the hadron calorimeter.

To reduce background from photons or leptons from the decays of hadrons
produced in jets, both the photon and the lepton in each event are
required to be “isolated”. The @xmath deposited in the calorimeter
towers in a cone in @xmath space of radius @xmath around the photon or
lepton position is summed, and the @xmath due to the photon or lepton is
subtracted. The remaining @xmath in the cone is required to be less than
@xmath for a photon, or less than 10% of the @xmath for electrons or
@xmath for muons. In addition, for photons the sum of the @xmath of all
COT tracks in the cone must be less than @xmath .

Missing transverse energy (Section 8.1 ) is calculated from the
calorimeter tower energies in the region @xmath . Corrections are then
made to the for non-uniform calorimeter response [ 56 ] for jets with
uncorrected @xmath @xmath and @xmath , and for muons with @xmath @xmath
.

We use @xmath and @xmath production as control samples (see Section 5.2
for the details for the muon channel and Section 6.2 for the electron
channel) to ensure that the efficiencies for high- @xmath electrons and
muons, as well as for , are well understood. The photon control sample
is constructed from the events in which one of the electrons radiates a
high- @xmath photon, with an additional requirement that the @xmath
invariant mass be within 10 @xmath of the @xmath mass.

The first search we perform is in the @xmath subsample, defined by
requiring that an event contain @xmath (Section 8.1 ) in addition to the
photon and “tight” lepton.

A second search, for the @xmath signature, is constructed by requiring
another muon (Chapter 5 ) or electron (Chapter 6 ) in addition to the
“tight” lepton and the photon. The additional muons are required to have
@xmath and to satisfy at least one of two different sets of criteria:
the same as those above for “tight” muons but with fewer hits required
on the track, or a more stringent cut on track quality but no
requirement that there be a matching “stub” in the muon systems.
Additional central electrons are required to have @xmath and to satisfy
the same criteria as tight central electrons but with a track
requirement of only @xmath @xmath (rather than 0.5 @xmath ), and no
requirement on a shower maximum measurement or lateral energy sharing
between calorimeter towers. Electrons in the end-plug calorimeters
(Section 6.1.3 ), @xmath , are required to have @xmath , minimal leakage
into the hadron calorimeter, a “track” containing at least 3 hits in the
silicon tracking system, and a shower transverse shape consistent with
that expected, with a centroid close to the extrapolated position of the
track [ 57 ] .

The analysis includes a search for @xmath events, for which the
estimated SM expectation is of order of 0.2 events. We also search for
@xmath events by requiring another photon with @xmath 25 GeV in addition
to the “tight” lepton and the photon. The additional photons are
required to pass standard photon cuts, described in Chapter 7 .

## Chapter 5 Muon Identification and Control Samples

This chapter describes the selection of muon objects that are used both
in the searches and for the control samples. We require at least one
‘tight central muon’ in an event for it to be classified as a @xmath
event. In both @xmath and @xmath events we search for additional muons
using a definition of ‘loose central muon’. In this chapter we describe
these two sets of cuts and the numbers of muon objects passing each cut
below. As this is a chapter on object identification, the tables show
the number of objects passing each cut.

The summary on the number of events in the Muon Sample is shown in Table
5.8 . The counting experiments based on event counts rather than object
counts for the @xmath candidates are described in Chapter 12 . This
chapter also describes the control samples of and decays used to check
the temporal stability, and also the product of acceptance and
efficiency.

### 5.1 Muon Selection Criteria

The muon selection cuts are similar to the standard CDF Run II cuts [ 58
] . We describe the selection of the tight muons in Section 5.1.1 . The
selection of loose muons is described in Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 .

#### 5.1.1 Tight Central CMUP and CMX Muons

The muon selection criteria for a tight central muon are listed in
Tables 5.1 and are described below. Tight central muons are identified
by extrapolating tracks in the COT through the calorimeters, and the
extrapolation is required to match to a stub either in both the CMU and
CMP muon detectors (‘CMUP’ muon) or in the CMX system (’CMX’ muon), see
Table 5.2 ). Tight central muons are required to have a track-stub
matching distance less than 3 cm for CMU, less than 5 cm for CMP, and
less than 6 cm for CMX. For a CMX muon we also require COT exit radius
of the muon track @xmath (COT) to be greater than 140 cm to ensure that
the track is well-measured.

The CMUP and CMX muon identifications require a muon object with the
requisite muon stubs. There are 355105 such objects in the @xmath events
of the muon sample. These are then divided into CMUP muon candidates and
CMX muon candidates. Stubless muon candidates are treated separately in
Section 5.1.3 ; there are 55346 stubless muon objects in the @xmath
events.

The impact parameter calculation uses the default muon track rather than
the parent COT track, and a tighter impact parameter cut is applied if
the track does in fact contain silicon hits. Instead, we have tabulated
this @xmath cut for reference but we do not use it to select tight or
loose muons. The muon tracks used in the initial selection for this
analysis are beam-constrained COT-only [ 58 ] . For default muon tracks
that contain silicon we link backwards to the COT-only parent track and
use that track for all subsequent analysis. This technique, while losing
valuable information from the silicon at this stage, puts all prompt COT
tracks on the same footing.

The @xmath distributions are shown in Figure 5.1 for the muons that pass
the loose muon identification cuts (Table 5.1 ). Muon candidates which
have stubs reconstructed from hits in either the ’bluebeam’, ’miniskirt’
or ’keystone’ regions [ 58 ] of the detector are rejected. These
sections of the detector were not fully operational for the entire data
sample.

All central muons are required to have @xmath so that the collision is
well-contained within the CDF detector. In order to be well-measured,
the muon track is required to have minimum of 3 axial and 3 stereo
superlayers with at least 5 hits in each superlayer.

High energy muons are typically isolated ‘minimum-ionizing’ particles
that have limited calorimeter energy. A muon traversing the central
electromagnetic calorimeter(CEM) deposits an average energy of @xmath
0.3 GeV. Therefore we require muon candidates to deposit less than 2 GeV
total in the CEM towers (we take into account two towers in the CEM) the
muon track intersects. Similarly, muons transversing the central
hadronic calorimeter(CHA) deposit an average energy of @xmath 2 GeV; we
consequently require muon candidates to deposit a total energy less than
@xmath 6 GeV, also increasing with muon momentum, in the CHA towers
intersected by the track extrapolation. To take into account the (slow)
growth of energy loss with momentum, for very high energy muons ( @xmath
) we require the measured CEM energy to be less than @xmath and CHA
energy to be less than @xmath .

To suppress hadrons and decay muons created from hadrons in jets we
require the total transverse energy deposited in the calorimeters in a
cone of R=0.4 around the muon track direction(known as the fractional
calorimeter isolation @xmath ) to be less than 0.1 of the muon track pt.

The COT cosmic finder by itself is essentially fully efficient.
Therefore, to suppress cosmic rays we use the COT-based cosmic rejection
[ 59 ] and reject events which it tagged as cosmic ray muons.

#### 5.1.2 Loose Central CMUP and CMX Muons

While each @xmath event has to contain at least one tight CMUP or CMX
muon, both @xmath and @xmath events are searched for additional high-
@xmath muons that could come from the decays of heavy particles. There
are two types of secondary muons we accept: ‘Loose’ CMUP and CMX muons,
described here, and stubless muons (see Section 5.1.3 ).

Loose muons are muon objects with either CMUP or CMX stubs, but with
looser COT cuts than the tight CMUP or CMX muons (see Table 5.1 ). We
require 3 axial and 2 stereo COT super layers with at least 5 hits each
for loose CMUP and CMX muons.

#### 5.1.3 Loose Central Stubless Muons

The cuts for the Stubless muons, described in Table 5.3 , are looser
than the tight cuts, and in particular do not require a stub in the muon
chambers. There are three types of ‘Stubless‘ muons:

-   CMU muons (muon track matches the CMU stub only)

-   CMP muons (muon track matches a stub in the CMP only)

-   CMIO muons (muon track does not match a stub in CMU, CMP or CMX)

To identify stubless muons, we require at least some energy in the
calorimeter towers that the muon extrapolates to, Calorimeter Energy
(Em+Had) @xmath 0.1 GeV, and a good fit to the COT track, @xmath
/(Number of COT hits-5) @xmath 3 [ 58 ] . These two cuts are used to
reject charged kaon decays in flight in which a low-momentum kaon (
@xmath GeV, typically) decays inside the COT with the kaon and
decay-muon tracks forming a ‘seagull’ pattern which is reconstructed as
a single high-momentum track.

The pattern-finding algorithm often removes a complete stereo layer in
order to get a good fit, and so these tracks are badly mis-reconstructed
in polar angle. They consequently often are recorded to leave zero
energy in the extrapolated traversed calorimeter towers [ 60 ] .

### 5.2 Muon Control Samples

The @xmath and @xmath provide control samples for the @xmath samples. We
use data triggered by the high- @xmath muon trigger (MUON_CMUP_18 or
MUON_CMX_18) for both @xmath and @xmath candidates, where tight muons
are the muons that pass the cuts in Table 5.2 .

For comparisons with data we used the Monte Carlo sample [ 61 ] . We
applied the trigger efficiencies and scale factors [ 58 ] , listed in
Table 5.4 .

#### 5.2.1 The Control Sample

The selection criteria for the control sample are listed in Table 5.5 .
We require two muons in the event. One must pass the tight cuts (Table
5.2 ), and another must pass the loose cuts (Table 5.1 ). We further
require the two muons to have opposite charge, and require the
difference of the @xmath beam-line coordinates of the muon tracks to be
less than 4 cm. The last requirement for counting @xmath events is that
the invariant mass of the muon pair of the @xmath candidate should be
between 66 GeV and 116 GeV. We find @xmath @xmath events. We also find
@xmath same-sign ‘ @xmath ’ events, indicative of the maximum level of
track reconstruction problems. The selection variable distributions for
the control sample are shown in Figure 5.2 .

To normalize the MC sample, we used the measured @xmath ( ) @xmath BR [
62 ] . The comparison of data vs MC for different muon types is shown in
Table 5.7 . The event yields are shown in Figure 5.3 .

#### 5.2.2 The Control Sample

The selection criteria for the control sample are listed in Table 5.6 .
We require one tight muon ( @xmath GeV, see Table 5.2 ), and @xmath GeV
(Section 8.1 ). We require the transverse mass of the @xmath candidate
to be in the mass window 20-140 GeV.

To reject events in which one muon is not identified, events with a
second track with @xmath GeV and associated EM and HAD calorimeter
energies less than 3 and 9 GeV, respectively, are rejected. We find
@xmath events, @xmath positive and @xmath negative @xmath ’s. The event
yields are shown in Figure 5.3 .

#### 5.2.3 Summary of the Muon Control Sample Event Counts. Stability
Plots

We use the control samples of and decays to check temporal stability of
the event yields (Figure 5.3 ). The summary on the number of events in
the Muon Sample is shown in Table 5.8 .

## Chapter 6 Electron Identification and Control Samples

We require at least one ‘tight central electron’ in an event for it to
be classified as an @xmath event. In both @xmath and @xmath events we
search for additional ’loose’ electrons in the central and end-plug
electromagnetic calorimeters. We describe the tight central and loose
central and plug cuts below. The counting experiments based on event
counts rather than object counts for the @xmath candidates are described
in Chapter 12 . This chapter also describes the control samples of and
decays used to check the temporal stability, and also the product of
acceptance and efficiency.

### 6.1 Electron Selection Criteria

The electron selection cuts are similar to the standard CDF Run II cuts
[ 63 ] . We describe the selection of the tight central electrons in
Section 6.1.1 . The selection of loose central electrons is described in
Section 6.1.2 ; the selection of electrons in end-plug is presented in
Section 6.1.3 . The selection cuts are standard [ 63 ] with the
exception that the CES fiducial requirement (see Section 6.1.1 ) and the
conversion cut (see Sections A.6 and 10.2 ) are not applied.

#### 6.1.1 Tight Central Electrons

The selection criteria for tight central electrons are listed in Table
6.1 and are described below.

Electrons are identified in the CEM by matching high momentum tracks to
high-energy CEM clusters. The electron track is the highest momentum
track which intersects one of two towers in the CEM cluster. The
electron tracks that we use in this analysis are beam-constrained
COT-only. We apply the same corrections to the electron tracks as we do
to the muon tracks.

Fiduciality is a variable, which can have following values:

-   error (null strip/wire cluster)

-   not fiducial in central or plug

-   fiducial in central or plug

-   fiducial, but in CEM Tower 9

-   fiducial, but in Chimney wedge tower 7

-   fiducial in CEM using max pt track extrapolated to plane of CES

-   fiducial in PEM using PES

-   fiducial in PEM using max @xmath track extrapolated to plane of PES

An electron candidate is required to have tracking momentum (P) which
exceeds half of its calorimeter energy (E). The electron track is
required to have a minimum of 3 axial and 2 stereo SL segments
containing at least 5 hits each. In order that the momentum resolution
does not make for inefficiencies for very high-energy electrons, for
@xmath the E/P cut is not applied (leaving only the @xmath GeV cut as
the requirement on the track). The electrons are required to have the
track extrapolate to the beam line within @xmath so that CDF detector
contains the collision well.

The position of the track extrapolated to the CES radius must satisfy
the following requirements: it must fall within charge-signed CES shower
position of the cluster in the r-phi view -3.0 cm @xmath 1.5 cm and it
must fall within 3 cm of the CES shower position in the Z-direction(
@xmath ).

The CEM shower characteristics should be consistent with that of a
single charged particle. We require the ratio of the total energy of the
CHA towers located behind the CEM towers in the electron cluster to that
of the electron itself to be less than than 0.055+0.00045 @xmath E GeV.
A comparison of the lateral shower sharing with neighboring towers in
the CEM cluster with test-beam data is parameterized by a dimensionless
quantity, @xmath [ 39 ] , which must have a value less than 0.2.

We require the @xmath for the profile of energy deposited in the CES
strips compared to that expected from test beam data [ 39 ] to be less
than 10. No @xmath cut is made on the profile in the CES wires as
bremsstrahlung will separate from the electron in the @xmath view.

As an additional isolation requirement, the total transverse energy
deposited in the calorimeter in a cone R=0.4 around the electron track,
must be less than 0.1 of the @xmath of the electron. The isolation is
corrected via the standard algorithm [ 65 ] , for leakage, but not the
number of vertices.

We do not apply ’Conversion Flag’ and ’Fiducial’ cuts to select
electrons, they are tabulated for reference and to see their effects.

The acceptance gain by removing the fiduciality requirement is
approximately 14%. Figure 6.1 shows the distributions for the electrons
which pass all cuts but fiducial requirement.

#### 6.1.2 Loose Central Electrons

While each @xmath event has to contain at least one tight electron, both
@xmath and @xmath events are searched for additional high- @xmath
electrons that could come from the decays of heavy particles. The cuts
for these additional electrons are described in Table 6.1 . These cuts
are looser than the tight cuts, and in particular do not require any of
the CES variables, i.e. no track-cluster match in @xmath or @xmath and
no cut on strip @xmath , and also no cut on @xmath [ 39 ] .

#### 6.1.3 Plug Electrons

Additional isolated electrons in the plug calorimeter with @xmath GeV
are identified for measured PEM rapidities of @xmath . The cuts used for
plug electron identification are given in Table 6.4 . We require minimal
leakage or activity in the hadron calorimeter, Had/Em @xmath 0.05, a
fractional isolation (isolation energy over the electron energy) less
than 0.1, and the shower shape to satisfy the PEM 3x3 @xmath and PES
5by9 5-strip to 9 strip ratio cuts. These cuts are similar to standard
cuts [ 63 ] .

We apply face corrections to the PEM energy of the plug electron
candidate, add the PPR energy and scale resulting number by 1.0315 [ 66
] , as shown in Equation 6.1 .

  -- -- -- -------
           (6.1)
  -- -- -- -------

### 6.2 Electron Control Samples

As in the muon case, the W and @xmath provide control samples for the
@xmath samples. We require at least one tight electron pass the high-
@xmath electron trigger (ELECTRON_CENTRAL_18) for both W and @xmath
candidates, where tight electrons are the electrons that pass the cuts
in Table 6.1 .

For comparisons with data we used the MC sample [ 61 ] . We applied
trigger efficiencies [ 67 ] and scale factors [ 63 ] , which are listed
in table 6.5 . The CEM Trigger efficiency for high- @xmath electrons is
1-2.784*exp(-1.749*( @xmath - 17.86)) [ 67 ] . The total Track Trigger
efficiency is @xmath 96-98%, depending on the run number and
silicon/non-silicon list of good runs [ 67 ] .We apply this trigger
efficiency to our run-dependent MC sample.

#### 6.2.1 The Central-Central Control Sample

The selection criteria for the central-central control sample are listed
in Table 6.6 . For this sample a @xmath candidate is required to have
two central electrons, one passing the tight cuts, and the other the
loose cuts (Table 6.1 ). The mass of the Z candidate is required to be
within the window 66 GeV to 116 GeV. The difference in the @xmath
coordinates of the two electron tracks must be less than 4 cm. We find
@xmath opposite-sign events and @xmath same-sign central-central @xmath
events satisfying these criteria (the large number of same-sign events
in the electron sample but not in the muon sample is largely due to
photon conversions - see Chapter 10 ).

The distributions in mass, @xmath of the pair, and @xmath are shown in
Figure 6.2 . To normalize the MC sample, we used the measured @xmath ( )
@xmath BR [ 62 ] .

#### 6.2.2 The Central-Plug Control Sample

We also form a central-plug dielectron @xmath control sample to monitor
the identification performance for the electrons in end-plug
calorimeters. We require a tight central electron, and a plug electron
passing the cuts of Table 6.4 . The mass of the Z candidate is required
to be within the window 66 GeV to 116 GeV. We find @xmath ( @xmath )
central-plug @xmath events satisfying these criteria with the plug
electron in the East (West) calorimeter.

The distributions in mass, @xmath of the pair, and @xmath are shown in
Figure 6.3 . The comparison of data vs MC is shown in Table 6.8 . The
event yields are shown in Figure 6.4 .

#### 6.2.3 The Control Sample

The selection criteria for the control sample are listed in Table 6.7 .
We require one tight central electron (i.e. @xmath GeV), and corrected
(Section 8.1 ) greater than @xmath GeV. We require the transverse mass
of the W candidate to be in the mass window 20-140 GeV. We find @xmath
events, @xmath positive and @xmath negative W’s. The event yields are
shown in Figure 6.4 .

#### 6.2.4 Summary of the Electron Control Sample Event Counts and
Stability Plots

We use the control samples of and decays to check temporal stability of
the event yields (Figure 6.4 ). Table 6.8 presents summary of the
electron control sample event counts.

## Chapter 7 Photon Identification

The photon selection criteria are identical for photons in both the muon
and electron samples; the photon cuts, and the number of events passing
in each sample, are enumerated in Table 7.2 and are described below.

A sample of photons from events used to measure the probability of an
electron radiating an energetic photon is also introduced.

### 7.1 Photon Selection Criteria

A photon candidate is required to have corrected transverse energy
greater than 25 GeV. For photons or electrons the CES shower position is
determined by the energy-weighted centroid of the highest energy
clusters of those strips and wires in the CES which correspond to the
seed tower. The direction of the photon is determined by the line
connecting the primary event vertex to the shower position in the CES.
To ensure that events are well-measured the shower position of the
photon is required to fall within the fiducial region of the CES so that
the shower is fully contained in the active region.

Photon candidates are required to have characteristics consistent with
those of a neutral electromagnetically-interacting particle. No COT
track with @xmath 1 GeV may point at the photon cluster. One track with
@xmath 1 GeV may point at the cluster.

The variable ‘Iso @xmath ’ is the Run I cone @xmath isolation energy
with the Run I correction to isolation energy due to phi-crack leakage [
65 ] . The tracking isolation variable ‘Track Isolation’ is the sum of
the @xmath of tracks in a in a cone in @xmath space of radius @xmath
surrounding the photon, measured in GeV.

Table 7.2 summarizes the selection of photons in the muon and electron
subsamples (Section 4.1 ).

For the muon subsample we require the event to be triggered by either a
high- @xmath muon trigger (which is MUON_CMUP_18 or MUON_CMX_18) or by a
high- @xmath photon trigger (PHOTON_25_ISO). After requiring a Tight
muon (Table 5.1 ) to be in the event with the photon (Table 7.1 ) we
find a total of @xmath @xmath candidate events.

For the electron subsample we require event to be triggered by either
high- @xmath electron trigger (ELECTRON_CENTRAL_18) or by high- @xmath
photon trigger (PHOTON_25_ISO). After requiring a tight electron(Table
6.1 ) to be in the event with the photon(Table 7.1 ) we find a total of
@xmath @xmath candidate events. The disparity between this number and
the @xmath @xmath events is due to a number of causes, in particular
hard photon bremsstrahlung of an electron, as discussed later in Section
7.2 .

### 7.2 Introducing the Photon Control Sample

Unlike for the electron or muon, finding a pure sample of high-Pt
photons is difficult; the ‘Compton’ sample of @xmath -jet events has QCD
fake backgrounds, for example. We describe here a control sample of
high-Pt photons derived from the @xmath .

In looking for photons in the electron sample, one has to take into
account that the dominant source of fake background for @xmath events is
@xmath production, wherein one of the electrons undergoes hard photon
bremsstrahlung in the detector material, or the COT fails to detect one
of the electron tracks, and that electron subsequently passes all of the
photon cuts. There are approximately @xmath tight central electron pairs
in the CDF data, so a photon fake rate as low as @xmath will give rise
to @xmath @xmath background events, which would be unacceptably high for
finding sources of new physics comparable to @xmath production. The Run
II detector has significantly more material inside the outer tracking
chamber than the Run I detector had, and so the number of ‘ @xmath ‘
events from production will be significantly higher. We measure this
fake rate directly from the data (the material in simulated data is
underestimated, see Table 6.8 ).

A control sample of @xmath -like events, @xmath , is selected from the
@xmath two-body @xmath candidates (see Chapter 12 ) by requiring that
the invariant mass of the @xmath pair, @xmath , be within 10 GeV of the
@xmath mass (91 GeV). There are @xmath such events in the CDF data. It
is observed that the shapes of the distributions of the two samples (
and @xmath ) are similar to each other(Figure 7.1 ).

## Chapter 8 Calculating the Missing Transverse Energy and @xmath

This chapter describes how missing transverse energy ( ) is calculated,
and gives the definition and describes calculation of the total
transverse energy.

### 8.1 Calculating the

Missing transverse energy ( ) is associated with particles that escape
detection. For example, is the signature of weakly interacting neutral
particles such as neutrinos, or possible new particles such as the
gravitino or LSP. It also can come from mismeasurement of the true
@xmath of objects, or from backgrounds such as cosmic rays or beam halo.

Missing @xmath ( @xmath ) is defined by @xmath , where i is the
calorimeter tower number for @xmath 3.6, and @xmath is a unit vector
perpendicular to the beam axis and pointing at the i @xmath tower. We
define the magnitude @xmath .

Corrections are made to the for non-uniform calorimeter response [ 56 ]
for jets with uncorrected @xmath @xmath and @xmath , and for muons with
@xmath @xmath :

-   Muons:
    – correct for @xmath , where @xmath is a transverse energy deposited
    in electromagnetic and hadron calorimeters, and @xmath is a
    transverse momentum of a muon track. We correct for all muons with
    @xmath GeV.

-   Jets:
    – correct for @xmath , where @xmath is a transverse energy of an
    uncorrected jet, and @xmath is a transverse energy of a jet,
    corrected for non-uniform calorimeter response. We correct for jets
    with @xmath GeV.

When identifying jets we check that jet object does not have any of the
objects identified in the current analysis close to it (within @xmath
0.5).

For the @xmath analysis we set the cut on to be @xmath GeV.

### 8.2 Calculating the Total Transverse Energy

Total transverse energy @xmath is defined for each event as the sum of
the transverse energies of the leptons, photons, jets, and that pass the
analysis selection criteria. To calculate @xmath we use Tight and Loose
Central Electrons (Table 6.1 ), Tight Phoenix Electrons (Table 6.2 ),
Tight and Loose CMUP and CMX muons, Stubless muons (Table 5.1 ), , and
jets in the event with @xmath and @xmath .

## Chapter 9 Standard Model Predictions

The dominant source of @xmath events at the Tevatron is electroweak
diboson production (Figure 9.1 ), in which an electroweak boson ( @xmath
or @xmath ) decays leptonically ( @xmath or @xmath ) and a photon is
radiated from either an initial state quark, a charged electroweak boson
( @xmath ), or a final state lepton. The number of @xmath events from
electroweak diboson production is estimated using several leading-order
(LO) Monte Carlo (MC) event generator programs. These programs are
MadGraph [ 68 ] , CompHep [ 69 ] , and Baur [ 70 , 71 ] .

These programs output 4-vectors and helicities of particles emanating
from a diboson production event in an ASCII format. In addition the
information on how the particles are produced (“mother” and “daughter”)
is recorded, including the energy scale and other parameters used for
the matrix element calculation.

These files are then fed into the LesHouchesModule [ 72 ] , which runs
Pythia [ 73 ] to add parton fragmentation and final-state radiation and
initial-state radiation (both QED and QCD) , and then writes out the
events in CDF HEPG format. These files are then used as input to the CDF
detector simulation program. This program outputs simulated data in a
format identical to that of an actual CDF Run II event. Simulated @xmath
event rates are then estimated in a manner identical to that of CDF
data.

### 9.1 @xmath, @xmath, @xmath and @xmath MC Sets

The details on the generator level settings of the Baur [ 71 ] MC @xmath
, @xmath datasets can be found in Ref. [ 74 ] .

The MadGraph @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath datasets created for this
analysis are listed in Table 9.3 . Details on the MadGraph and CompHep
MC samples can be found in Ref. [ 75 , 76 ] .

The kinematic cuts used for the generation of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath MC Sets are listed in Table 9.1 .

To account for NLO corrections to the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
processes we use the @xmath -dependent K-factor= @xmath obtained using
Baur’s NLO calculation programs [ 77 ] .

We apply these corrections to our LO MC(MadGraph and Baur). For @xmath
and @xmath we used the same K-factor formulas as for @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively.

Since the Baur NLO program only considers the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
channel contributions and not the bremstrahlung off the lepton lines(in
this case on the generator level @xmath , @xmath ) we apply the
inclusive W cross-section K-factor of 1.36 to the W+photon processes.

The K-factor applied to @xmath and @xmath MadGraph MC samples is shown
in Equation LABEL:kfactor_wgwgg.equation . The K-factor applied to
@xmath and @xmath MadGraph MC samples is shown in Equation
LABEL:kfactor_zgzgg.equation . In the Equations
LABEL:kfactor_wgwgg.equation and LABEL:kfactor_zgzgg.equation @xmath (
@xmath ) is the mass of the generated W(Z) system , and @xmath is a
(generated) photon transverse energy.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Every MC event is weighted with the appropriate K-factor.

### 9.2 Checks

To be highly confident in the SM predictions, we compared the
predictions from the three independent LO matrix-element generators at
generator and HEPG level.

There is excellent agreement (within 10% or within statistics) between
MadGraph and CompHep in all channels. As the two generators are really
different in technique (a helicity amplitude calculation in MadGraph, as
opposed to the symbolic evaluation of squared matrix element in
CompHep), this gives us confidence in the predictions.

Figure 9.2 shows the integrated cross section versus @xmath of the
photon for the MadGraph and CompHep @xmath and @xmath samples [ 75 , 76
] . Figure 9.3 shows the integrated cross section versus @xmath of the
photon for the MadGraph and CompHep @xmath and @xmath samples [ 75 , 76
] .

We have compared MadGraph, CompHep and MadGraph samples at GENERATOR [
75 ] and HEPG [ 78 ] . The more detailed study for MadGraph and Baur
@xmath and @xmath samples have been performed at Ref. [ 79 , 80 ] . For
example, the distributions for the muon channel is shown in Figure 9.4 .

### 9.3 The SM Diboson @xmath and @xmath Processes as Sources of
Lepton-Photon Events

The @xmath channel was the main SM contributor to the @xmath signature
with the Run I cuts [ 29 ] . In the Run I analysis, @xmath was expected
to contribute @xmath events to the @xmath channel, out of a total of
@xmath , and @xmath , out of a total of @xmath for the @xmath channel.
Having a reliable prediction of this signature is crucial.

The photon can be radiated from the incoming quarks, from the outgoing
electron, or the intermediate W (Figure 9.1 ). More detail on the
kinematic distributions and the cross sections is available in Ref [ 75
] . Initial-state radiation is simulated by the pythia MC program [ 73 ]
tuned to reproduce the underlying event. The generated particles are
then passed through a full detector simulation, and these events are
then reconstructed with the same code used for the data.

The predicted numbers of detected @xmath and @xmath events in @xmath
from SM @xmath production satisfying the analysis cuts from MadGraph are
given in Table 9.4 .

The uncertainties on the SM contributions include those from parton
distribution functions (5%), factorization scale (2%), K-factor (3%), a
comparison of different MC generators ( @xmath 5%), and the luminosity
(6%) (Chapter 11 ).

We have studied predictions from MadGraph, CompHep and Baur generators
for data and MC reconstructed in Ref. [ 78 ] , and these studies showed
good agreement in predicted rates.

The process @xmath is also one of the major SM backgrounds for the
lepton+ photon+X searches. It is the largest contributor to the
inclusive multi-body category in the Run I search, with expected
contributions in 86 @xmath of 5.01 @xmath 0.54 events in the @xmath mode
and 4.60 @xmath 0.54 in the @xmath mode [ 2 ] . It is also significant
in the @xmath channel, especially for muons, as one muon can be missed
inducing . The expected contributions for the electron and muon channels
in Run I were @xmath and @xmath events, respectively, smaller than the
@xmath contributions, but still significant, with a total ( @xmath ) of
@xmath events out of the @xmath events expected in 86 @xmath .

The photon can be radiated from the incoming quarks or from the outgoing
electron (Figure 9.1 ). More detail on the kinematic distributions and
the cross sections is available in Ref [ 75 ] .

The predicted numbers of detected (inclusive) @xmath and @xmath events
in @xmath from SM @xmath production satisfying the analysis cuts from
MadGraph are given in Table 9.5 . The uncertainties on the SM
contributions include those from parton distribution functions (7%), a
comparison of different MC generators ( @xmath 5%), and the luminosity
(6%) (Chapter 11 ).

### 9.4 The SM Triboson @xmath and @xmath Processes as Sources of
Lepton-Photon Events

While small, the @xmath , @xmath processes are the largest true SM
sources of a signature of a high- @xmath lepton plus two photons. The
observation of several such events has motivated a careful study of the
cross-sections for these sources [ 75 ] . In this study we have used
both MadGraph and Comphep; we get excellent agreement between the two
generators (Figure 9.3 ), giving us confidence in the predictions.

The final state of one lepton and two photons, @xmath , is produced in
the SM through an intermediate W, with radiation off of any of the
charged lines in the diagrams. We denote the final state of @xmath as ‘
@xmath ’ for convenience, although the @xmath is virtual and the
kinematics of the final state are more complicated than the name would
suggest. Note that this is process has three spin-one bosons in the
final state; MadGraph treats the helicities correctly and writes them
into the output file as input to the next steps.

The predicted numbers of detected @xmath and @xmath events in @xmath
from SM @xmath production satisfying the analysis cuts from MadGraph are
given in Table 9.6 . The agreement on the generator level for @xmath
between the two monte carlos, CompHep and MadGraph is good (Figure 9.3
), and we will use MadGraph @xmath to get predicted rates. More details,
including kinematic distributions, can be found in Ref. [ 75 ] .

The final state of two leptons and two photons, @xmath , is generated
through the intermediate photon and @xmath states, with radiation off of
any of the charged lines in the diagrams. We denote this as ‘ @xmath ’
for convenience, but the two amplitudes modify the mass spectra and
angular distributions, and so are both important.

This process is one of the SM mechanisms that could produce the @xmath
event [ 28 ] (although with an extra two jets), and is of interest in
the dilepton-diphoton searches as a background. As one can see below the
SM cross sections are small, typically one femtobarn or less.

The predicted numbers of detected @xmath and @xmath events in @xmath
from SM @xmath production satisfying the analysis cuts from MadGraph are
given in Table 9.6 . The agreement on the generator level for @xmath
between the two monte carlos, CompHep and MadGraph is good (Figure 9.3
), and we will use MadGraph @xmath to get predicted rates. More details,
including kinematic distributions, can be found in Ref. [ 75 ] .

### 9.5 The Sum of Contributions for SM @xmath, @xmath, @xmath, @xmath
Processes

Table 9.7 gives the sum of the expected contributions to the @xmath and
@xmath channels from SM @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath processes.
We have multiplied the average LO predictions for each channel by the
K-factors listed in Equations LABEL:kfactor_wgwgg.equation and
LABEL:kfactor_zgzgg.equation . As we require the event to be triggered
either by the lepton or by the photon trigger, this combination of
triggers is fully efficient.

### 9.6 @xmath and @xmath Followed by or @xmath and @xmath or @xmath

The last SM direct contribution (as opposed to misidentification) we
consider is @xmath and @xmath production followed by the boson leptonic
decay in the @xmath channel(“ @xmath background”). The tau can then
decay into an electron or muon. These events are not fakes, in the sense
that the electron or muon is real, although not a direct product of the
vector boson decay.

Table 9.8 gives a summary of the contributions to the @xmath and @xmath
channels from @xmath events ( @xmath and @xmath decaying to taus). Shown
are numbers of expected tau events from different processes ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) making a signature of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for the
different categories defined in the analysis. The final lepton is either
an electron or muon.

Background from @xmath , where @xmath ( @xmath 1/4 of the @xmath
branching fraction), then @xmath , which could mimic a single track +
photon signature that looks like @xmath is a part of @xmath background
estimated.

## Chapter 10 Backgrounds: Fakes

In addition to the expectations from real SM processes that produce real
@xmath events described in Chapter 9 , there are backgrounds due to
misidentified leptons and photons, and also incorrectly calculated . We
generically call these misidentifications ‘fakes’. In this chapter we
first treat backgrounds from fake photons, then from fake leptons,
including backgrounds to the W samples due to events with a fake lepton
and false .

### 10.1 Fake Photons

We consider two sources of fake photons: QCD jets in which a neutral
hadron or photon from hadron decay mimics a direct photon, and electron
bremsstrahlung, in which an energetic photon is radiated off of an
electron which is then much lower energy and curls away from the photon.

#### 10.1.1 Fake Photons from Jets

High @xmath photons are copiously created from hadron decays in jets
initiated by a scattered quark or gluon. In particular, mesons such as
the @xmath or @xmath decay to photons which may satisfy the photon
selection criteria.

The number of lepton-plus-misidentified-jet events in the @xmath and
@xmath samples is determined by measuring the jet @xmath spectrum in
@xmath jet and @xmath jet samples, respectively, and then multiplying by
the probability of a jet being misidentified as a photon, @xmath . The
uncertainty on the number of such events is calculated by again using
the measured jet spectrum and the upper and lower bounds on the @xmath
-dependent misidentification rate. An overview of the fake rate method
is given in Ref. [ 41 ] .

Any photon that is due the decay of a meson ( @xmath , @xmath ) is
classified as FAKE and any photon that is created in the hard scattering
process or radiated off a quark is classified as a TRUE photon. The
strategy is first to measure the RAW fake rate. The fraction of jets
which are matched to a photon candidate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

We estimate TRUE fake as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

To distinguish @xmath from @xmath or other hadrons, the following
variables have been used in the jet fake rate studies:

-   CES @xmath
    – @xmath typically have higher @xmath than prompt photons

-   Isolation in a cone in @xmath space of radius R=0.4 around the
    @xmath candidate
    – the background is usually produced as a part of a jet @xmath
    @xmath is higher than for @xmath

-   Hit rate in the CPR (Central Preradiator Detector, see Section 2.2.3
    )
    – CPR is between solenoid and calorimeter. @xmath converts in the
    coil and therefore we measure charge. Photons and fakes have
    different conversion probabilities.

Technical details on the studies of jets faking photons in CDF II are
available in Ref. [ 81 ] . The most recent numbers are available in Ref.
[ 41 ] and resulting distribution for @xmath and @xmath are shown in
Figure 10.2 . We follow this study closely in our estimates. We use jets
from the inclusive high- @xmath muon and high- @xmath electron lepton
samples (Section 4.1 ) to evaluate the background from jets faking
photons.

The above studies show that the (fake) photon carries about 94% of the
jet @xmath , and the resolution on the photon @xmath is about 5%. We
consequently scale and smear the jet @xmath by these numbers to get the
@xmath of the fake photon. We then select jets with @xmath and @xmath 25
GeV after the scaling and smearing. The jets are then weighted with by
the jet fake rate [ 81 ] .

The number of fake events versus the @xmath of the fake photon are shown
in Figure 10.3 for the @xmath and @xmath samples in both the electron
and muon channels. We count lepton-‘fake photon‘ candidates in the same
way as we do for real photons to calculate background for each
subcategory. Table 10.1 summarizes the number of events in the @xmath
and @xmath samples for the sub-categories used in the analysis.

#### 10.1.2 Fake Photons from Electron Bremsstrahlung

We can measure the probability that a high- @xmath electron ‘brems’ an
energetic photon in the material before the COT tracking volume in such
a way that it fakes a photon, by using the @xmath as a source of
‘tagged’ electrons. We look for a back-to-back @xmath pair close to the
@xmath mass ( @xmath and @xmath ) - this is the sub-category labeled
‘Z-like’. For the @xmath sample the requirements are an exactly 1
electron and 1 photon, with @xmath and @xmath . From the number of these
events and the number of events we can measure the probability per ‘leg’
of a @xmath that an electron is misidentified as a photon. We require
both electrons in to be central and pass tight cuts, so that the
kinematic requirements will be the same as for the @xmath sample (i.e.
two tight central electromagnetic objects).

The events in the 2nd row (labeled as ) of the Table 10.2 have the same
signature as @xmath events (see Figure 12.1 ), but instead of a photon
we require a tight central electron(Table 6.3 ).

For instance, to estimate contribution from electron faking photon to
@xmath category we count events with ee+ (both electrons are tight
central, Table 6.3 ). For Multi-Lepton + Photon we count events with
three electrons, of which two electrons should be tight central, and the
third one can be tight or loose central (Table 6.1 ), or phoenix tight
(Table 6.2 ). Finally, for Multi-Photon + Lepton category we use @xmath
events, both electrons are Tight Central.

Using the numbers in Table 10.2 we calculate the background from
electrons misidentified as photons. For example, for @xmath subcategory
the estimated number of electron-fake-photon events(“ @xmath ”) is
calculated as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath @xmath events in the sample

-   @xmath @xmath @xmath -like events

-   @xmath @xmath @xmath -like events expected from diboson events(
    @xmath , @xmath )

-   @xmath @xmath + jet faking photon @xmath -like events expected from
    misidentified jets

-   @xmath events (81 GeV @xmath 101 GeV, @xmath 150)

We take all numbers from data, with the exception that we get number of
@xmath events expected from diboson events, @xmath and @xmath , from MC
(we take into account contribution from @xmath and @xmath , although
it’s @xmath 1% of that from @xmath and @xmath ).

Finally, we estimate the number of electron-fake-photon events in @xmath
to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

Table 10.2 summarizes the calculated number of events in each analysis
subcategory for electrons faking photons by catastrophic bremsstrahlung.
The upper three rows are the input numbers used in the calculation,
which is given by Equation 10.3 . The last row gives the estimated
number of events detected with fake photons from electron
bremsstrahlung.

### 10.2 QCD (’Non-W/Z’) Backgrounds

To measure the QCD backgrounds from fake leptons and or fake , we form a
‘non-W/Z’ sample we expect to have very little real lepton content [ 82
] by selecting on loose leptons, rejecting events from the W or Z.

To estimate Non-W/Z background we use four samples:

-    Non-W/Z sample : 1 @xmath + jet(s), no W or Z candidates

-    Signal Sample : @xmath or @xmath

-    Golden-Lepton : tight e’s, CC ; tight @xmath ’s

-    Jet Faking Photon : @xmath or @xmath

In these samples we define three track isolation regions:

-    Track-Isolated : 0 GeV @xmath Track Isolation @xmath 2 GeV

-    Non-Track-Isolated : Track Isolation @xmath 4 GeV

-    Intermediate : 2 GeV @xmath Track Isolation @xmath 4 GeV

The procedure we use is to:

-   Estimate fraction of golden leptons with bad track isolation

-   Estimate fraction of non-W/Z leptons with good track isolation

-   Estimate QCD(Jet faking lepton and ) background

-   Vary track isolation regions to get systematics

We describe the selection and the procedure in detail below. We define
’Non-W/Z’ sample in Section 10.2.1 . We describe the basic method in
Section 10.2.2 , and then modify it to avoid double counting and to
include systematics in Section 10.2.4 . We estimate QCD (non-W/Z)
background for and in Section 10.2.5 to make sure we obtain results
consistent with Ref. [ 62 ] .

#### 10.2.1 Non-W/Z Sample

To select an event for the Non-W/Z sample we require the event to have
no W or Z candidates. Therefore, we require the event to have exactly
one tight lepton and no additional loose leptons or @xmath . We also
require the event to have at least one hadronic jet. For the electron
Non-W/Z sample the jet is required to have EM Fraction @xmath 0.8,
@xmath , @xmath GeV. For the muon Non-W/Z sample the jet is required to
have 0.1 @xmath EM Fraction @xmath 0.9, @xmath , @xmath GeV.

To reject events in which one muon is not identified, events with a
second track with @xmath GeV and associated EM and HAD calorimeter
energies less than 3 and 9 GeV, respectively, are rejected (we used the
same requirements to select control sample in Section 5.2.2 ).

#### 10.2.2 Track Isolation Method

To calculate the backgrounds from fake W’s and fake Z’s in which the
lepton comes from a jet, we use the track isolation of the lepton and
the samples of good electrons from Z’s and QCD background from the
non-WZ sample described above. The procedure is as follows:

-   Assume W, Z, @xmath , @xmath all have the same underlying event
    structure, including jets (good assumption to first order in the SM,
    see for example Figure 10.6 ).

-   Define 3 samples:

    -   @xmath or @xmath (signal region)

    -   golden-lepton (tight central-central electrons , tight muons )

    -   Non-W/Z QCD background

-    [0] @xmath : Number of events in a signal sample
    Count @xmath events of @xmath ( @xmath )

-    [1] @xmath : fraction of golden leptons with bad track isolation
    From the golden-lepton sample find the fraction @xmath of golden
    leptons that have bad track isolation (tiso @xmath 4).

-    [2] @xmath : number of signal in a @xmath region
    @xmath represents the number of real electrons we will lose by
    subtracting off electrons with tiso @xmath 4 in the @xmath ( @xmath
    ) sample. This has an uncertainty ( @xmath ) @xmath
    @xmath

-    [3] @xmath : ratio of background with good track isolation to the
    bad track isolation
    From the non-WZ sample find the ratio @xmath of background with good
    track tiso ( @xmath ) to those with bad track tiso ( @xmath ). We
    use this to estimate how many of the tiso @xmath 2 candidates are
    really QCD background.
    @xmath

-    [4] @xmath : the number of background with @xmath
    From the @xmath ( @xmath ) sample, the number of background with
    tiso @xmath 4 should be the number of candidates with tiso @xmath 4
    minus the expected number of real electrons with tiso @xmath 4:
    @xmath

-    [5] @xmath : the number of background with @xmath
    The number of background with @xmath is
    @xmath

-    [6] @xmath : the number of background with @xmath
    From number of background in @xmath @xmath and number of events in
    Non-WZ sample with @xmath and @xmath we estimate number of
    background with @xmath . The number of background with @xmath is
    @xmath

-    [7] @xmath : QCD background
    Resulting Number of QCD background
    @xmath

#### 10.2.3 Non-W/Z Results

We have used track isolation to make estimates of the non-W backgrounds
in the control sample (Section 10.2.5 ).

Table 10.3 summarizes the numbers of track-isolated and
non-track-isolated events in the good electron, non-WZ, and signal
samples. In addition, we add numbers of events from W+jet and Z+jet
categories, used to estimate jet faking photon background.

The good electrons are heavily track-isolated ( @xmath ); the QCD
background ‘electrons’ are predominantly track-non-isolated ( @xmath ).

Table 10.6 shows step-by-step calculation of predicted QCD (Non-WZ)
backgrounds.

#### 10.2.4 Modified Track Isolation Method

From the jet fake rate we obtain (fake gamma + real W) and (fake gamma +
fake W) backgrounds. From Track Isolation Method we obtain (real gamma +
fake W) and possibly (fake gamma + fake W).

To summarize, there are three sources of faking @xmath with either fake
gamma and/or fake W:

1.  fake gamma + real W (from jet fake rate)

2.  fake gamma + fake W (also part of jet fake rate and possibly part of
    non-W/Z background)

3.  real gamma + fake W (from non-W/Z background)

If fake W is a part of non-W/Z background it should contribute to
track-non-isolated regions. Real W’s from W+jet should have the same
track isolation distribution as W+ @xmath (we have performed the checks
for all the samples we use, see for example Figure 10.6 ).

To avoid double counting, we modify Track Isolation Method as follows:
we subtract W+jet faking photon contribution from @xmath trackiso
regions, we subtract Z+jet faking photon contribution from @xmath
trackiso regions. Then we repeat procedure, documented in Section 10.2.2
, with these modified @xmath and @xmath numbers (Table 10.6 ).

To take into account systematic error of 100% for jet faking photon rate
(Table 10.6 ) we repeat these procedure, subtracting W+jet and Z+jet
contribution multiplied by 2. Therefore, to avoid double-counting we use
background estimates from “Predicted QCD Backgrounds with Jet Fakes
Subtracted” (Table 10.6 ).

Finally, Non-W/Z backgrounds for @xmath and @xmath signatures are
summarized in Table 10.7 . Systematic errors are obtained by varying
track isolation regions. Further checks for Non-WZ background for and
are described below in Section 10.2.5 .

#### 10.2.5 Non-W/Z background for and

We have used track isolation to make estimates of the non-WZ backgrounds
in the control sample and @xmath and @xmath signal samples. Table 10.8
shows the estimated ‘non-W’ background in the W samples for 5 different
track-iso regions. This is for a check- the values are consistent with
known QCD backgrounds for W’s [ 62 ] . The method uses track isolation
and two regions, one at low track-iso and one at high. Leptons from the
golden Z sample are used to estimate the number of leptons in the
high-track-iso region; ‘leptons’ from the non-WZ sample are used to
estimate the number of leptons in the low-track-iso region. The first
column of the table gives the ranges in GeV for the low and high
track-iso regions, respectively.

## Chapter 11 Systematic Uncertainties

In this chapter we summarize estimates of the systematic uncertainties
on the SM predicted rates and on the measured event counts.

The errors are categorised as theoretical (Section 11.1 ), luminosity
(Section 11.2 ) and experimental (Section 11.3 . The contributing
effects for the SM predictions we have considered are:

-   7% error is on the total theoretical prediction, including the NLO
    uncertainties.

-   Luminosity: 6%

-   Trigger Efficiencies: 2% for muons and 1% for electrons for lepton
    triggers only. We OR’ing lepton trigger with photon trigger, and
    therefore this combination of triggers is fully efficient.

-   @xmath z_vert @xmath @xmath 60: 1%

-   Muon ID Efficiencies: 2%

-   Electron ID Efficiencies: 1%

-   Photons ID Efficiencies: 4%

The systematic uncertainties on the backgrounds are included in the
background estimates, discussed in Chapter 9 and Chapter 10 . For the SM
predictions the total systematic uncertainty is 10.2% for @xmath and
@xmath for electrons, and 10.5% for @xmath and @xmath for muons (Chapter
9 ).

### 11.1 Theoretical Systematic Uncertainties

Limitations in the theoretical precision of the calculation, result in
an uncertainty on the cross-section prediction. The effect of these
errors on the cross-section is studied in [ 7 , 41 , 83 ] and is
summarized in Table 11.1

#### 11.1.1 Factorization Scale

The factorization scale is the minimum @xmath value calculated [ 41 , 83
] for photon emission in the ZGAMMA and WGAMMA programs [ 70 ] . This
value will affect the maximum @xmath value for post generation Pythia
fragmentation. The default factorization scale was @xmath , the square
of the collision energy of the event. The cross-section and acceptance
were measured using four other values, 2 @xmath , 3/2 @xmath , 2/3
@xmath and 1/2 @xmath . The greatest variation in the cross-section from
the default value of Q2 was 2%.

#### 11.1.2 Parton Density Function Choice

Protons and anti-protons are composite particles. Therefore, any
interactions between them must be described using parton density
functions (PDF). The PDF describes the energy distributions of the
valence quarks, gluons and sea quarks inside the proton/anti-proton.

The PDF chosen for use with ZGAMMA [ 70 ] was the CTEQ5L PDF. In order
to determine the systematic error from this choice, the LO cross-section
is compared to the corresponding predictions calculated from the MRST 72
- 76 PDFs. The MRST cross-sections range between 1.604 and 1.625 @xmath
whereas the cross-section using CTEQ5L is 1.72 @xmath . The difference
between the two was taken to be the systematic error [ 41 , 83 ] , of
6%.

#### 11.1.3 K-factor

The calculated K-factor only takes into account O( @xmath ) corrections.
To take into account higher order corrections, the Q scale in the NLO
calculation was varied by factors of 2 and 1/2. A 3% variation in the
cross-section calculation was observed, and taken to be a systematic
error.

### 11.2 Luminosity Systematic Uncertainties

The luminosity error is estimated to be 6%, which includes a 4.4%
contribution from the acceptance and operation of the luminosity monitor
and 4.0% from the theoretical uncertainty on the calculation of the
total @xmath cross-section [ 49 ] .

### 11.3 Experimental Systematic Uncertainties

The sources of experimental systematic errors [ 7 , 41 , 83 ] for the
@xmath analysis subcategories are summarized in Table 11.2 . Jet Fake
systematic error is discussed in Section 10.1.1 .

Systematic uncertainty on jet faking photon rate is one of the
dominating errors. The uncertainty is limited by the statistics for the
high- @xmath photons, so we expect it to significantly improve with more
data. At that point we’ll be dominated by the systematic uncertainty.
Therefore, the biggest contribution will be from the SM estimates on
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath production.

## Chapter 12 The @xmath Search

This chapter presents the results of the @xmath search for the three
signatures of interest - @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Section 12.1 describes the ‘analysis subcategories’ established in the
Run I analysis [ 2 ] , and used again here so as to be a priori .
Section 12.2 presents the number of events in each analysis subcategory
for the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (the sum of @xmath ) samples.
Section 12.3 discusses the stability of the observed numbers during the
course of the run. The predicted and observed totals for the @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath and comparison of observed kinematic distributions to
the SM predicted shapes is done in Section 12.4 .

### 12.1 Defining the Event Categories by Topology

Categories of photon-lepton events were defined a priori in a way that
characterized the different possibilities for new physics. For each
category, the inclusive event total and basic kinematic distributions
can be compared with standard model expectations. The decay products of
massive particles are typically isolated from other particles, and
possess large transverse momentum and low rapidity.

Therefore, inclusive @xmath events are selected by requiring a central
tight photon with @xmath @xmath and a central @xmath or @xmath with
@xmath @xmath . Both signal and control samples are drawn from this
@xmath sample (Figures 12.3 , 12.1 and 12.2 ).

Considering the control samples first, from the @xmath sample we select
back-to-back events with exactly one photon and one lepton (i.e. @xmath
); this is the dominant contribution to the @xmath sample, and has a
large Drell-Yan component. A subset of this sample is the ‘Z-like’
sample, which provides the calibration for the probability that an
electron radiates and is detected as a photon, as discussed in Section
10.1.2 . The remaining back-to-back events are called the Two-Body
Events and were not used in this analysis.

All events which either have more than one lepton or photon, or in which
the lepton and photon are not back-to-back (and hence the event cannot
be a Two-Body event), are classified as ‘Inclusive Multi-Body @xmath ’.
These are further subdivided into three categories: @xmath (Section 12.5
) (‘Multi-Body @xmath Events’), for which the (Section 8.1 ) is greater
than 25 GeV , @xmath (Section 12.6 ) and @xmath (Section 12.7 )
(‘Multi-Photon and Multi-Lepton Events’), and events with exactly one
lepton and exactly one photon, which are not back-to-back. The events
with exactly one lepton and exactly one photon, which are not
back-to-back were not used in the analysis.

### 12.2 The Number of Events Observed

Figure 12.1 shows the results of this classification for the inclusive
electron data sample. We find @xmath @xmath events, of which @xmath are
in the Inclusive Multi-Body category. Of these, @xmath are classified as
@xmath events and @xmath and @xmath as Multi-Photon and Multi-Electron
events respectively.

Figure 12.2 shows the results for the inclusive muon sample.We find
@xmath @xmath events, of which @xmath are in the Inclusive Multi-Body
category. Of these, @xmath are classified as @xmath events and @xmath
and @xmath as Multi-Photon and Multi-Muon events.

Figure 12.3 shows the sum of the electron and muon entries in the
analysis subcategories. There are @xmath @xmath events, @xmath
Multi-Photon events, and @xmath Multi-Lepton events. It is these
categories, shown in red in the figures, that are of particular interest
due to the Run I results.

### 12.3 Stability of the Event Rates versus Run Number

This sub-section looks at the rate for the analysis subcategories as a
function of run number. We use the same eight luminosity bins used to
check the stability of the control samples, described in Section 4.1 .
We see no obvious problems, although the statistics are low. Figure 12.4
shows the rates in events/ @xmath for the @xmath and @xmath signal
subcategories in each run segment in the muon channel; Figure 12.5 does
the same for the electron channel.

### 12.4 Results

In this section we summarize the predicted and observed totals for the
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath searches. We compare observed kinematic
distributions to the SM predicted shapes.

### 12.5 @xmath Search

The predicted and observed totals for the @xmath search are shown in
Table 12.1 . We observe @xmath @xmath events compared to the expectation
of @xmath events.

There is no significant excess in the @xmath signature. Figure 12.6
shows the observed distributions summed over the @xmath and @xmath
events in a) the @xmath of the photon; b) the @xmath of the lepton; c)
the missing transverse energy, ; and d) the transverse mass of the
@xmath system, where @xmath - @xmath .

The predicted and observed kinematic distributions for @xmath are
compared in Figure 12.7 . The distributions for @xmath signature are
compared in Figure 12.8 .

The additional plots of the identification variables for @xmath and
@xmath are available in Section A.2 .

### 12.6 @xmath Search

The predicted and observed totals for the @xmath search are shown in
Table 12.2 . We observe @xmath @xmath events compared to the expectation
of @xmath events.

The @xmath search criteria select @xmath events ( @xmath @xmath and
@xmath @xmath ) of the @xmath @xmath events. No @xmath events are
observed. Figure 12.9 shows the observed distributions in a) the @xmath
of the photon; b) the @xmath of the leptons; c) the 2-body mass of the
dilepton system; and d) the 3-body mass @xmath . For the @xmath process
occurring via initial state radiation, the dilepton invariant mass
@xmath distribution is peaked around the @xmath -pole. For the final
state radiation, the three body invariant mass @xmath distribution is
peaked about the @xmath -pole.

The predicted and observed kinematic distributions for @xmath are
compared in Figure 12.10 . The distributions for @xmath signature are
compared in Figure 12.11 . The dominant contribution for the @xmath and
@xmath signatures is from the SM @xmath production.

We do not expect events with large in the @xmath sample, based on the SM
backgrounds; the Run I @xmath event was of special interest in the
context of supersymmetry [ 18 , 19 ] due to the large value of (55
@xmath 7 @xmath ). Figure 12.12 shows the distributions in for the
@xmath and @xmath subsamples of the @xmath sample. No events are
observed with @xmath @xmath .

The additional plots of the identification variables for @xmath and
@xmath are available in Section A.3 .

### 12.7 @xmath Search

The predicted and observed totals for the @xmath search are shown in
Table 12.3 . We do not observe any @xmath candidate events compared to
the expectation of @xmath events.

## Conclusions

In conclusion, we have searched for physics beyond the Standard Model in
a channel in which new phenomena due to supersymmetry or extra
dimensions, for example, could well appear. In particular, we have
repeated the Run I CDF search for inclusive lepton + photon production,
a final state in which both a very rare event appeared and also in which
there seemed to be an excess over SM predictions. The new analysis, the
subject of this thesis, was done specifically with the same kinematic
requirements as the Run I search, but with a significantly larger data
sample and a higher collision energy.

We conclude that the excess in the @xmath signature in Run I of 2.7
sigma was at least largely a statistical fluctuation. If the Run I ratio
of the number of @xmath events observed to the number expected, 16/7.6,
had held up, the “2.7 @xmath excess” in this channel observed in Run I
would have resulted in an observation of 78 @xmath 11 events when @xmath
are expected in the Run II repeat of the analysis, versus the @xmath
events observed.

We find that the numbers of events in the @xmath and @xmath subsamples
of the @xmath sample agree with the SM predictions. We find no events
like the @xmath candidate event of Run I, and, even more generally,
observe no @xmath events with anomalous large or with multiple photons.
We have no explanation for the Run I @xmath event, and nothing we have
measured leads us to believe that is background.

However, we still find that in the @xmath signature in the Run II data
the number of observed events is higher than predicted, although the
excess is now slight. It is possible that the leading-order + K-factor
theoretical calculations of the diboson @xmath and @xmath channels,
which contain many diagrams including initial state radiation, are not
precise enough for the precision we have now reached.

Alternatively, or perhaps in addition, this analysis has observed a
small number of events on the ‘tails’ of the kinematic distributions, in
regions we expect few SM events. These events contribute to the
observation of more events than expected in the @xmath signature, much
as the @xmath event contributed to the excess in the Run I search.
Whether these are very rare backgrounds or something new will require
yet more data.

The Fermilab plan is to have a factor of 10-20 more data than presented
here by the end of Run II of the Tevatron. The increased statistics will
require an improved understanding of backgrounds as well as better SM
predictions. In particular the estimate of the rate for a jet to be
misidentified as a photon is limited now by the statistics for high-
@xmath photons; we expect the estimate will significantly improve with
more data.

In summary, while it would have been very exciting to find physics
beyond the Standard Model, we found no more @xmath events in a much
larger sample than in Run I, and the Run I excess in @xmath became less
significant rather than more. However, we have conclusively settled a
question that generated much interest in the theoretical community. The
channels we have investigated will remain interesting, and the
techniques we have developed and the knowledge gained will be useful for
similar searches at the LHC.

## Acknowledgments

I thank my thesis co-supervisors Henry Frisch (UC) and Andrey Rostovtsev
(ITEP) for their encouragement and support. I learned many things from
my co-supervisors, and most important of which is to enjoy what I do and
keep my eyes wide open.

To keep my body as active as my mind really helped me to survive years
of my graduate study. I learned two basic things: “no pain - no gain”
and “what doesn’t break me makes me stronger”. These two simple things
still keep me going.

I would like to thank Eduard Boos and Lev Dudko for their support and
development of CompHep, and Tim Steltzer, Steve Mrenna, and Fabio
Maltoni for their similar responsiveness for MadGraph and Pythia.
Alexander Belyaev, and Alexander Sherstnev generated the CompHep @xmath
and @xmath datasets, respectively, for the search. Uli Baur provided
wisdom on the effective Born approximation parameters for the LO
parameters. Steve Levy, Peter Onyisi, Alexander Paramonov, Carla
Pilcher, and Collin Wolfe provided invaluable support for the UCNtuple
and datasets.

I want to thank GodParents of the @xmath PRL publication Bob Blair, Ron
Moore and Antonio Sidoti, for all the time and effort they put into the
paper in order to improve it and see it published in time for my thesis
defense. I also want to thank my thesis opponents, Leonid Gladilin and
Vladimir Gavrilov, for their questions and comments. I wish to thank
Paul Tipton for careful proof reading my thesis.

I would like to thank my friends in Russia, who helped me to have
necessary (many!) papers to have the pre-defense process started while I
was in the US - Dmitry Liventsev, Roman Vishnitsky, Alexander and Elena
Zykovy.

I want to thank many people at ITEP who helped me to go through all the
formalities for my thesis defense - Tagir Aushev, Elena Filimonova,
Valentina Korchagina, Elena Minervina, Mikhail Trusov, Valery Vasil’ev
and Tatiana Tokareva. I would like to thank those who spent a lot of
time helping me to start doing research at ITEP - Alexei Drutskoy,
Alexander Fedotov, Dmitry Ozerov, Vyacheslav Zaharov, Alexander Zhokin.

I am grateful to Aspasia Sotir-Plutis and Veronica (”Vicki”)
McClain-Stone, who helped me with different formalities at the
University of Chicago, which allowed me to concentrate on performing the
search.

I also would like to thank my CDF collaborators Anadi Canepa, Kathy
Copic, Ray Culbertson, Max Goncharov, Helen Hayward, Beate Heinemann,
Heather Gerberich, Al Goshaw, Mike Kirby, Bruce Knuteson, Konstantin
Kotelnikov, Slava Krutelyov, Giulia Manca, Pasha Murat, Jane Nachtman,
Alexei Safonov, Tara Shears, Irina Shreyber, Reda Tafirout, Stan
Thompson, Jason Tsui, Soushi Tsuno, Song Ming Wang, and Un-Ki Yang for
their many contributions.

## Appendix A Appendices

### a.1 List Of Lepton-Photon Events

### a.2 Additional @xmath Plots

In this section we present additional plots of the identification
variables for @xmath and @xmath signatures.

#### a.2.1 Additional @xmath Plots

#### a.2.2 Additional @xmath Plots

### a.3 Additional @xmath Plots

In this section we present additional plots of the identification
variables for @xmath and @xmath signatures.

#### a.3.1 Additional @xmath Plots

#### a.3.2 Additional @xmath Plots

### a.4 Stability Plots for @xmath and @xmath

To check electron and muon identification in events with an extra object
(such as a photon in the signal channel) we plot the rate for @xmath and
@xmath in the 8 bins of luminosity (Table 4.1 ) in Figure A.11 .

### a.5 CMX vs CMUP muons: Comparison of Isolation Variables

We have checked that muons that go into the CMX system have the same
isolation properties as CMUP muons. Figure A.12 shows the distributions
in calorimeter isolation, relative track isolation (total @xmath of
tracks in a cone in @xmath space of radius @xmath around the muon track
divided by @xmath ) and absolute track isolation for and events.

### a.6 Fake Electrons from Photon Conversions

There are three dominant sources of fake electrons: a) photons from
@xmath , @xmath and other mesons, that convert into asymmetric @xmath
pairs in the material before the COT volume, b) charged hadrons in jets
that either interact in the electromagnetic volume of the calorimeter or
overlap with a @xmath or secondary photon in the jet, and c) electrons
from the decay of heavy flavor ( @xmath , @xmath , and maybe even @xmath
). We estimated these backgrounds in Section 10.2 by studying the total
@xmath of tracks in a cone in @xmath space of radius @xmath around the
lepton track.

We consider fake electrons from photon conversions below. Electrons
coming from photon conversion are identified by conversion algorithm,
which looks for couple of opposite sign tracks with @xmath 0.2 cm and
@xmath 0.04.

For each electron a conversion flag is tested. We define if the electron
is flagged as coming from a conversion ( @xmath ) or from trident events
where a conversion is caused by a bremsstrahlung photon ( @xmath ). We
study same-sign events in sample and then check how many of them contain
electrons tagged as conversions or tridents.

Figure A.13 shows the distributions for same-sign and opposite-sign
@xmath pairs. The invariant mass of the same-sign electrons is shifted
with respect to the invariant mass of (Figure A.13 , a). We observe
similar behavior (shift in invariant mass distribution) in the MC as in
data (Figure A.14 ).

To develop an understanding of the conversion cut for the candidate
events, we summarize the same-sign events in sample. Out of @xmath
events in this sample only @xmath are not tagged as either a conversion
electron or a trident. We find that we have @xmath same sign muon
events, which is comparable to @xmath non-conversion/trident same-sign
electron events.

### a.7 Checking the @xmath and @xmath for Additional Backgrounds

We have used a number of techniques, described below, to look for
additional backgrounds in the @xmath and @xmath samples.

##### Same-Sign Leptons to Estimate Jets Faking one or More Leptons

We used results from Ref. [ 84 ] on the numbers of same-sign (SS) and
other-sign (OS) muon pairs in the dimuon sample. The expected background
from SS muon pairs to @xmath is calculated as follows.

First we obtain the ratio of W+1 jet events to OS events, x, expected in
the dimuon sample: x = SS/OS @xmath 1.51 @xmath 0.05. For the @xmath
sample ratio of SS/OS is of order of 0.05% and therefore x=0.1%. In the
@xmath sample we have 12 OS events, and therefore the expected
background from W+1 jet is negligible, 0.1% @xmath 12 = 0.012 @xmath
0.001 events.

##### Decays in flight of Low Momentum @xmath Faking a High-Momentum
Muon

A low-momentum hadron, not in an energetic jet, can decay to a muon
forming a “kink” between the hadron and muon trajectories (Figure A.16
). In this case a high-momentum track may be reconstructed from the
initial track segment due to the hadron and the secondary track segment
from the muon. A kaon that decays before the COT volume results in a
muon whose momentum is correctly measured; a kaon that decays after the
COT is itself correctly measured. These contributions are included in
the total background estimate (see Section 10.2 ).

The contribution from this background is estimated by identifying tracks
consistent with a “kink” in the COT. We count the number of times that,
proceeding radially along a COT track, a “hit” in the n+1 layer of
sense-wires is on the other side of the fitted track from the hit in the
nth layer. Real tracks will have hits distributed on both sides of the
fit, and will therefore have many “transitions”. A mis-measured track
from a 5- @xmath @xmath (for example), on the other hand, will consist
of two intersecting low-momentum arcs fit by a high momentum track, and
will have a small number of transitions [ 85 ] .

Figure A.16 shows the number of transitions in muons in the control
sample, and in a sample enriched in hadron decays by selecting events
with a large @xmath , at least one jet and muon that have large impact
parameter @xmath cm. Figure A.17 shows the number of transitions for
muon tracks with and without silicon hits. The red curve is the
distribution for the muons from sample. Decays-in-flight have a
distribution that peaks much lower, with few events above 30
transitions. We see no evidence that any of these tracks are DIF muons.

##### @xmath, @xmath Cosmics Background

For this we invert cosmic cut, and require the event to be tagged as
cosmic [ 59 ] . We processed the unstripped high- @xmath muon sample
with this inverted requirement and found no @xmath or @xmath candidate
events.

In addition we scanned our @xmath and @xmath candidate events with CDF
Run II Event Display (Section 3 ) and made sure that none of them look
like beam halo or cosmics events.