### Chapter 1 Introduction

  I would not call that one but rather the characteristic trait of
  quantum mechanics
  -Erwin Schrödinger [ Sch35 ]

#### 1.1 Motivation

Quantum computation and quantum information is the field that deals with
the information processing and transmission making use of quantum
systems. This is a discipline that has begun its development in recent
years, and to which a lot of effort is being devoted (for a review of
the field, see for example [ GMD02 , NC00 ] ). Its interest stems from
the fact that there are physical tasks regarding information processing
and transmission that can be possibly done more efficiently with quantum
systems than with the ordinary classical ones. Some examples are the
following:

1.  Regarding information processing we highlight

    -    The factorization of large integer numbers into primes [ Sho97
        ] .

        This takes a time that grows exponentially in the number of
        digits @xmath of the integer being factorized with the most
        powerful classical algorithms known. That is the property in
        which many classical cryptography systems are based, i.e. public
        key distribution. With Shor’s algorithm a quantum computer would
        only use a polynomial time in @xmath .

    -    Search algorithms [ Gro97 ] .

        “Quantum mechanics helps in searching for a needle in a
        haystack” (L. Grover). With a classical computer it takes a time
        of order @xmath to find a given item in a disorganized list of
        size @xmath . In a quantum computer it would take a time that
        grows as @xmath , with Grover’s algorithm.

2.  Regarding information transmission, we mention

    -    Quantum cryptography [ Wie83 , BBB @xmath 92 ] .

        The private distribution of secure keys, for use in
        cryptography, is a reality. Nowadays there are some companies
        which offer this service. This feature relies in the
        impossibility of distinguishing with certainty two
        non-orthogonal quantum states.

    -    Dense coding [ BW92 ] .

        With quantum mechanics it is possible to transmit two bits of
        information with a single quantum bit, in a secure way.

    -    Quantum teleportation [ BBC @xmath 93 , BBM @xmath 98 , BPM
        @xmath 97 ] .

        This is a feature very useful in quantum information. It is a
        procedure to move quantum states around without making use of a
        communication channel. With this protocol a copy of a certain
        quantum state is obtained in another specified place. This
        implies the destruction of the initial state, because the
        cloning of quantum states is forbidden by quantum linearity
        (no-cloning theorem).

Some of the previous applications make use of a genuine quantum
resource, namely Entanglement . In the early days of quantum mechanics,
Erwin Schrödinger already realized the importance of this quantum
property. He said, “Entanglement is the characteristic trait of Quantum
Mechanics”. Roughly speaking, entanglement are genuine quantum
correlations between spatially separated physical systems. To show the
difference between these non-local, quantum correlations and purely
classical ones, we consider an example conceived by Asher Peres [ Per78
, Per95 ] : Suppose a bomb, initially at rest, which explodes into two
fragments carrying opposite momenta @xmath , @xmath (see FIG. 1.1 ). An
observer measures the magnitude @xmath , where @xmath is a unit vector
with a fixed arbitrary direction. The result of the measurement, called
a, is @xmath or @xmath . Additionally, a second observer measures @xmath
, where @xmath is another unit vector with another fixed arbitrary
direction. The result can only be @xmath .

The experiment is repeated @xmath times. We call @xmath and @xmath the
results measured by these observers for the @xmath th bomb. If the
observers compare their results, they find a correlation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example, if @xmath , they obtain @xmath .

To compute @xmath for arbitrary @xmath and @xmath , we consider the
sphere shown in FIG. 1.2 . The plane orthogonal to @xmath divides the
sphere in two hemispheres. We have @xmath if @xmath points through one
of these hemispheres and @xmath if it points through the other
hemisphere. Similarly, the regions where @xmath are limited by the
intersection of the sphere with the plane orthogonal to @xmath . This
way, the sphere is divided into four sections, as shown in FIG. 1.2 .
The shaded sections have @xmath , while the unshaded ones have @xmath .
The classical correlation for uniformly distributed @xmath results

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Regarding now the quantum mechanical case, we consider two spatially
separated spin @xmath particles @xmath and @xmath in the singlet state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the arrows denote the third component of spin along an arbitrary
direction. An observer measures the observable @xmath , while another
one measures @xmath , being @xmath and @xmath the Pauli spin matrices
associated to particles @xmath and @xmath respectively. @xmath and
@xmath are arbitrary unit vectors. We denote as before @xmath and @xmath
the results of these measures, taking values @xmath . It can be shown
that in this case, the correlation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We plot ( 1.1 ) and ( 1.2 ) in FIG. 1.3 . This figure shows how the
quantum correlation is always stronger than the classical one, except
where both are @xmath or @xmath . This qualitatively different behavior
of the quantum and classical correlations has very profound
implications, as John Bell shown [ Bel64 ] , upon the arguments of
Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen [ EPR35 ] : realism+locality is
incompatible with quantum mechanics. Up to now, experiments favor the
latter. There is, indeed, a general consensus about the validity of
quantum mechanics, and, in particular, entanglement, in opposition to
local realistic theories. Although it is difficult to prove with total
security the correctness of quantum mechanics, there are no relevant
experiments that contradict it ¹ ¹ 1 For a recent reference showing the
allowed correlations volume predicted by local realistic theories,
quantum mechanics, and in general no-signalling theories, see [ Cab05 ]
.

##### 1.1.1 Preliminaries: Basic notions of entanglement

In this section we give some relevant definitions about entanglement,
that will be used along the Thesis.

We consider a composite system @xmath described by a Hilbert space
@xmath , either finite- or infinite-dimensional. This space is built
upon the tensor products of the Hilbert spaces associated to the
subsystems @xmath of @xmath . We consider for the time being bipartite
systems @xmath , for simplicity. Thus, @xmath , and @xmath .

-   Pure states

    ###### Definition 1.
    (product state) A vector state @xmath of system @xmath is a product
    state if it can be expressed as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath and @xmath .

    ###### Definition 2.
    (entangled state) A vector state @xmath of system @xmath is
    entangled if it is not a product state.

    A remarkable example, for @xmath , are the so-called Bell states,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (1.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    that possess the maximum achievable entanglement for these
    dimensions (1 ebit, or entangled bit).

    A very useful tool for analyzing the entanglement of pure bipartite
    states is the Schmidt decomposition [ EK95 , LWE00 ] . It basically
    consists in expressing the pure bipartite state as sum of
    biorthonormal products, with positive coefficients, @xmath ,
    according to

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath , @xmath , are orthonormal bases associated to @xmath
    and @xmath , respectively (see Appendix A ). In Eq. ( 1.5 ), @xmath
    , and it can be infinite, like for systems described with continuous
    variables as momentum, energy, position, frecuency, or the like. In
    those cases, the states @xmath would be @xmath wave functions,

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.6)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath denotes the corresponding continuous variable.

    For pure bipartite states the relevant entanglement measure is the
    entropy of entanglement , @xmath . Given a certain state @xmath , it
    is defined as the von Neumann entropy of the reduced density matrix
    with respect to @xmath o @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where the @xmath coefficients are the eigenvalues of the reduced
    density matrix of @xmath with respect to either of the two
    subsystems, and are the ones appearing in Eq. ( 1.5 ). In general,
    @xmath , @xmath for a product state ² ² 2 In this case, @xmath and
    @xmath , @xmath . , and, the more entangled is a state, the larger
    is @xmath . For a maximally entangled state ³ ³ 3 In this case,
    @xmath , @xmath . , @xmath , and if @xmath , then @xmath diverges.

    Another interesting entanglement measure for pure states is the
    Schmidt number, @xmath . It is defined

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    @xmath gives the effective number of terms appearing in the Schmidt
    decomposition ( 1.5 ) of a pure bipartite amplitude. @xmath for
    product states, and, the larger @xmath , the larger the
    entanglement. Along this Thesis we will be using the notation @xmath
    both for the Schmidt or the Slater number. The latter is defined
    analogously, although it is related to pure bipartite amplitudes of
    identical fermions, that can always be written in terms of
    superpositions of biorthonormal Slater determinants (it is the
    generalization of the Schmidt decomposition for identical fermions,
    called Slater decomposition). The Slater number gives the effective
    number of Slater determinants appearing in the Slater decomposition.
    This is just half the Schmidt number. On the other hand, the degree
    of genuine entanglement is the same in both cases, given that for
    identical fermions the correlations due to antisymmetrization must
    be substracted: they are not genuine entanglement.

-   Mixed states

    ###### Definition 3.
    (separable state) A separable state can always be expressed as a
    convex sum of product density operators [ Wer89 ] . In particular, a
    separable bipartite state can be written as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are density operators
    associated to subsystems @xmath and @xmath .

    ###### Definition 4.
    (entangled state) An entangled mixed state is a quantum state that
    is not separable.

    A remarkable example are the so-called Werner states, canonical
    examples of mixed states obtained from a Bell state that suffers
    decoherence. They are defined in the way

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Where @xmath , and @xmath gived the degree of mixture of the state.
    It is well-known [ Wer89 ] that the Bell state @xmath is distillable
    ⁴ ⁴ 4 it is, may be obtained from a certain number of copies of
    @xmath by Local Operations and Classical Communication. from Eq. (
    1.10 ) iff @xmath .

    For mixed bipartite or multipartite states there are not known
    universal entanglement measures. In fact, neither there are criteria
    that may allow to determine whether a certain state is or not
    entangled (separability criteria), and they are just known in some
    particular cases.

    For @xmath or @xmath and @xmath it exists the PPT separability
    criterion [ Per96 , HHH96 ] . It establishes that a certain
    bipartite mixed state is separable iff its partial transposed matrix
    (PT, transposed with respect to one of the two subsystems) is
    positive (with positive eigenvalues). Otherwise it is entangled.

    This criterion gives rise to defining an entanglement measure for
    @xmath and @xmath dimensions, so-called negativity @xmath ,
    according to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the smallest of the eigenvalues of the PT matrix. A
    separable state has @xmath , an entangled state, @xmath , and, the
    more entangled is a state, the larger @xmath .

    For the sake of completeness we mention that there exist many more
    entanglement measures for low dimensions (Concurrence, Entanglement
    of Formation, Tangle, etc.) and other separability criteria for
    arbitrary dimensions like the ones based on entanglement witnesses [
    LBC @xmath 00 , PV07 ] .

At the same time that the field of quantum information and computation
evolves, more and more evidence appears that shows the crucial role of
entanglement in this field. Bipartite and multipartite entanglement is
one of the features that give rise to many of the developments of
quantum computation and information, like quantum cryptography [ Wie83 ,
Eke91 ] , dense coding [ BW92 ] , quantum teleportation [ BBC @xmath 93
, BBM @xmath 98 , BPM @xmath 97 ] and aspects of quantum computation [
NC00 ] , among others. A lot of effort is being devoted to obtain
separability criteria (to decide whether a given mixed or pure state is
entangled or not), and to measure and characterize entanglement. For a
review, see Ref. [ LBC @xmath 00 ] or Ref. [ PV07 ] . For a compilation
of bibliographic references on entanglement and other topics on
foundations of quantum mechanics and quantum information, see Ref. [
Cab00 ] . The evaluation of the entanglement of a composite state is
thus a main task to be done.

This Thesis is mainly a series of theoretical results about
entanglement. The importance of entanglement, both from the theoretical,
fundamental point of view, and for the experimental applications in
information processing and communication, is a well-founded motivation
for having carried out the lines of research I have developed here. With
respect to the focusing, being this a theoretical Thesis, it is mainly
related to entanglement properties from the physical point of view. This
is indeed a Thesis about physics, more than about mathematics or
computer science. However, Part III (Multipartite entanglement) in this
Thesis is more related to mathematics and information theory, with two
more abstract chapters.

In the following I briefly expose the main results of this Thesis.

#### 1.2 Contributions

The research lines I followed for carrying out this work are mainly
three:

-   Entanglement and Special Relativity.

-   Entanglement of pure states described by continuous variables.

-   Multipartite entanglement.

##### 1.2.1 Entanglement and Relativistic Quantum Theory

Peres, Scudo y Terno introduced [ PST02 ] the relative character under
Lorentz transformations of the entropy of entanglement of a @xmath
particle. This result may have profound implications given that the
quantum information theory is being mainly developed in the laboratory
frame, without considering different observers in relative uniform
motion, so it is not covariant. It would be interesting to investigate
what happens when processing or transmitting quantum information in
relativistic regimes. In this respect several papers have appeared,
which explore the relationship among quantum information theory and
special relativity [ Cza97 , PST02 , AM02 , GA02 , GBA03 , PS03 , TU03 ,
AjLMH03 , PT04 , MY04 , FSM05 , Har05 , AFSMT06 , Har06b , Har06a , HW06
, JSS06b , JSS06a ] .

Following this line we have contributed with

-    Dynamics of momentum entanglement in lowest-order QED

    This is a work [ LLS06b ] somewhere in between the entanglement of
    continuous variables and the relativistic aspects of entanglement,
    so it could be placed in either part of the Thesis. Here we study
    the dynamics of momentum entanglement generated in the lowest order
    QED interaction between two massive spin-1/2 charged particles,
    which grows in time as the two fermions exchange virtual photons. We
    observe that the degree of generated entanglement between
    interacting particles with initial well-defined momentum can be
    infinite. We explain this divergence in the context of entanglement
    theory for continuous variables, and show how to circumvent this
    apparent paradox. Finally, we discuss two different possibilities of
    transforming momentum into spin entanglement, through dynamical
    operations or through Lorentz boosts.

-    Generation of spin entanglement via spin-independent scattering

    Here we consider [ LL06 ] the bipartite spin entanglement between
    two identical fermions generated in spin-independent scattering. We
    show how the spatial degrees of freedom act as ancillas for the
    creation of entanglement to a degree that depends on the scattering
    angle, @xmath . The number of Slater determinants generated in the
    process is greater than 1, corresponding to genuine quantum
    correlations between the identical fermions. The maximal
    entanglement attainable of 1 ebit is reached at @xmath . We also
    analyze a simple @xmath dependent Bell’s inequality, which is
    violated for @xmath . This phenomenon is unrelated to the
    symmetrization postulate but does not appear for unequal particles.

-    Relativity of distillability

    In this work we study [ LMDS06 ] entanglement distillability of
    bipartite mixed spin states under Wigner rotations induced by
    Lorentz transformations. We define weak and strong criteria for
    relativistic isoentangled and isodistillable states to characterize
    relative and invariant behavior of entanglement and distillability.
    We exemplify these criteria in the context of Werner states, where
    fully analytical methods can be achieved and all relevant cases
    presented.

-    Dirac equation and relativistic effects in a single trapped ion

    We present [ LLSS07b ] a method of simulating the Dirac equation, a
    quantum-relativistic wave equation for spin- @xmath massive
    particles, in a single trapped ion. The four-component Dirac
    bispinor is represented by four metastable ionic internal states,
    which, together with the motional degrees of freedom, could be
    controlled and measured. We show that the proposed scheme would
    allow for a smooth transition from massless to massive particles, as
    well as for access to parameter ranges and physical regimes not
    provided by nature. Furthermore, we demonstrate that paradigmatic
    quantum relativistic effects unaccesible to experimental
    verification in real fermions, like Zitterbewegung , Klein’s
    paradox, Wigner rotations, and spontaneous symmetry breaking
    produced by a Higgs boson, could be studied.

##### 1.2.2 Continuous variable entanglement

The entanglement of continuous variables has raised a lot of interest in
the past years [ Vai94 , FSB @xmath 98 , LB99 , Gie01 , GECP03 , AB05 ,
BvL05 ] . For a thorough review of the field, see [ BvL05 ] .

We will concentrate in the continuous variable entanglement of pure
bipartite states, which is very relevant for the applications and
corresponds to the ideal case with no decoherence.

The results we have obtained in this line are

-    How much entanglement can be generated between two atoms by
    detecting photons?

    We prove [ LGRC07 ] that in experiments with two atoms an arbitrary
    degree of entanglement between them may be reached, by only using
    linear optics and postselection on the light they emit, when taking
    into account additional photons as ancillas. This is in contrast to
    all current experimental proposals for entangling two atoms, that
    were only able to obtain one ebit.

-    Spin entanglement loss by local correlation transfer to the
    momentum

    We show [ LLS06a ] the decrease of spin-spin entanglement between
    two @xmath fermions or two photons due to local transfer of
    correlations from the spin to the momentum degree of freedom of one
    of the two particles. We explicitly show how this phenomenon
    operates in the case where one of the two fermions (photons) passes
    through a local homogeneous magnetic field (optically-active
    medium), losing its spin correlations with the other particle.

-    Schmidt decomposition with complete sets of orthonormal functions

    We develop [ LL05a ] a mathematical method for computing analytic
    approximations of the Schmidt modes of a bipartite amplitude with
    continuous variables. In the existing literature, various authors
    compute the Schmidt decomposition in the continuous case by
    discretizing the corresponding integral equations. We maintain the
    analytical character of the amplitude by using complete sets of
    orthonormal functions. We give criteria for the convergence control
    and analyze the efficiency of the method comparing it with previous
    results in the literature related to entanglement of biphotons via
    parametric down-conversion.

-    Momentum entanglement in unstable systems

    We analyze the dynamical generation of momentum entanglement in the
    decay of unstable non-elementary systems described by a decay width
    @xmath [ LL05b ] . We study the degree of entanglement as a function
    of time and as a function of @xmath . We verify that, as expected,
    the entanglement grows with time until reaching an asymptotic
    maximum, while, the wider the decay width @xmath , the lesser the
    asymptotic attainable entanglement. This is a surprising result,
    because a wider width is associated to a stronger interaction that
    would presumably create more entanglement. However, we explain this
    result as a consequence of the fact that for wider width the mean
    life is shorter, so that the system evolves faster (during a shorter
    period) and can reach lesser entanglement than with longer mean
    lives.

##### 1.2.3 Multipartite entanglement

The multipartite entangled states stand up as the most versatile and
powerful tool for realizing information processing protocols in quantum
information science [ BD00 ] . The controlled generation of these states
becomes a central issue when implementing the applications. In this
respect, the sequential generation proposed by Schön et al. [ SSV @xmath
05 , SHW @xmath 06 ] is a very promising scheme to create these
multipartite entangled states.

We have contributed to the field with

-    Sequential quantum cloning

    Not every unitary operation upon a set of qubits may be implemented
    sequencially through successive interactions between each qubit and
    an ancilla. Here we analyze [ DLL @xmath 06 ] the operations
    associated to the quantum cloning sequentially implemented. We show
    that surprisingly the resources (Hilbert space dimension @xmath ) of
    the ancilla grow just linearly with the number of clones @xmath to
    obtain. Specifically, for universal symmetric quantum cloning we
    obtain @xmath and for symmetric phase covariant quantum cloning,
    @xmath . Moreover, we obtain for both cases the isometries for the
    qubit-ancilla interaction in each step of the sequential procedure.
    This proposal is easily generalizable to every quantum cloning
    protocol, and is very relevant from the experimental point of view:
    three-body interactions are very difficult to implement in the
    laboratory, so it is fundamental to reduce the protocols to
    sequential operations, which are mainly two-body interactions.

-    Inductive classification of multipartite entanglement under SLOCC

    Here we propose [ LLSS06 , LLSS07a ] an inductive procedure to
    classify @xmath -partite entanglement under stochastic local
    operations and classical communication (SLOCC) when the
    classification for @xmath qubits is supposed to be known. The method
    relies in the analysis of the coefficients matrix of the state in an
    arbitrary product basis. We illustrate this method in detail with
    the well-known bi- and tripartite cases, obtaining as a by-product a
    systematic criterion to establish the entanglement class of a pure
    state without using entanglement measures, in opposition to what has
    been done up to now. The general case is proved by induction,
    allowing us to obtain un upper bound for the number of entanglement
    classes of @xmath -partite entanglement in terms of the number of
    classes for @xmath qubits. Finally, we give our explicit calculation
    for the highly nontrivial case @xmath [ LLSS07a ] .

#### 1.3 Description of the Thesis

-   In Chapter 2 I analyze the momentum entanglement generation among
    two electrons which interact in QED by exchanging virtual photons. I
    show that surprisingly, @xmath matrix theory produces pathological
    results in this case: the entanglement in Møller scattering would be
    divergent for incident particles with well-defined momentum. In
    order to manage with these divergences, that would be physical
    (entanglement is a measurable magnitude, with a physical meaning), I
    made the calculation for electrons with Gaussian momentum
    distributions which interact for a finite time. The divergences
    disappear, but, remarkably, the attainable entanglement would not be
    bounded from above.

-   In Chapter 3 I consider the spin entanglement among two or more
    identical particles, generated in spin-independent scattering. I
    show how the spatial degrees of freedom act as ancillas creating
    entanglement between the spins to a degree that will depend in
    general on the specific scattering geometry considered. This is
    genuine entanglement among identical particles as the correlations
    are larger than merely those related to antisymmetrization. I
    analize specifically the bipartite and tripartite case, showing also
    the degree of violation of Bell’s inequality as a function of the
    scattering angle. This phenomenon is unrelated to the symmetrization
    postulate but does not appear for unlike particles.

-   In Chapter 4 I analyze the Lorentz invariance of usual magnitudes in
    quantum information, like the degree of entanglement or the
    entanglement distillability. I introduce the concepts of
    relativistic weak and strong isoentangled and isodistillable states
    that will help to clarify the role of Special Relativity in the
    quantum information theory. One of the most astonishing results in
    this work is the fact that the very separability or distillability
    concepts do not have a Lorentz-invariant meaning. This means that a
    state which is entangled (distillable) for one observer may be
    separable (nondistillable) for another one that propagates with a
    finite @xmath speed with respect the first one. This is an
    all-versus-nothing result, in opposition to previous results on
    relativistic quantum information, which showed that a certain
    entanglement measure was not relativistically-invariant (but always
    remained larger than zero).

-   In Chapter 5 I present a method for simulating Dirac equation, a
    quantum-relativistic wave equation for massive, spin- @xmath
    particles, in a single trapped ion. The four-component Dirac
    bispinor is represented by four metastable, internal, ionic states,
    which, together with the motional degrees of freedom, could be
    controlled and measured. I show that paradigmatic effects of
    relativistic quantum mechanics unaccesible to experimental
    verification in real fermions, like Zitterbewegung , Klein’s
    paradox, Wigner rotations, and spontaneous symmetry breaking
    produced by a Higgs boson, could be studied.

-   In Chapter 6 I prove that in experiments with two atoms an arbitrary
    degree of entanglement between them may be reached, by only using
    linear optics and postselection on the light they emit, when taking
    into account additional photons as ancillas. This is in contrast to
    all current experimental proposals for entangling two atoms, that
    were only able to obtain one ebit.

-   In Chapter 7 I show the decrease of the initial spin-spin
    entanglement among two @xmath fermions or two photons, due to local
    correlation transfer from the spin to the momentum degree of freedom
    of one of the two particles. I explicitly show how this phenomenon
    works in the case where one of the two fermions (photons) traverses
    a local homogeneous magnetic field (optically active medium), losing
    its spin correlations with the other particle.

-   In Chapter 8 I develop a mathematical method for computing analytic
    approximations of the Schmidt modes of a bipartite amplitude with
    continuous variables. I maintain the analytical character of the
    amplitude by using complete sets of orthonormal functions. I give
    criteria for the convergence control and analyze the efficiency of
    the method comparing it with previous results in the literature
    related to entanglement of biphotons via parametric down-conversion.

-   In Chapter 9 I apply our method to a relevant case: the entanglement
    of two photons created by parametric down-conversion. I compare our
    results (leading to well known, continuous functions) with those
    computed by standard numerical methods that produce sets of points:
    discrete functions. Both procedures agree remarkably well.

-   In Chapter 10 I consider the final products of an unstable system
    like an excited atom that emits a photon and decays to the ground
    state, or a nucleus that radiates a particle entangled with it. I
    analyze the momentum entanglement of these final particles. I study
    its dependence on the evolution time @xmath and on the decay width
    @xmath . I observe that the entanglement grows with time, until it
    reaches an asymptotic maximum, while the wider the @xmath , the
    lesser the entanglement. I also compute the power-law corrections in
    @xmath to the exponential decay, and obtain the entangled energy
    dependence of these corrections.

-   In Chapter 11 I show that the decomposition of the unity in @xmath
    is in fact the Schmidt decomposition of the Dirac delta. It has
    maximum (infinite) entanglement, well-known result that is very
    easily verified from this point of view.

-   In Chapter 12 I analyze the operations associated to the quantum
    cloning sequentially implemented. I show that surprisingly the
    resources (Hilbert space dimension @xmath ) of the ancilla grow just
    linearly with the number of clones @xmath to obtain. Specifically,
    for universal symmetric quantum cloning I obtain @xmath and for
    symmetric phase covariant quantum cloning, @xmath . Moreover, I
    obtain for both cases the isometries for the qubit-ancilla
    interaction in each step of the sequential procedure. This proposal
    is easily generalizable to every quantum cloning protocol, and is
    very relevant from the experimental point of view: three-body
    interactions are very difficult to implement in the laboratory, so
    it is fundamental to reduce the protocols to sequential operations,
    which are mainly two-body interactions.

-   In Chapter 13 I propose an inductive procedure to classify @xmath
    -partite entanglement under stochastic local operations and
    classical communication (SLOCC) when the classification for @xmath
    qubits is supposed to be known. The method relies in the analysis of
    the coefficients matrix of the state in an arbitrary product basis.
    I illustrate this method in detail with the well-known bi- and
    tripartite cases, obtaining as a by-product a systematic criterion
    to establish the entanglement class of a pure state without using
    entanglement measures, in opposition to what has been done up to
    now. The general case is proved by induction, allowing us to obtain
    un upper bound for the number of entanglement classes of @xmath
    -partite entanglement in terms of the number of classes for @xmath
    qubits. I also include the complete classification for the @xmath
    case.

-   In Appendix A I review the Schmidt procedure for expressing a
    general bipartite pure state as ‘diagonal sum of biorthogonal
    products’. I describe the finite dimensional case and the continuous
    case.

-   In Appendix B I review the no-cloning theorem of quantum mechanics,
    and also some examples of optimal approximate quantum cloning (to a
    certain fidelity): symmetric universal quantum cloning and symmetric
    economical phase-covariant quantum cloning.

    In Appendix C I review the protocol [ Vid03 ] for expressing a
    multiqubit pure state in its matrix-product form ( cf. [ Eck05 ,
    PGVWC06 ] ).

## Part I Entanglement and Relativistic Quantum Theory

### Chapter 2 Dynamics of momentum entanglement in lowest-order QED

In the last few years two apparently different fields, entanglement and
relativity, have experienced intense research in an effort for treating
them in a common framework [ Cza97 , PST02 , AM02 , GA02 , GBA03 , PS03
, TU03 , AjLMH03 , PT04 , MY04 , Har05 , FSM05 , AFSMT06 , Har06b ,
Har06a , HW06 , JSS06b , JSS06a ] . Most of those works investigated the
Lorentz covariance of entanglement through purely kinematic
considerations, and only a few of them studied ab initio the
entanglement dynamics. For example, in the context of Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED), Pachos and Solano [ PS03 ] considered the
generation and degree of entanglement of spin correlations in the
scattering process of a pair of massive spin- @xmath charged particles,
for an initially pure product state, in the low-energy limit and to the
lowest order in QED. Manoukian and Yongram [ MY04 ] computed the effect
of spin polarization on correlations in a similar model, but also for
the case of two photons created after @xmath annihilation, analyzing the
violation of Bell’s inequality [ Bel64 ] . In an earlier work, Grobe et
al. [ GRE94 ] studied, in the nonrelativistic limit, the dynamics of
entanglement in position/momentum of two electrons which interact with
each other and with a nucleus via a smoothed Coulomb potential. They
found that the associated quantum correlations manifest a tendency to
increase as a function of the interaction time.

In this chapter, we study to the lowest order in QED the interaction of
a pair of identical, charged, massive spin- @xmath particles, and how
this interaction increases the entanglement in the particle momenta as a
function of time [ LLS06b ] . We chose to work at lowest order, where
entanglement already appears full-fledged, precisely for its simplicity.
In particular this allows to set-aside neatly other intricacies of QED,
whose influence on entanglement should be subject of separate analysis.
In this case, the generation of entanglement is a consequence of a
conservation law: the total relativistic four-momentum is preserved in
the system evolution. This kind of entanglement generation will occur in
any interaction verifying this conservation law, like is the case for
closed multipartite systems, while allowing the change in the individual
momentum of each component. The infinite spacetime intervals involved in
the S-matrix result in the generation of an infinite amount of
entanglement for interacting particles with well-defined momentum. This
apparent paradox is surpassed by considering finite-width momentum
distributions. However, it is remarkable that the attainable
entanglement is not bounded from above, as we will show here. We will
also discuss two different possibilities, with dynamical operations or
with Lorentz boosts, of establishing transfer of entanglement between
the momentum and spin degrees of freedom in the collective two-particle
system. In Section 2.1 , we analyze at lowest order and at finite time
the generation of momentum entanglement between two electrons. In
Section 2.2 we apply the method developed in Chapter 8 (see also Refs. [
LL05a , Lam05 ] ) to calculate the Schmidt decomposition of the
amplitude of a pair of spin- @xmath particles, showing the growth of
momentum entanglement as they interact via QED. We obtain also analytic
approximations of the Schmidt modes ( 8.8 ) and ( 8.9 ) both in momentum
and configuration spaces. In Section 2.3 , we address the possibilities
of transferring entanglement between momenta and spins via dynamical
action, with Local Operations and Classical Communication (LOCC), using
the majorization criterion [ Nie99 ] , or via kinematical action, with
Lorentz transformations.

#### 2.1 Two-electron Green function in perturbation theory

To address the properties of entanglement of a two electron system one
needs the amplitude (wave function) @xmath of the system, an object with
16 spinor components dependent on the configuration space variables
@xmath , @xmath of both particles. The wave functions were studied
perturbatively by Bethe and Salpeter [ SB51 ] and their evolution
equation was also given by Gell-Mann and Low [ GML51 ] . The wave
function development is closely related to the two particle Green
function,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which describes (in the Heisenberg picture) the symmetrized probability
amplitude for one electron to proceed from the event @xmath to the event
@xmath while the other proceeds from @xmath to @xmath . If @xmath
describes the electron at 3 and @xmath that at 4, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

will be their correlated amplitude at 1, 2, where @xmath denotes the
Dirac matrix @xmath associated to vertex @xmath , and @xmath is the
differential element lying in the hypersurface orthonormal to the @xmath
coordinate. In the free case this is just @xmath , but the interaction
will produce a reshuffling of momenta and spins that may lead to
entanglement. The two body Green function @xmath is precisely what we
need for analysing the dynamical generation of entanglement between both
electrons.

Perturbatively [ SB51 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the free propagator of an electron that evolves from
@xmath to @xmath , and @xmath is the free photon propagator for
evolution between @xmath and @xmath . We may call @xmath to the
successive terms on the right hand side of this expression. They will
describe the transfer of properties between both particles due to the
interaction. This reshuffling vanishes at lowest order, which gives just
free propagation forward in time:

  -- -------- -- -------
                 
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The first effects of the interaction appear when putting
@xmath instead of @xmath in the left hand side of the above equation.
The corresponding process is shown in Fig. 2.1 .

To deal with this case we choose @xmath and introduce the new variables
@xmath and @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

in Eq. ( 2.3 ), which gives

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (2.7)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

where @xmath is a shorthand notation for what corresponds to ( 2.4 ) at
second order, and @xmath . After some straightforward calculations, we
obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath            @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath            @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath are the only contributions that remain asymptotically ( @xmath )
leading to the standard scattering amplitude, while @xmath vanish in
this limit. We recall that these are weak limits: no matter how large
its modulus, the expression in Eq. ( 2.1 ) will vanish weakly due to its
fast oscillatory behavior. On the other hand, the sinc function in Eq. (
2.9 ) enforces energy conservation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This limit shows also that the entanglement in energies increases with
time [ LL05a ] , reaching its maximum (infinite) value when @xmath , for
particles with initial well-defined momentum and energy. This result is
independent of the chosen scattering configuration. Exact conservation
of energy at large times, united to a sharp momentum distribution of the
initial states, would naturally result into a very high degree of
entanglement. The better defined the initial momentum of each electron,
the larger the asymptotic entanglement. The physical explanation to this
unbounded growth is the following: The particles with well defined
momentum (unphysical states) are spread over all space, and thus their
interaction is ubiquitous, with the consequent unbounded degree of
generated entanglement. This is valid for every experimental setup,
except in those pathological cases where the amplitude cancels out, due
to some symmetry. In the following section, and for illustrative
purposes, we will single out these two possibilities.

1.  The case of an unbounded degree of attainable entanglement, due to
    an incident electron with well defined momentum. We consider, with
    no loss of generality, a fuzzy distribution in momentum of the
    second initial electron, for simplicity purposes.

2.  Basically the same setup as 1 ) but with a specific spin
    configuration, which leads to cancellation of the amplitude at large
    times due to the symmetry, and thus to no asymptotic entanglement
    generation.

On the other hand, for finite times, nothing prevents a sizeable
contribution from Eq. ( 2.1 ). In fact, in the limiting case where
@xmath is large compared to the energies relevant in the problem, it may
give the dominant contribution to entanglement. Whether the contribution
from @xmath and @xmath is relevant, or not, depends on the particular
case considered.

#### 2.2 Two-electron entanglement generation at lowest order

The electrons at @xmath will be generically described by an amplitude
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

that should be normalizable to allow for a physical interpretation,
i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

For separable states where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath could be Gaussian
amplitudes @xmath centered around a certain fixed momentum @xmath and a
certain spin component @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

which in the limit of vanishing widths give the standard -well defined-
momentum state @xmath .

In the absence of interactions, a separable initial state will continue
to be separable forever. However, interactions destroy this simple
picture due to the effect of the correlations they induce. Clearly, the
final state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

can not be factorized.

In the rest of this section we analyze the final state @xmath in Eq. (
2.19 ) to show how the variables @xmath and @xmath get entangled by the
interaction. We consider the nonrelativistic regime in which all
intervening momenta and widths @xmath , so the characteristic times
@xmath under consideration are appreciable. We single out the particular
case of a projectile fermion @xmath scattered off a fuzzy target fermion
@xmath centered around @xmath . As a further simplification, we consider
the projectile momentum sharply distributed around @xmath ( @xmath ) so
that the initial state can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our kinematical configuration would acquire complete generality should
we introduce a finite momenta @xmath for the initial electron b. The
reference system would be in this case midway between the lab. system
and the c.o.m. system. In short, the choice @xmath will not affect the
qualitative properties of entanglement generation.

We will work in the lab frame, where particle @xmath shows a fuzzy
momentum distribution around @xmath , and focus in the kinematical
situation in which the final state momenta satisfy @xmath and also
@xmath , @xmath (see Fig. 2.2 ). This choice not only avoids forward
scattering divergencies but also simplifies the expression of the
amplitude in Eq. ( 2.19 ), due to the chosen angles. For sure, the
qualitative conclusions would also hold in other frames, like the
center-of-mass one.

We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, boldface characters represent trivectors, otherwise they represent
their associated norms. We perform now the following change of
variables,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

turning the amplitude in Eq. ( 2.19 ) into

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (2.23)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . In the following, we analyze
different specific spin configurations in the non-relativistic limit
with the help of Eq. ( 2.23 ). We consider an incident particle energy
of around @xmath eV @xmath ( @xmath KeV), and a momentum spreading
@xmath one order of magnitude less than @xmath . We make this choice of
@xmath and @xmath to obtain longer interaction times, of femtoseconds (
@xmath ). Thus the parameter values we consider in the subsequent
analysis are @xmath and @xmath . We consider the initial spin state for
particles @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

along an arbitrary direction that will serve to measure spin components
in all the calculation. The physical results we are interested in do not
depend on this choice of direction. The QED interaction, in the
non-relativistic regime considered, at lowest order, is a Coulomb
interaction that does not change the spins of the fermions. In fact,
@xmath , @xmath . Given the initial spin states of Eq. ( 2.24 ),
depending on whether the channel is @xmath or @xmath , the possible
final spin states are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Due to the fact that the considered fermions are identical, the
resulting amplitude after applying the Schmidt procedure is a
superposition of Slater determinants [ SCK @xmath 01 , ESBL02 , GM04 ] .
Whenever this decomposition contains just one Slater determinant (Slater
number equal to 1) the state is not entangled: its correlations are just
due to the statistics and are not useful for the applications because
they do not contain any additional physical information. If the
amplitude contains more than one determinant, the state is entangled.
Splitting the amplitude in the corresponding ones for the @xmath and
@xmath channels, we have

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                          
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the infinite time limit the sinc function converges to @xmath , which
is a distribution with infinite entanglement [ LL05a ] . The presence of
the sinc function is due to the finite time interval of integration in
Eq. ( 2.7 ). This kind of behavior can be interpreted as a time
diffraction phenomenon [ Mos52 ] . It has direct analogy with the
diffraction of electromagnetic waves that go through a single slit of
width @xmath comparable to the wavelength @xmath . The analogy is
complete if one identifies @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

In Fig. 2.3 , we plot the modulus of Eq. ( 2.2 ) versus @xmath , @xmath
, at times @xmath . This graphic shows the progressive clustering of the
amplitude around the curve @xmath , due to the function @xmath . This is
a clear signal of the growth in time of the momentum entanglement. Fig.
2.3 puts also in evidence the previously mentioned time diffraction
pattern.

We have applied the method for obtaining the Schmidt decomposition given
in Ref. [ LL05a ] (see Chapter 8 , or a more complete description in
Ref. [ Lam05 ] ) to Eq. ( 2.2 ), considering for the orthonormal
functions @xmath , @xmath Hermite polynomials with their weights, to
take advantage of the two Gaussian functions. We obtain the Schmidt
decomposition for @xmath , where the error with matrices @xmath @xmath
or smaller is @xmath in all considered cases. We plot in Fig. 2.4 the
coefficients @xmath of the Schmidt decomposition of Eq. ( 2.2 ) as a
function of @xmath , for times @xmath . The number of @xmath different
from zero increases as time is elapsed, and thus the entanglement grows.

The complete Schmidt decomposition, including channels @xmath and @xmath
, is given in terms of Slater determinants [ SCK @xmath 01 ] , and is
usually called Slater decomposition. It is obtained antisymmetrizing the
amplitude for channel @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the modes @xmath and @xmath are the Schmidt modes of the channel
@xmath obtained for particles @xmath and @xmath respectively, and they
correspond to the modes of the channel @xmath for particles @xmath and
@xmath respectively.

A measure of the entanglement of a pure bipartite state of the form of
Eq. ( LABEL:eqges13bis ), equivalent to the entropy of entanglement
@xmath , is given by the Slater number [ GRE94 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath gives the number of effective Slater determinants which appear in
a certain pure bipartite state in the form of Eq. ( LABEL:eqges13bis ).
The larger the value of @xmath , the larger the entanglement. For @xmath
(one Slater determinant) there is no entanglement. This measure is
obtained considering the average probability, which is given by @xmath (
@xmath , and thus @xmath can be seen as a probability distribution). The
inverse of the average probability is the Slater number. Its attractive
properties are that it is independent of the representation of the
wavefunction, it is gauge invariant, and it reaches its minimum value of
1 for the separable state (single Slater determinant). In Fig. 2.5 , we
show the Slater number @xmath as a function of elapsed time @xmath ,
verifying that the entanglement increases as the system evolves. It can
be appreciated in this figure the monotonic growth of entanglement, due
to the fact that we have considered an incident electron with well
defined momentum. In realistic physical situations with wave packets,
this growth would stop, due to the momentum spread of the initial
electrons. The general trend is that the higher the precision in the
incident electron momentum, the larger the resulting asymptotic
entanglement. The fact that the entanglement in momenta between the two
fermions increases with time is a consequence of the interaction between
them. We remark that the entanglement cannot grow unless the two
particles ‘‘feel’’ each other. The correlations in momenta are not
specific of QED: the effect of any interaction producing momentum
exchange while conserving total momentum will translate into momentum
correlations.

The Schmidt modes in momenta space for the amplitude of Eq. ( 2.2 ) are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the corresponding cut-off and the values of the
coefficients @xmath are obtained through the method given in Ref. [
LL05a ] . The modes in momenta space depend on time because they are not
stationary states: the QED dynamics between the two fermions and the
indeterminacy on the energy at early stages of the interaction give this
dependence. By construction, the coefficients @xmath do not depend on
@xmath , @xmath .

We plot in Fig. 2.6 the Schmidt modes @xmath at times @xmath for @xmath
(we are plotting specifically the real part of each mode only, which
approximates well the whole mode, because Eq. ( 2.2 ) is almost real for
the cases considered). The sharper modes for each @xmath correspond to
the later times. Each Schmidt mode is well approximated at early times
by the corresponding Hermite orthonormal function, and afterwards it
sharpens and deviates from that function: it gets corrections from
higher order polynomials. The fact that the modes get thinner with time
is related to the behavior of Eq. ( 2.2 ) at large times. In particular
the sinc function goes to @xmath and thus the amplitude gets sharper.

Now we consider the Schmidt modes in configuration space. To obtain
them, we just Fourier transform the modes of Eq. ( 2.31 ) with respect
to the momenta @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The dependence of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath on @xmath
is given through Eq. ( 2.22 ). The factor @xmath in Eq. ( 2.32 ) is the
one which commutes the states between the interaction picture
(considered in Eq. ( 2.31 ) and in the previous calculations in Secs.
2.1 and 2.2 ) and the Schrödinger picture.

The Hermite polynomials obey the following expression [ GR48 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the help of Eq. ( 2.33 ) and by linearity of the Fourier
transforms, we are able to obtain analytic expressions for the Schmidt
modes in configuration space (to a certain accuracy, which depends on
the cut-offs considered). This is possible because the dispersion
relation of the massive fermions in the considered non-relativistic
limit is @xmath , and thus the integral of Eq. ( 2.32 ) can be obtained
analytically using Eq. ( 2.33 ).

The corresponding Schmidt modes in configuration space are then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the orthonormal functions in configuration space are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Eqs. ( 2.34 ) and ( 2.35 ), we are using dimensionless variables,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and the dimensionless time defined before,
@xmath . The modes in Eqs. ( 2.34 ) and ( 2.35 ) are normalized in the
variables @xmath . The orthonormal functions of Eq. ( 2.35 ) propagate
in space at a speed @xmath and they spread in their evolution.
Additionally, the modes of Eq. ( 2.34 ) have also the time dependence of
@xmath . The Slater decomposition in configuration space, obtained
Fourier transforming the modes of Eq. ( 2.31 ) is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coefficients @xmath are unaffected by the Fourier transformation,
and thus the degree of entanglement in configuration space is the same
as in momenta space.

We consider now the initial spin configuration

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, the only possible final state in the non-relativistic limit is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, the sinc term goes to zero, because the momentum part of
this term is antisymmetric in @xmath , @xmath and the sinc function goes
to @xmath , which has support (as a distribution) on @xmath . We point
out that the sinc contribution to this amplitude is negligible because
of the particular setup chosen. In other experiment configurations the
amplitude in Eq. ( 2.19 ) associated to the spin states of Eqs. ( 2.37 )
and ( 2.38 ) would have appreciable sinc term and thus increasing
momenta entanglement with time. On the other hand, in this case the
contribution from @xmath in Eq. ( 2.1 ) and @xmath is even smaller than
the sinc term, and converges weakly to zero.

We plot in Fig. 2.7 the real and imaginary parts of the term associated
to @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 2.23 ), which we denote by @xmath , for
spin states of Eqs. ( 2.37 ) and ( 2.38 ) as a function of time @xmath
and having @xmath , @xmath . We want to show with it the strong
oscillatory character of the amplitude with time, and how all the
contributions interfere destructively with each other giving a zero
final value. This is similar to the stationary phase procedure, in which
only the contributions in proximity to the stationary value of the phase
do interfere constructively and are appreciable. What we display here is
the weak convergence to zero for the functions @xmath and @xmath .

In this section, we investigated the generation of entanglement in
momenta between two identical spin- @xmath particles which interact via
QED. We showed how the correlations grow as the energy conservation is
increasingly fulfilled with time. The previous calculation had, however,
the approximation of considering a projectile particle with perfectly
well defined momentum, something not achievable in practice. This is a
first step towards a real experiment, where both fermions will have a
dispersion in momenta and thus infinite entanglement will never be
reached, due to the additional integrals of the Dirac delta @xmath over
the momentum spread. We believe these results have much interest both
from the fundamental point of view but also from the experimental one,
for example in fermion gases [ SALW04 ] .

#### 2.3 Entanglement transfer between momentum and spin

##### 2.3.1 Dynamical transfer and distillation

In the previous section we computed the entanglement in momenta for a
pair of electrons which interact through exchange of a virtual photon.
The results could be summarized by: the more collimated in momentum is
the incident electron, and the more time is elapsed, the larger the
entanglement in momenta obtained. Heisenberg’s principle, on the other
hand, establishes a limit to the precision with which the momentum may
be collimated and hence to the achievable degree of entanglement.

It is possible in principle to transform the entanglement in momenta
into entanglement in spins. This is easily seen in terms of the
majorization criterion [ Nie99 , NC00 ] . This is of practical interest
because the experimenter usually manipulates spins, thus spin
entanglement seems to be more useful. Here we analyze this entanglement
transfer.

Majorization is an area of mathematics which predates quantum mechanics.
Quoting Nielsen and Chuang, ‘‘Majorization is an ordering on
d-dimensional real vectors intended to capture the notion that one
vector is more or less disordered than another”. We consider a pair of
@xmath -dimensional vectors, @xmath and @xmath . We say @xmath is
majorized by @xmath , written @xmath , if @xmath for @xmath , with
equality instead of inequality for @xmath . We denote by @xmath the
components of @xmath in decreasing order @xmath . The interest of this
work in the majorization concept comes from a theorem which states that
a bipartite pure state @xmath may be transformed to another pure state
@xmath by Local Operations and Classical Communication (LOCC) if and
only if @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath are the vectors of (square)
coefficients of the Schmidt decomposition ( A.11 ) (finite dimension
case) or ( A.14 ) (continuous case) of the states @xmath , @xmath ,
respectively. LOCC adds to those quantum operations effected only
locally the possibility of classical communication between spatially
separated parts of the system. According to this criterion, it would be
possible in principle to obtain a singlet spin state @xmath beginning
with a momentum entangled state @xmath whenever @xmath .

The possibility of obtaining a singlet spin state from a
momentum-entangled state can be extended to a more efficient situation:
the possibility of distillation of entanglement. This idea consists on
obtaining multiple singlet states beginning with several copies of a
given pure state @xmath . The distillable entanglement of @xmath
consists in the ratio @xmath , where @xmath is the number of copies of
@xmath we have initially, and @xmath the number of singlet states we are
able to obtain via LOCC acting on these copies. It can be shown [ NC00 ]
that for pure states the distillable entanglement equals the entropy of
entanglement, S ( 11.2 ). Thus, in the continuous case
(infinite-dimensional Hilbert space), the distillable entanglement is
not bounded from above, because neither is S. According to this, the
larger the entanglement in momenta the more singlet states could be
obtained with LOCC.

To illustrate the possibility of entanglement transfer with a specific
example, we consider a momentum-entangled state for two distinguishable
fermions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

This state has associated a vector @xmath . On the other hand, the
singlet state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

has associated a vector @xmath .

These vectors obey @xmath , and thus the state entangled in momenta may
be transformed into the state entangled in spins via LOCC. The
operations needed to achieve this are in general unitary operations
acting on the degrees of freedom of momentum and spin of each individual
electron, local projective measurements, and classical communication
between the separated parts of the system (the experimental setups
located where the electrons reach). The unitary local operations may be
implemented by, for example (in the non-relativistic case), electric
fields (which modify the momentum) and magnetic fields (which modify the
spin and the direction of the momentum) combined to give the desired
effect. The specific setup needed to do this might be rather
complicated. In addition, decoherence effects should be avoided. What we
point out is that majorization states this transformation would be
possible in principle.

##### 2.3.2 Kinematical transfer and Lorentz boosts

Another approach to the study of entanglement transfer between momentum
and spin degrees of freedom is the kinematical one. In fact, the Lorentz
transformations may entangle the spin and momentum degrees of freedom.
To be more explicit, and following the notation of Ref. [ GA02 ] , we
consider a certain bipartite pure wave function @xmath for two spin-
@xmath fermions, where @xmath and @xmath denote respectively the spin
degrees of freedom of each of the two fermions, and @xmath and @xmath
the corresponding momenta. This would appear to an observer in a Lorentz
transformed frame as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the spin @xmath representation of the Wigner rotation @xmath . The
Wigner rotations of Eq. ( 2.42 ) can be seen as conditional logical
operators, which rotate the spin a certain angle depending on the value
of the momentum. Thus, a Lorentz transformation will modify in general
the entanglement between momentum and spin of each individual electron.
We distinguish the following particular cases.

Product state in all variables. In this case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the entanglement at the rest reference frame is zero. Under a boost,
the Wigner rotations of Eq. ( 2.42 ) entangle the momentum of each
fermion with its spin, and thus the entanglement momentum-spin grows [
PST02 ] .

Entangled state spin-spin and/or momentum-momentum. We consider now a
state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath an arbitrary state of the spins, and @xmath an arbitrary
state of the momenta. In this case, a Lorentz boost will entangle in
general each spin with its corresponding momentum, and a careful
analysis shows that the spin-spin entanglement never grows [ GA02 ] . Of
course, by applying the reversed boost the entanglement momentum-spin
would be transferred back to the spin-spin one, and thus the latter
would grow. This particular case shows that, for the state we considered
in Sec. 2.2 , given by Eqs. ( 2.24 ), ( 2.25 ) and ( 2.2 ), the
entanglement could not be transferred from momenta into spins via
Lorentz transformations. Thus, the dynamical approach would be here more
suitable.

Entangled state momentum-spin. According to the previous theorem, the
momentum-spin entanglement may be lowered, transferring part of the
correlations to the spins, or increased, taking some part of the
correlations from them. To my knowledge, there is not a similar result
for the momentum, that is, whether the momentum entanglement can be
preserved under boosts, or it suffers decoherence similarly to the
spins, and part of it is transferred to the momentum-spin part.

### Chapter 3 Generation of spin entanglement via spin-independent
scattering

#### 3.1 Spin-spin entanglement via spin-independent scattering

A compound system is entangled when it is impossible to attribute a
complete set of properties to any of its parts. In this case, and for
pure states, it is impossible to factor the state in a product of
independent factors belonging to its parts. In this chapter we will
consider bipartite systems composed of two @xmath fermions. Our aim is
to uncover [ LL06 ] some specific features that apply when both
particles are identical. They appear itemized three pages below.

States of two identical fermions have to obey the symmetrization
postulate. This implies that they decompose into linear combinations of
Slater determinants (SLs) of individual states. Naively, as these SLs
cannot be factorized further, indistinguishability seems to imply
entanglement. This is reinforced by the observation that the entropy of
entanglement (EoE) is bounded from below by @xmath , well above the
lower limit @xmath for a pair of non-entangled distinguishable
particles. So, it looks like there is an inescapable amount of
uncertainty, and hence of entanglement, in any state of two identical
fermions.

The above issue has been extensively examined in the literature [ SCK
@xmath 01 , ESBL02 , GM04 ] with the following result: Part of the
uncertainty (giving @xmath ) corresponds to the impossibility to
individuate which one is the first or the second particle of the system.
This explains why the lower limit for the EoE is 1. Consider for
instance two identical @xmath fermions in a singlet state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The antisymmetrization does not preclude the assignment of properties to
the particles, but only assigning them precisely to particle 1 or
particle 2. The reduced density matrix of any of the particles is @xmath
with an EoE @xmath .

The portion of @xmath above 1 (if any) is genuine entanglement as it
corresponds to the impossibility of attributing precise properties to
the particles of the system [ GM04 ] . Assume for instance that we endow
the previous fermions with the capability of being outside ( @xmath ) or
inside ( @xmath ) the laboratory ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ).
We now have two different possibilities: either the fermion outside has
spin up ( @xmath ) or spin down ( @xmath ). Hence, there are two
different SLs for a system built by a pair of particles with opposite
spins, one outside, the other inside the laboratory

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

They form two different biorthogonal states, the combination @xmath
corresponding to the singlet and @xmath to the triplet state (with
respect to the total spin @xmath ). An arbitrary state @xmath would then
be a linear combination of these two SLs:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

giving an EoE

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Clearly, when @xmath or @xmath vanish, we come back to @xmath , as the
only uncertainty left is the very identity of the particles.
Summarizing, while indistinguishability is an issue to be solved by
antisymmetrization within each SL, entanglement is an issue pertaining
to the superposition of different SLs [ SCK @xmath 01 , ESBL02 , GM04 ]
. At the end, we could even decide to call 1 to the variables of the
outside particle, and forget about symmetrization

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

as both particles are far away from each other. In this case, the EoE,
equal to @xmath is lesser than the one corresponding to antisymmetrized
states by a quantity of 1, which is just the uncertainty associated to
antisymmetrization. From now on we will consider the latter definition
of @xmath , which gives the genuine amount of entanglement between the
two particles. Notice that for half-odd @xmath , the number @xmath of
Slater determinants is bounded by @xmath , where @xmath is the dimension
of each Hilbert space of the configuration or momentum degrees of
freedom for each of the two fermions.

Much in the same way as above, we could consider one of the particles as
right moving ( @xmath ) the other as left moving ( @xmath ), giving rise
to two SLs in parallel with the above discussion. This is the first step
towards the inclusion of the full set of commuting operators for the
system. In addition to the spin components ( @xmath ) or helicities,
there are the total @xmath and relative @xmath momenta. In the center of
mass (CoM) frame we could consider the system described by the continuum
of SLs

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . The labels 0 and @xmath are the azimuthal
angles when we laid the axes along @xmath . Finally, there is a pair of
SLs for each @xmath , so that a general state made with two opposite
spin particles with relative momentum @xmath could be written in the
form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Again, we run into the impossibility to tell which is 1
and which is 2. In addition there may be some uncertainty about the
total spin state, whether a singlet or a triplet, or conversely, about
the spin component of any of the particles, @xmath or @xmath .

After this discussion it should be clear to what extent entanglement and
distinguishability belong to different realms [ SCK @xmath 01 , ESBL02 ,
GM04 ] . A requirement to include identical particles is to symmetrize
the expressions used for unlike particles. Until now, we have only
considered the free case. We have to examine the case of two interacting
particles, as interaction is expected to be the source of subsequent
entanglement [ LRM76 , Tör85 , ALP01 , PS03 , MY04 , AAMS04 , SALW04 ,
Har05 , TK05 , LLS06b , Wan05 , Har06b , Har06a , HW06 ] . Obviously,
the answer may depend on a tricky way on the detailed form of the
interaction, of its spin dependence in particular . It also seems that
the role of particles identity, if any, will be played through
symmetrization.

In the following we will show that spin entanglement is generated for
the case of two interacting spin- @xmath identical particles, with the
following features:

-   Spin-spin entanglement is generated even by spin independent
    interactions.

-   In this case, it is independent of any symmetrization procedure.

-   This phenomenon does not appear for unlike particles.

We first tackle the scattering of two unequal @xmath particles @xmath
and @xmath which run into each other with relative CoM momentum @xmath .
We set the frame axes by the initial momentum @xmath of particle @xmath
, and let the spin components be @xmath and @xmath along an arbitrary
but fixed axis. We will consider a spin independent Hamiltonian @xmath ,
so the evolution conserves @xmath and @xmath . We denote by @xmath
@xmath the state of particle @xmath ( @xmath ) that propagates along
direction @xmath with spin @xmath . In these conditions the scattering
proceeds as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scattering angle and @xmath the scattering
amplitude. We will consider @xmath different from 0 or @xmath to avoid
forward and backward directions. While the increase of uncertainty due
to the interaction is clear, because a continuous manifold of final
directions with probabilities @xmath opened up from just one initial
direction, spin remains untouched. The information about @xmath is the
same before and after the scattering; as much as we knew the initial
spin of @xmath , we know its final spin whatever the final direction is.
In other words, spin was not entangled by the interaction. We will now
translate these well known facts to the case of identical particles,
where they do not hold true.

Let particle @xmath be identical to @xmath . Consider the same initial
state as before: A particle @xmath with momentum @xmath and spin @xmath
runs into another @xmath with momentum @xmath and spin @xmath . Notice
there is maximal information on the state. We could write @xmath , and
eventually symmetrize. We now focus on the final state. It is no longer
true that particle @xmath will come out with momentum @xmath and spin
@xmath with amplitude @xmath while the amplitude for coming out with
momentum @xmath and spin @xmath vanishes. Recalling that @xmath above
did become @xmath , the two cases @xmath and @xmath fuse into a unique
state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

as shown in Figure 3.1 .

Notice the uncertainty acquired by the spin: Now particle @xmath comes
out from the interaction along @xmath either with spin @xmath or with
spin @xmath , with relative amplitudes @xmath and @xmath respectively.
In other words, spin was entangled during the spin independent
evolution. Here, it is not the spin dependence of the interaction, but
the existence of additional degrees of freedom which generate spin-spin
entanglement. These, act as ancillas creating an effective spin-spin
interaction that entangles the two fermions. The ancilla and the degree
of entanglement depend on the scattering angle @xmath . Notice that for
@xmath both amplitudes @xmath and @xmath become equal, so that the
degree of generated entanglement is maximal, 1 ebit. On the other hand,
for @xmath , it generally holds @xmath , so that in the forward and
backward scattering almost no entanglement would be generated. However,
this depends on the specific interaction. In Section 3.2 we will clarify
this point with Coulomb interaction.

Symmetrization does not change this, it only expresses that we can not
tell which one is 1 and which one is 2. The properly symmetrized initial
state is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The scattering process could be written in terms of SLs as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the final momentum and the Slater determinants are given
in ( 3.5 ). Both, this expression and Eq.( 3.8 ), describe the same
physical situation and lead to the same entanglement generation.

The bosonic case may be analyzed in an analogous way. The modification
for two-dimensional spin Hilbert spaces (i.e. photons) would be a sign
change in Eqs. ( 3.5 ), ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.10 ), as bosonic statistics has
associated symmetric states. The equivalent of Eq. ( 3.10 ) for bosons
is a genuine entangled state for @xmath , much as in the fermionic case.

#### 3.2 A specific example: Coulomb interaction at lowest order

We now consider Coulomb interaction at lowest order to illustrate the
reasonings presented above. In this case

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a numerical factor depending on the charge @xmath .
@xmath and @xmath are two of the Mandelstam variables, associated to
@xmath and @xmath channels respectively, and depending on the scattering
angle @xmath . for initial @xmath and final @xmath relative 4-momenta of
the scattering fermions, they are given by @xmath , @xmath . In the CoM
frame,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass of each fermion and @xmath is the available
energy.

According to this, the spin part of the state ( 3.8 ) for this case,
properly normalized, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

being

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two amplitudes @xmath and @xmath vary monotonously as @xmath grows,
becoming equal for @xmath . The physical meaning for this is that for
@xmath , the knowledge about the system is maximal and the entanglement
minimal (zero), and for increasing @xmath the knowledge of the system
decreases continuously until reaching its minimum value at @xmath .
Accordingly, the entanglement grows with @xmath until reaching its
maximum value for @xmath .

We plot in Figure 3.2 the EoE [ TK05 ] @xmath of state ( 3.13 ) as a
function of @xmath , for @xmath . The entanglement grows monotonically
until @xmath , where it becomes maximal (1 ebit).

#### 3.3 Violation of Bell’s inequality as a function of the scattering
angle @xmath

In order to analyze the role the @xmath scattering angle plays in the
generation of these genuine quantum correlations, we consider now the
degree of violation of Bell’s inequality as a function of @xmath . To
this purpose, we define [ Bel64 , CS78 ] the observable

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the (normalized) state ( 3.8 ) and @xmath , @xmath are
arbitrary unit vectors. In Eq. ( 3.3 ) we consider the amplitudes @xmath
and @xmath normalized for each @xmath , in the form @xmath . We consider
three coplanar unit vectors, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Bell’s inequality, given by [ Bel64 , CS78 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

will then be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the particular case of Coulomb interaction at lowest order here
considered, @xmath and thus the critical angle for which the inequality
becomes violated is @xmath for @xmath . For @xmath the Bell’s inequality
does not hold. We show in Figure 3.3 the @xmath dependence of @xmath
together with the classical-quantum border, @xmath , at @xmath . Thus,
for experiments with @xmath one could be able in principle to
discriminate between local realism and quantum mechanics.

This is in contrast with recent analysis of Bell’s inequality violation
in elementary particle systems [ Go04 , BEG05 , Tör86 ] , where the
emphasis was placed on flavor entanglement, @xmath , @xmath , and the
like. These analysis presented [ BBGH04 ] two kinds of drawbacks coming
from the lack of experimenter’s free will and from the unitary evolution
with decaying states. These issues reduce the significance of the
experiments up to the point of preventing their use as tests of quantum
mechanics versus local realistic theories. The spin-spin entanglement
analyzed in this chapter does not have this kind of problems and could
be used in principle for that purpose.

#### 3.4 The tripartite case

Our protocol can be straightforwardly generalized to more complicated
settings. To show this, we consider now three identical, massive, @xmath
particles which interact through some kind of two- and three-body
interaction, which for our practical purposes is completely general, but
spin independent. We suppose the particles evolve in a plane, and the
prolongations of the directions of propagation intersect at one point,
having relative angles of @xmath degrees among each two neighbor
directions, see Figure 3.4 . We will label these in-directions with
angles 0, @xmath and @xmath , which will also be the final angles for
illustrative purposes. Our initial state is now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes, like previously, the state of particle of type
@xmath with propagation direction @xmath and spin @xmath . Our final
state will now be a superposition of all the possible final states
associated to the different channels. There are as much as permutations
of the three states @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which can evolve each
through directions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

For example, in case there is no interaction, the three states will
evolve according to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We will give a weight
@xmath to this channel, where the 0 labels mean the in- and out-angle
for each particle remains the same.

In the case where there is a two-body interaction among the particles,
the possible channels are those which permutate two of the final legs of
the Feynman diagram. There are three channels associated to two-body
scattering: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . One example would be the
following evolution, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . As in previous
sections, the spins remain unchanged. We will give a weight @xmath to
the channels associated to two-body interactions, which means that two
of the particles experience a trajectory change of @xmath .

Finally, in case there is a three-body interaction among the three
particles, the final channels will be those that permutate the three
legs of the Feynman diagram. The two available channels for three-body
interactions are @xmath and @xmath . One example would be the evolution
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We will give a weight @xmath to the
channels associated to three-body scattering, which means that the three
particles change their propagation direction by @xmath . Of course,
three-body interactions are unusual, so typically we will have @xmath .
Accordingly, the final state obtained this way will be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.20)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We plot in Figure 3.4 the six different diagrams associated to the six
channels of the spin-independent scattering of three identical @xmath
particles.

In the asymptotic limit, once the particles are far apart, their wave
packets will not overlap anymore and we may consider the particles as
distinguishable. We will denote by @xmath the spin state of the three
particles, where @xmath is associated to the particle that propagates at
the end along @xmath , @xmath to the one that propagates along @xmath
and @xmath to the one that moves along @xmath . The asymptotic spin
state associated to Eq. ( 3.20 ) will be, in this notation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Notice that in case we considered only two spins, @xmath and @xmath
(either three spin- @xmath particles or three spin-1 particles with just
two spin states of the 3-dimensional @xmath Hilbert space), the part
associated to two-body interaction would be a @xmath state, a state with
genuine tripartite entanglement. Thus, in this way it could be possible
to generate genuine multipartite entanglement via spin-independent
scattering. A generalization to the @xmath -partite case of our
procedure is straightforward from the tripartite and bipartite cases and
we will omit it here.

In summary, we analyzed the relation between entanglement and
antisymmetrization for identical particles, in the context of
spin-independent particle scattering. We showed that, in order to create
genuine spin-spin quantum correlations between two @xmath fermions,
spin-dependent interactions are not compulsory. The identity of the
particles along with an interaction between degrees of freedom different
from the spin, suffice for this purpose. The entanglement generated this
way is not a fictitious one due to antisymmetrization, but a real one,
and violates a certain Bell’s inequality for @xmath .

### Chapter 4 Relativity of distillability

#### 4.1 Lorentz transformed spin density matrix

As we have pointed out along this Thesis, nowadays entanglement is
considered a basic resource in present and future applications of
quantum information, communication, and technology [ NC00 , GMD02 ] .
However, entangled states are fragile, and interactions with the
environment destroy their coherence, thus degrading this precious
resource. Fortunately, entanglement can still be recovered from a
certain class of states which share the property of being distillable.
This means that even in a decoherence scenario, entanglement can be
extracted through purification processes that restore their quantum
correlations [ BBP @xmath 96 , BMD05 ] . An entangled state can be
defined as a quantum state that is not separable, and a separable state
can always be expressed as a convex sum of product density operators [
Wer89 ] . In particular, a bipartite separable state can be written as
@xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are density
operators associated to subsystems A and B.

In the context of quantum field theory, special relativity (SR) [ Rin01
] and quantum mechanics are described in a unified manner. From a
fundamental point of view, in addition, it is relevant to study the
implications of SR on the modern quantum information theory (QIT) [ PT04
] . Recently, Peres et al. [ PST02 ] have observed that the entropy of
entanglement of a single spin- @xmath density matrix is not a
relativistic invariant, given that Wigner rotations [ Wig39 ] entangle
the spin with its momentum distribution when observed in a moving
referential. This astonishing result, intrinsic and unavoidable, shows
that entanglement theory must be reconsidered from a relativistic point
of view. On the other hand, the fundamental implications of relativity
on quantum mechanics could be stronger than what is commonly believed.
For example, Wigner rotations induce also decoherence on two entangled
spins [ AM02 , PS03 , GA02 , GBA03 ] . However, they have not been
studied yet in the context of mixed states and distillable entanglement
[ Per96 , HHH98 ] .

A typical situation in SR pertains to a couple of observers: one is
stationary in an inertial frame @xmath and the other is also stationary
in an inertial frame @xmath that moves with velocity @xmath with respect
to @xmath . The problems addressed in SR consider the relation between
different measurements of physical properties, like velocities, time
intervals, and space intervals, of objects as seen by observers in
@xmath and @xmath . However, in QIT, it is assumed that the measurements
always take place in a proper reference frame, either @xmath or @xmath .
To see the effects that SR can bring about in QIT problems [ PT04 ] , we
need to enlarge the typical situations where quantum descriptions and
measurements take place.

In order to analyze the new possibilities that SR offers, we introduce [
LMDS06 ] the following concepts

-    Weak isoentangled state @xmath : A state that is entangled in all
    considered reference frames. This property is independent of the
    chosen entanglement measure @xmath .

-    Strong isoentangled state @xmath : A state that is entangled in all
    considered reference frames, while having a constant value
    associated with a given entanglement measure @xmath . This concept
    depends on the @xmath chosen.

-    Weak isodistillable state @xmath : A state that is distillable in
    all considered reference frames. This implies that the state is
    entangled for these observers.

-    Strong isodistillable state @xmath : A state that is distillable in
    all considered reference frames, while having a constant value
    associated with a given entanglement measure @xmath . This concept
    depends on the @xmath chosen.

In general, the following hierarchy of sets holds (see Fig. 4.1 for a
pictorial representation)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

To illustrate the relative character of distillability, let us consider
[ LMDS06 ] the specific situation in which Alice (A) and Bob (B) share a
bipartite mixed state of Werner type with respect to an inertial frame
@xmath . Moreover, in order to complete the SR+QIT scenario, we also
consider another inertial frame @xmath , where relatives (A’) and (B’)
of Alice (A) and Bob (B) are moving with relative velocity @xmath with
respect to @xmath . Using the picture of Einstein’s trains, we may think
that (A) and (B) are at the platform of the railway station sharing a
set of mixed states, while their relatives (A’) and (B’) are travelling
in a train sharing another couple of entangled particles of the same
characteristics. The mixed state is made up of two particles, say
electrons with mass @xmath , having two types of degrees of freedom:
momentum @xmath and spin @xmath . The former is a continuous variable
while the latter is a discrete one. By definition , we consider our
logical or computational qubit to be the spin degree of freedom. Each
particle is assumed to be localized, like in a box, and its momentum
@xmath will be described by the same Gaussian distribution. We assume
that the spin degrees of freedom of particles @xmath and @xmath are
decoupled from their respective momentum distributions and form the
state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is a parameter such that @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding momentum vectors of
particles @xmath and @xmath , as seen in @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with Gaussian momentum distribution @xmath , being @xmath . @xmath and
@xmath represent spin vectors pointing up and down along the @xmath
-axis, respectively. If we trace momentum degrees of freedom in Eq. (
4.3 ), we obtain the usual spin Bell states, @xmath . If we do the same
in Eq. ( 4.2 ), we remain with the usual spin Werner state [ Wer89 ]
that can be written in its matrix form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is known that Bell state @xmath is distillable out of Eq. ( 4.5 ) if,
and only if, @xmath .

We consider also another pair of similar particles, @xmath and @xmath ,
with the same state as @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , but seen in another
reference frame @xmath . The frame @xmath moves with velocity @xmath
along the @xmath -axis with respect to the frame @xmath .

When we want to describe the state of @xmath and @xmath as observed from
frame @xmath , rotations on the spin variables, conditioned to the value
of the momentum of each particle, have to be introduced. These
conditional spin rotations, considered first by Wigner [ Wig39 ] , are a
natural consequence of Lorentz transformations. In general, Wigner
rotations entangle spin and momentum degrees of freedom for each
particle. We want to encode quantum information in the two qubits
determined by the spin degrees of freedom of our two spin- @xmath
particles. As a consequence, the reduced spin system, after a Lorentz
transformation, increases its entropy and reduces its initial degree of
entanglement. If we consider the velocities of the particles as having
only non-zero components in the @xmath -axis, each state vector of
@xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 4.4 ) transforms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath express Wigner rotations conditioned to the
value of the momentum vector.

The most general bipartite density matrix in the rest frame for
arbitrary spin- @xmath states and Gaussian product states in momentum,
is spanned by the tensor products of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , and can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under a boost, Eq. ( 4.7 ) will transform into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Tracing out the momentum degrees of freedom, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.9)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Following Peres et al. [ PST02 ] , we compute first the Lorentz
transformed density matrix of state @xmath , after tracing out the
momentum. The expression is given, to leading order of @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . Demanding @xmath to be small does not restrict the
generality of our results, on the contrary, it is a requirement of
physical consistency in our model. First, the Newton-Wigner localization
problem prevents us from considering momentum distributions with @xmath
. In that case, particle creation would manifest and our model, relying
on a bipartite state of the Fock space, would break down. Second, @xmath
would produce a very fast wave-packet spreading, having as a consequence
an undesired particle delocalization. Finally, thinner packets favor the
possibility of finding isoentangled and isodistillable states.

This can be straightforwardly generalized to the other three tensor
products involving @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With the help of Eqs. ( 4.9 - 4.14 ), it is possible to compute the
effects of the Lorentz transformation on any density matrix of two spin-
@xmath particles, after tracing out the momentum, for a boost in the
@xmath -direction.

#### 4.2 Application to Werner states

With these tools, we compute now the Lorentz transformation, under a
boost, of the state in Eq. ( 4.2 ) and obtain the reduced spin state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We can apply now the positive partial transpose (PPT)
criterion [ Per96 , HHH96 ] to know whether this state is entangled. Due
to the box-inside-box structure of Eq. ( 4.15 ), it is possible to
diagonalize its partial transpose in a simple manner, finding the
following eigenvalues

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are always positive, and @xmath
can be shown to be positive for @xmath . The eigenvalue @xmath is
negative if, and only if, @xmath , where @xmath . The latter implies
that in the interval

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

distillability of state @xmath is possible for the spin state in A and
B, but impossible for the spin state in A’ and B’, both described in
frame @xmath . We plot in Fig. 4.2 the behavior of @xmath as a function
of the rapidity @xmath . The region below the curve (ND) corresponds to
the @xmath values for which distillation is not possible in the Lorentz
transformed frame. On the other hand, the region above the curve (D),
corresponds to states which are distillable for the corresponding values
of @xmath . Notice that there are values of @xmath for which the Werner
states are weak isodistillable and weak isoentangled, corresponding to
the states in the region D above the curve for the considered range of
@xmath . On the other hand, there are states that will change from
distillable (entangled) into separable for a certain value of @xmath ,
showing the relativity of distillability and separability.

#### 4.3 Analysis of existence of Sie and Sid states

The study of strongly isoentangled and strongly isodistillable two-spin
states is a much harder task that will depend on the entanglement
measure we choose. We believe that these cases impose demanding
conditions and, probably, this kind of states does not exist. However we
would like to give a plausibility argument to justify this conjecture.
Our argument is based on two mathematical points: (i) analytic
continuation is a mathematical tool that allows to extend the analytic
behavior of a function to a region where it was not initially defined,
and (ii) an analytic function is either constant or it changes along all
its interval of definition. Point (i) will allow us to extend
analytically our calculation to @xmath , an unphysical but
mathematically convenient limit. Point (ii) will be applied to any
well-behaved entanglement measure. We consider then a general spin
density matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are real, and @xmath . The
analytic continuation of the Lorentz transformed state, according to our
procedure in Eqs. ( 4.9 - 4.14 ), in the limit @xmath , is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath denote the real and imaginary parts. This state
is separable because its eigenvalues, given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

coincide with the corresponding ones for the partial transpose matrix.
In this case, @xmath , and @xmath . So, according to the PPT criterion,
the analytic continuation of the Lorentz transformed density matrix of
all the two spin- @xmath particle states with Gaussian momentum part
factorizable considered here, converges to a separable state in the
limit of @xmath . Our analytic calculation holds for @xmath , leaving
out of reach the case @xmath . However, any analytic measure of
entanglement, due to this behavior of the analytic continuation at
@xmath , is forced to change with @xmath for @xmath , except for states
separable in all frames. In this way, our approximation techniques give
evidence of the non-existence of strong isoentangled and strong
isodistillable states, for variations of the parameter @xmath .

From a broader perspective, our analysis corresponds to the invariance
of entanglement and distillability of a two spin- @xmath system under
Lorentz-Wigner completely positive (CP) maps [ HHH96 ] . This is an
important problem that, to our knowledge, has not received much
attention in quantum information theory, and that will require a
separate and more abstract analysis. Moreover, for higher dimensional
spaces, like a two spin- @xmath system (qutrits), the notion of
relativity of bound entanglement will also arise [ HHH98 ] .

In summary, the concepts of weak and strong isoentantangled and
isodistillable states were introduced, which should help to understand
the relationship between special relativity and quantum information
theory. The study of Werner states allowed us to show that
distillability is a relative concept depending on the frame in which it
is considered. We have proven the existence of weak isoentangled and
weak isodistillable states in our range of validity of the parameter
@xmath . We also conjectured the non-existence of strong isoentangled
and strong isodistillable states in special relativity. We give evidence
for this surprising result relying on the analytic continuation of the
Lorentz transformed spin density matrix for a general two spin- @xmath
particle state. This analytic continuation converges to a separable
state in the limit @xmath . Thus, any entanglement measure analytic in
the parameter @xmath is forced to change with @xmath in every interval,
unless the state is separable in every frame.

### Chapter 5 Dirac equation and relativistic effects in a single
trapped ion

#### 5.1 Dirac equation simulation in a trapped ion

The search for a fully relativistic Schrödinger equation gave rise to
the Klein-Gordon and Dirac equations [ Sak67 ] . P. A. M. Dirac looked
for a Lorentz-covariant wave equation that is linear in spatial and time
derivatives, expecting that the interpretation of the square wave
function as a probability density holds. As a result, he obtained a
fully covariant wave equation for a spin- @xmath massive particle
(fermion), which incorporated ab initio the spin degree of freedom. It
is known that the Dirac formalism plays a central role in the context of
quantum field theory, where creation and annihilation of particles are
allowed. However, the one-particle solutions of the Dirac equation in
relativistic quantum mechanics predict some astonishing effects, like
Zitterbewegung , Klein’s paradox, Wigner rotations, and mass acquisition
through spontaneous symmetry breaking produced by a Higgs boson.

In recent years, a growing interest has appeared regarding simulations
of relativistic effects in controllable physical systems. Some examples
are the simulation of Unruh effect in trapped ions [ ADM05 ] ,
Zitterbewegung for massless fermions in solid state physics [ SLW05 ] ,
and the simulation of black-hole properties in the realm of
Bose-Einstein condensates [ GACZ00 ] . In this respect, simulation of
the paradigmatic Dirac equation in a completely flexible and
controllable physical system would be desirable, given its many
counterintuitive and unverified predictions. This problem arises mainly
due to the fact that the required range of energies (or frequencies) is
of the order of the fermion mass @xmath , unaccessible to present
experiments.

On the other hand, the fresh dialog between quantum information and
special relativity [ PST02 , AM02 , PS03 , PT04 ] has raised important
issues concerning the content and transfer of quantum information under
Lorentz transformations. In this sense, the so-called Wigner rotations
entangle the spin with the momentum degrees of freedom, yielding a
non-covariant spin entropy for a single particle and reducing the degree
of entanglement in multiparticle systems [ LMDS06 ] .

In this chapter, I study the simulation of the Dirac equation in a
single trapped ion. We show [ LLSS07b ] that it is possible to implement
realistic interactions on four metastable ionic internal levels, coupled
to the motional degrees of freedom, so as to reproduce such a
fundamental quantum relativistic wave equation. In this manner, the
Dirac dynamics could be fully simulated and many relevant quantum
relativistic effects reproduced and measured.

We consider a single ion inside a Paul trap, where four metastable ionic
internal states, @xmath , and @xmath , may be coupled pairwise to the
center-of-mass (CM) motional degrees of freedom in directions @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . We will make use of three standard interactions in
trapped ion technology, allowing for the coherent control of the
vibronic dynamics [ LBMW03 ] . First, a carrier interaction consisting
of a coherent driving acting on any pair of internal levels, while
leaving untouched the motional degrees of freedom. It can be described
by the Hamiltonian @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the raising and
lowering spin- @xmath operators, respectively, and @xmath is the
coupling strength. The driving phases and frequencies could be adjusted
so as to produce, alternatively, the Hamiltonians @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , are Pauli operators in the
conventional directions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Second, a
Jaynes-Cummings (JC) interaction, usually called red-sideband
excitation, consisting of a coherent driving acting on two internal
levels and one of the CM modes. Typically, a resonant JC coupling
induces an excitation in the internal levels while producing a
deexcitation of the motional harmonic oscillator, and viceversa. The JC
Hamiltonian reads @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the annihilation
and creation operators associated with a harmonic oscillator, and @xmath
is the effective coupling strength. Third, an anti-JC (AJC) interaction,
consisting of a JC-like coupling tuned to the blue motional sideband
with Hamiltonian @xmath . Here, an internal level excitation accompanies
an excitation in the considered motional degree of freedom, and
viceversa.

Later, we will give details on the experimental aspects of our proposal.
For the moment, we want to stress that all these interactions could be
applied simultaneously and addressed to different pairs of internal
levels coupled to different CM modes. For example, it is possible to
combine a JC and an anti-JC dynamics to form the Hamiltonian @xmath ,
whose physics is far from being described in terms of Rabi oscillations
associated with independent JC or anti-JC interactions [ Zhe98 , SdMFZ01
, SAW03 ] . In turn, it yields a conditional displacement in the
motional degrees of freedom depending on the internal state, producing
the so-called Schrödinger cat states. By manipulating directions and
phases, we could also produce @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , as shown in an impressive recent experiment [ HBD @xmath 05 ] .
Although conventional, the directions of the Pauli matrices could be
combined so as to produce, for instance, simultaneously or
independently, @xmath and @xmath .

We define the wave vector associated with the four ionic internal levels
as @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We build now the following Hamiltonian acting on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath      @xmath            (5.2)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------

that can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have assumed that @xmath and @xmath , and we have used the
relationship

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We may rewrite Eq. ( 5.2 ) in a more compact manner,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where each entry represents a @xmath matrix, @xmath and @xmath are the
simulations of the speed of light and the electron’s rest energy in our
implementation. The Schrödinger equation associated with this evolution,
@xmath , yields the same dynamics as the one-dimensional Dirac equation
for a free spin- @xmath particle, where @xmath represents the
four-component Dirac bispinor. Extensions to the cases of 2D or 3D Dirac
equations are naturally expected. For example, the standard Dirac
equation could be obtained by replacing and implementing @xmath . Given
the flexibility of coherent control in trapped ions, we could consider
the use of different couplings for the terms @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , producing an anisotropic Dirac equation. The properties of
these new families of Dirac equations, not given by nature but
implemented artificially in our proposed scheme, are still to be
studied. At this point, we will turn our attention to describe the
diverse quantum-relativistic effects that could simulated and tested
under the dynamics described above.

We will be hereafter using the 4-spinor notation and we shall work in
the chiral representation, where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In terms of the internal states @xmath , and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the chiral representation @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath ( @xmath )
corresponds to a positive (negative) energy state in the standard
representation.

It is interesting to note that the Dirac equation holds even in two
spatial dimensions. This will be of relevance in our simulations given
that the control in trapped ions is, currently, mainly constrained to
two dimensions ¹ ¹ 1 What we mean with this assertion is that the
interaction term @xmath could not be easily implemented with current
technology, in opposition to the @xmath and @xmath terms. The latter are
just conditional rotations, while the former is a conditional energy
shift which is harder to implement, like with an AC-Stark shift. . In
fact, Eq.( 5.6 ) remains as it is in the @xmath case, but with the index
@xmath running from 1 to 2 only ( @xmath and @xmath components). In 3+1
dimensions the Lorentz group is generated by 3 rotations @xmath and 3
boosts @xmath . The linearly independent combinations @xmath and @xmath
generate two independent @xmath algebras whose eigenvalues @xmath and
@xmath serve to label @xmath the representations of the group. As parity
commutes with @xmath and anticommutes with @xmath , it trades @xmath by
@xmath . Hence, it is necessary to introduce direct sums of
representations @xmath (doubling the number of components) to account
for parity. In particular, Dirac fermions belong to the @xmath
representation of the group. It is straightforward to show that, by
using the Pauli matrices to represent @xmath for @xmath , the group
generators are given by @xmath . Explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath and that from these expressions we get @xmath and
@xmath as given in ( 5.7 ); incidentally, @xmath acts as the parity
operator in this representation.

In 2+1 dimensions there are only two boosts @xmath and @xmath and the
rotation @xmath in the @xmath plane. There is only one @xmath algebra [
Bar47 , BF65 ] generated by the combinations @xmath . By parity @xmath
and @xmath , which is another representation of the same algebra with
the same eigenvalues. Hence, the 2+1 Lorentz group only requires two
component spinors for the fundamental representation. In particular this
means that Dirac fermions will be in a sum of irreducible
representations of this group. It is important to recognize that the
behavior of 2+1 parity will continue to be represented by @xmath and the
boosts by @xmath . From now on we will analyze the 2+1 Dirac equation
physics.

#### 5.2 Relativistic effects to be simulated

##### 5.2.1 Zitterbewegung

The first phenomenon we analyze is the electron’s Zitterbewegung (ZB).
It is the helicoidal motion that arises due to the non-commutativity of
the electron’s velocity operator components, @xmath . Explicitly, the
electron’s position operator, in the Heisenberg picture, evolves with
time as [ Sak67 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we restrict to @xmath as explained above.

The resulting expression consists of an initial position, a motion
proportional to time, and an unexpected oscillation term with an
amplitude equal to the Compton wavelength. That oscillation term is the
ZB.

We consider an initial electron wavepacket having associated positive
and negative energy components [ Sak67 ] ( @xmath ), in the Schrödinger
picture,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the usual fermionic spinors verifying @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . @xmath are the corresponding distributions associated
to positive (+) or negative (-) energy components, which may be
Gaussians, for example. We will take @xmath . The value of the position
operator in the 2-dimensional @xmath plane, averaged with the state (
5.14 ) is, in the limit ² ² 2 We point out that we take this limit in
order to have a fully-analytical, easy-to-compute expression. However,
the ZB oscillation would also take place in other energy regimes @xmath
[ Sak67 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the two-component Pauli spinors associated
to @xmath (+) and @xmath (-). Whenever the matrix element @xmath is
different from zero, which happens for properly chosen initial states (
5.14 ) (for example, when @xmath is an eigenvector of @xmath ), then
@xmath will oscillate harmonically in the @xmath plane. In our ionic
simulation, we have that @xmath will be the average position of the ion,
which will make the ZB oscillation ( 5.15 ) for initial ionic state
given by Eq. ( 5.14 ) and the dynamics of Eq. ( 5.5 ) (in the 2D-case),
with the substitutions @xmath and @xmath .

The only condition for the validity of Eq. ( 5.15 ) is @xmath which
translates, in the ionic case, into @xmath . This can always be attained
by properly tuning the laser intensities @xmath and @xmath . We point
out that the limit @xmath is not necessary in order that the ZB takes
place, and we have only considered it for the ease of the analytical
expression ( 5.15 ).

Notice that, in our proposed simulation, the ZB frequency could be
tunable to feasible experimental requirements, like @xmath MHz. This is
remarkable given that the ZB frequency for the real free electron,
@xmath Hz is far from experimental reach. Additionally, the ZB amplitude
in our implementation could be around @xmath position phonons, clearly
measurable, while the ZB amplitude for the real free electron is around
@xmath Å, totally unattainable.

##### 5.2.2 Klein’s paradox

Our following proposal is to simulate Klein’s paradox. In 1929, Klein
noticed [ Kle29 ] the anomalous behavior of Dirac particles in regions
where a high potential energy @xmath exists ( @xmath ): When @xmath ,
negative energy electrons may swallow @xmath , acquiring positive energy
and behaving as ordinary electrons, while leaving a hole in the Dirac
sea. This stems from the fact that @xmath implies @xmath which is
positive when either both factors on the r.h.s. are positive, or both
are negative. In the first case, @xmath which is the usual condition; in
the second one @xmath , which may be larger than @xmath as noticed by
Klein. In this case an electron - positron pair could be created from
@xmath . Interactions as simple as @xmath can simulate this phenomenon.
Notice that @xmath does not induce any transition by itself. It is the
tuning of @xmath to a value larger than @xmath at @xmath that produces
the effect. This phenomenon could be simulated in our implementation
with a global Stark shift.

##### 5.2.3 Wigner rotations

The next physical phenomenon we consider is the Wigner rotation induced
by Lorentz boosts. We will be using mainly the notation of Ref. [ AM02 ]
. We begin with a particle of @xmath with momentum @xmath and energy
@xmath . We make a Lorentz boost along direction @xmath , with rapidity
@xmath , being @xmath , to analyze the explicit dependence of the Wigner
rotation on the momentum @xmath of the particle and on the boost
velocity @xmath . The Wigner angle @xmath that the spin rotates
conditional to the momentum is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, we have @xmath and @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to this, and considering @xmath , @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This interaction may be simulated with a Hamiltonian of the kind @xmath
as introduced above, where here @xmath , being @xmath the elapsed time.

##### 5.2.4 Spontaneous symmetry breaking induced by a Higgs boson

The last phenomenon we consider is the spontaneous symmetry breaking
(SSB) that gives the electron a finite mass through the acquisition of a
finite vacuum expectation value (v.e.v) of a Higgs field [ PS95 ] . In
this case, the electron’s mass @xmath is given by the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Yukawa coupling and @xmath is the v.e.v. of the Higgs
field. As this v.e.v. grows from a zero value into a finite one, the
electron’s mass becomes nonzero. It is possible with our experimental
proposal to simulate general behaviors of the Higgs field that would
produce many different dynamics of mass acquisition. Given that,
according to Eq. ( 5.5 ), @xmath , and here we have @xmath , the Higgs
dynamics may be simulated by tuning @xmath . An appropriate choice of
@xmath , could simulate the phase transitions that lead to the true
vacuum and massive fermions.

#### 5.3 Experimental procedure

The basic ingredients to implement the proposed experiments are four
independent electronical (internal) states in one ion, harmonically
confined in a rf-Paul trap. We will have to achieve the initialization
of the states and four pairwise and independent couplings, as outlined
in Eq. ( 5.2 ), to be driven simultaneously. Finally, one will have to
read out the result of the calculation by measuring the population of
each electronic state and their distribution over the harmonic
oscillator states of motion individually. For a thorough reference
containing detailed experimental procedures in trapped ions, see [
LBMW03 ] .

The required states could be composed by four ground-state hyperfine
levels of an earth alkaline atomic ion, e.g. of @xmath Mg @xmath by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ³ ³ 3 The nuclear spin of @xmath of
@xmath Mg @xmath would allow for 3 ancilla levels needed for detection
purposes described in the following. ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath respectively), as depicted in Fig. 5.1 . A constant external
magnetic field will define the quantization axis and lift the degeneracy
of the levels. We will exploit the formal equivalence between a
two-level system and a spin-1/2 magnetic moment in a magnetic field for
each individual coupling of two out of the four states. To achieve the
required pairwise and independent couplings, we would suggest two photon
stimulated Raman transitions. Choosing the beam orientation relative to
each other and relative to the quantization axis appropriately will
allow to provide beams of the required polarization to drive all
necessary transitions and to avoid disturbing AC-Stark-shifts.

At the start of each experiment, the ions will be laser cooled close to
the motional ground state and optically pumped into state @xmath . Two
carrier transitions and two red/blue side band transitions will be
driven simultaneously to realize the calculation, one of each type
depicted in Fig. 5.1 . The coupling of states @xmath would be equivalent
to that of the not shown @xmath via an additional carrier. The red/blue
sideband transitions between @xmath would be driven by an additional
pair of beams comparable but at slightly different frequencies or
detunings to those shown driving @xmath .

At the end of the calculation, state sensitive detection is to be
realized by an additional laser beam, tuned to a cycling transition [
LBMW03 ] , coupling state @xmath resonantly to the @xmath level. Since
the Zeeman shift (1-10MHz) will not be sufficient in comparison to the
line width of the resonant transition ( @xmath 43 MHz) to protect the
population in state @xmath against this interfering excitation, we will
have to hide it in one of the @xmath ground state levels prior to
detection. Thus, the population of state @xmath would be transferred to
state @xmath to make room for the population of state @xmath being
transferred subsequently. To measure the population of any of the other
three states we propose to use the carrier transition between states
@xmath or @xmath instead of the side bands (and an additional carrier to
drive @xmath ) to allow for the transfer into state @xmath . Since these
carrier transitions do not affect the motional state populations, hiding
the population of state @xmath and driving a blue-sideband transition
between the population transferred into state @xmath and the cleared
state @xmath would allow for deriving the motional state population.

Taking into account the available laser intensities, all necessary Raman
beams could be derived out of only one laser source. We would have to
split the original beam and provide the necessary frequency offsets and
switching via multi passing through acousto-optical modulators (AOM).
The amount of necessary laser beams could be further reduced by using
electro-optical modulators to provide red and blue sidebands at the same
time. The additionally appearing carrier would just have to be book
kept. There appear to be no fundamental reasons, why this experiment
could not be realized with state of the art technology and fidelities of
operation at the expense of only a slightly increased effort for the
additionally required beams. We point out that, in order to facilitate
the experiment, one could consider just the Dirac equation in 1+1
dimensions. The Hamiltonian to simulate in that case would have the form
@xmath , that could be easily implemented with one carrier, one blue-
and one red-sideband transitions. We remark that the predictions of
Dirac equation here reviewed, like Zitterbewegung , Klein’s paradox,
Wigner rotations or mass acquisition would already take place at this
level of 1+1 dimensions.

## Part II Entanglement of continuous variables

### Chapter 6 How much entanglement can be generated between two atoms
by detecting photons?

In the world of quantum information processing it is widely accepted
that, while photons are the ideal candidates for transmitting quantum
information, this information is better stored and manipulated using
atomic systems. The reason is that, while photons can be moved through
long distances with little decoherence, atoms can be easily confined and
can preserve quantum information for a long time. Consequently, an ideal
design for a quantum network will conceivably be built upon a number of
atomic or solid state devices which communicate through photonic quantum
channels.

There exist mainly two methods for entangling distant atoms. The first
one is based on emission of photons by the first atom, which afterwards
interact with the second atom generating the entanglement [ CZKM97 ,
vECZ97 , GST @xmath 98 , PK00 , CLE02 , CLE03 ] . On the other hand, the
second method relies on detecting the photons emitted by the two atoms
with the subsequent entanglement generation due to interference in the
measurement process [ CCGFZ99 , BKPV99 ] . Some aspects of these
proposals have been experimentally verified [ JKP01 , KHR02 , MBB @xmath
04 , BMDM04 , VWS @xmath 06 , MCJ @xmath 06 , MMM @xmath 06 , CdF @xmath
05 , DJD @xmath 05 , BJD @xmath 06 ] . Most of the experiments with
isolated atoms and light aim at entangling the internal state of the
atom with the polarization of the photon [ KHR02 , MBB @xmath 04 ,
BMDM04 , VWS @xmath 06 , MCJ @xmath 06 , MMM @xmath 06 ] . It is clear
that due to the size of the Hilbert space, the maximum attainable
entanglement is one ebit.

In this chapter we will deal with the generation of entanglement between
two atoms. We will focus on the second method mentioned above, in which
entanglement is generated by measurements. To avoid the limit of one
ebit, we work with continuous variables and seek entanglement in the
motional state of the atoms. We will answer two fundamental questions:
How much entanglement can be produced between the atoms? How can we
achieve it? The basics of this chapter is contained in Ref. [ LGRC07 ] .

The first result, obtained in Section 6.1 is that by usual means ---two
atoms, one or two emitted photons, linear optics and postselection [
CCGFZ99 , MMM @xmath 06 ] ---, we cannot produce more than 1 ebit of
entanglement between the atoms, even if our Hilbert space is larger. The
second result, exposed in Section 6.2 is that we can achieve an
arbitrary amount of entanglement using at least two emitted photons and
what we call an Entangling Two-Photon Detector (ETPD). The ETPD is a
device which combines both photons in a projective measurement onto a
highly entangled state. Theoretically, an ETPD could be built using a
Kerr medium and postselection, but current nonlinear materials are too
inefficient for such implementation. Inspired by the KLM proposal [
KLM01 ] , we demonstrate an efficient scheme for simulating the ETPD
using ancillary photons. In Section 6.3 we clarify our proposal with a
simple example: three photons and three detectors. Our last result,
presented in Section 6.4 is that introducing @xmath additional photons
in our setup, together with @xmath single-photon detectors,
beam-splitters and an attenuator, we can obtain an amount of
entanglement as high as @xmath ebits. Finally, at the end of the chapter
we discuss the relevance of these results and possible implementations.

#### 6.1 Entanglement based on atoms and photons

As mentioned above, current experiments with isolated atoms and light
aim at entangling the internal state of the atom with the polarization
of the photon [ VWS @xmath 06 ] . It is clear that in both cases, due to
the size of the Hilbert space, the maximum attainable entanglement is
one ebit. We will rather work with continuous variables and seek
entanglement between the motional state of the atom and the photon. We
have in mind the setup in Ref. [ CCGFZ99 ] where two atoms are excited
with a very small probability and we consider the state of the atoms
after spontaneous emission, when both are in the ground state. The state
of the system is given by the wave function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath denote the momenta of the emitted photons;
@xmath their associated creation operators and @xmath the vacuum state
of the EM field, and @xmath is the excitation probability of the atoms.
The initial momentum distribution of the emitted photons is given by
@xmath for the @xmath -th atom. As we will see later, we require some
uncertainty in the initial momentum in order to generate a large amount
of entanglement. Finally @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote the recoil
momenta of the atoms after emitting the photons. The terms omitted in
Eq. ( 6.1 ) correspond to higher order processes where an atom emits
more than one photon. These terms will have a very small contribution if
the decay time of the atom is longer than the duration of the exciting
pulse.

Let us now consider a single detector placed symmetrically below the
atoms [ CCGFZ99 ] , as in Fig. 6.1 a. If there is one single photon
detection, this will amount to a projective measurement onto a
single-photon state and out of the state in Eq. ( 6.1 ) only the term on
the first row will survive. Since the photons coming from the atoms are
undistinguishable, an implicit symmetrization will take place and the
final state of the atoms will be of the form @xmath , for some motional
states @xmath and @xmath . Even though we work with continuous
variables, this state can have at most 1 ebit which corresponds to
@xmath .

We are going to show now that with two emitted photons, linear optics
and two detectors, we cannot do better than one ebit of entanglement
[See Fig. 6.1 b]. The proof generalizes the previous argument with a
little bit more care. First of all, linear optics amounts to a linear
transformation of the initial momentum modes, @xmath , to new operators,
@xmath . A trivial example of this is a @xmath beam splitter, which
changes the photons from incident states @xmath and @xmath to @xmath .
Linear optics can be combined with measurements. Without loss of
generality, all measurements will take place at the end of the process
and they amount to a projection onto the modes @xmath and @xmath for the
first and second detector, respectively. The state after a projective
measurement onto two single-photon detectors reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the modes @xmath and @xmath detected by the first and second
detector are expressed on an orthonormal basis different from that of
the @xmath or @xmath operators. We enclose this information, plus the
initial wavefunction of the photon in the following @xmath -numbers

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using these wavefunctions we define the motional states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expectation value in Eq. ( 6.2 ) can be written in terms of the
@xmath . We thus arrive to the following expression for the atomic state
after the measurement

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This state cannot have more than 1 ebit of entanglement, which happens
when all the states @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal
to each other.

We must make several remarks. First of all, adding more detectors does
not improve the outcome. Second, our proof is valid independently of the
number of beam splitters, prisms, lenses and even polarizers we use. In
particular, attenuating elements such as polarizers and filters can be
treated as a linear operation plus a measurement and are covered by the
previous formalism.

#### 6.2 Arbitrary degree of entanglement between two atoms using
postselection

We propose now to use an ETPD to obtain an arbitrary degree of
entanglement between the two atoms. An ETPD is by definition a device
that clicks whenever two photons arrive simultaneously and with their
momenta satisfying a certain constraint. An example would be a
parametric up-conversion crystal, in which pairs of photons with momenta
@xmath and @xmath are converted with a certain probability into a new
photon with momentum @xmath . One imposes a constraint on the initial
state by post-selecting a window of final momenta. For example,
restricting the measurement to photons with transverse momentum @xmath ,
then the initial contributing momenta must be those satisfying @xmath
[Fig. 6.1 d]. In this example the ETPD ideally projects the initial two
photon product state @xmath onto the probably entangled state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the acceptance function of the detector or, equivalently,
the constraint that the final detected momenta @xmath and @xmath obey.

We claim now that with two emitted photons, linear operations and an
ETPD, there is no limit to the attainable entanglement. To prove it we
consider that after projection of the photon part of state in Eq. ( 6.1
) into @xmath , the resulting atomic state will take the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the already entangled state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Depending on the specific shape of the functions @xmath and @xmath
@xmath , @xmath , the corresponding state may reach an unbounded degree
of entanglement. For example, let us consider that the photons evolve
freely in space without any linear optics elements, @xmath , and assume
that the detector has a very narrow acceptance function @xmath . The
wider the initial momentum widths of the two photons, the larger the
resulting bipartite atomic entanglement, which is not bounded from
above. Indeed, in this ideal case the outcome will be much like the EPR
pairs from the seminal paper Ref. [ EPR35 ] .

Current Kerr media are too inefficient to practically implement the ETPD
introduced here. Motivated by this we have designed another protocol
that simulates the outcome of an ETPD using linear optics, additional
photons and postselection. As shown in the KLM proposal [ KLM01 ] , any
highly entangling quantum gate can be performed this way. Some care is
needed, though, because for our problem direct application of the KLM
proposal results in a too large number of gates to even obtain a
moderate amount of entanglement between both atoms.

Our proposal starts up from the two atoms after having emitted two
photons, and we add @xmath additional ancillary photons,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The resulting state after linear operations on the @xmath photons, and
@xmath -fold coincidence count on the @xmath detectors, will be,
analogously to the two-photon and two-detector case [Eqs. ( 6.2 )-( 6.5
)]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the set of permutations of @xmath elements. This
state may contain much more than one ebit of entanglement. In fact, an
upper bound to the degree of attainable entanglement is @xmath ebits. We
will show afterwards that this bound is indeed saturated.

#### 6.3 Three photons and three detectors

As a clarifying example we consider the setup in Fig. 6.1 c with three
photons and three detectors. Photons @xmath and @xmath come from their
respective atoms, we introduce a single auxiliary photon, @xmath and we
place three detectors symmetrically to the atoms, @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . The final state for the two atoms, considering that all the
three detectors are excited by the three photons, and fixing relative
phases equal to 1 for simplicity purposes, would have the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we denote with @xmath the atomic state associated to detection of
@xmath in @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath . In Fig. 6.2 we show the @xmath
processes that contribute coherently to the two-atom final entangled
state. The previous state contains an entanglement of @xmath ebits.

#### 6.4 Saturation of the entanglement bound @xmath ebits

The previous example is suboptimal. The maximal amount of entanglement
of @xmath ebits is reachable for some of the states in Eq. ( 6.10 ). To
prove it we consider a very symmetric configuration in which the
detectors are located along a circle, equidistant to both atoms [Fig.
6.1 c]. We will assume for simplicity that the two emitted photons and
the @xmath ancillary ones are in @xmath -wave states and arrive with
equal probability and phase to every detector. In a similar fashion as
in Eq. ( 6.11 ), the final bipartite atomic state will take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the final bipartite atomic state after detection of
photon @xmath in detector @xmath , and photon @xmath in detector @xmath
. In matrix form, the coefficients @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Both the reduced density matrix of one atom and the
Schmidt rank can be obtained from this matrix. The previous state can be
rewritten in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is a completion of @xmath to an orthonormal basis
in @xmath . From here it is obvious that the density matrix has
full-rank and we can with local operations obtain a maximally entangled
state of the form, up to local phases, @xmath . To do so we must reduce
the contribution of the term @xmath . As shown in Ref. [ RZBB94 ] , a
network of beam-splitters and phase-shifters can be used to perform a
unitary operation, @xmath , that maps the mode @xmath to a single
optical port. If, as shown in Fig. 6.3 we place on that port a filter
@xmath that decreases its amplitude by a factor @xmath , when the @xmath
detectors click simultaneously the atoms will get projected onto a
maximally entangled state with @xmath The proof is a little bit
cumbersome, as it involves studying how all the photon modes in Eq. (
6.9 ) transform under the nonunitary operation given by the network in
Fig. 6.3 and then ensuring that the detection of @xmath photons does
indeed give rise to the maximally entangled state. The state of the
@xmath photons and @xmath atoms is given, before detection, by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is the recoil state of atom @xmath , and @xmath is
the mode associated to detector @xmath . The linear transformation
@xmath applied to the modes before detection (see Fig. 6.3 ), maps the
modes @xmath into the modes @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,
are a completion to an orthonormal set, given by @xmath . The
corresponding state after application of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the recoil state of atom @xmath transformed under @xmath
.

The following step of our protocol is the application of an attenuator
@xmath to mode @xmath , according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The meaning of Eq. ( 6.17 ) is clear: the attenuator absorbs the photon
with a probability @xmath while leaves it unperturbed with a probability
@xmath . Postselection when detecting the @xmath photons will ensure
that no photon has been absorbed in the process.

The resulting state is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for @xmath and 1 otherwise.

Now we apply the inverse transformation @xmath , giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Upon detection of the @xmath photons at the @xmath detectors, the final
atomic state will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was previously introduced in ( 6.12 ) and appears due to
the fact that each detector just clicks for one single photon. @xmath
may be recast in the form @xmath , producing an atomic state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, we had that @xmath , and @xmath @xmath , so that our
final result is that, fixing @xmath the final atomic state will be the
maximally entangled state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which contains an entanglement of @xmath ebits. This completes our
proof.

Summing up, in this chapter we have demonstrated that it is possible to
achieve an arbitrary amount of entanglement in the motional state of two
atoms by using spontaneous emitted photons, linear optics and projective
measurements. The resulting states can be used to study violation of
Bell’s inequalities and also as a resource for quantum information
processing. We expect that similar ideas can be used to entangle atomic
clouds, replacing the photons with atoms, because in this case it is
easy to build a two-atom detector.

Regarding the implementation, the ideas shown here can be tested easily
in current experiments. We would suggest using two trapped ions as
target atoms. The ions should be either on a very weak trap, or released
right before excitation. The entanglement in the momentum will translate
into an entanglement in the position of the atoms after a short time of
flight. In practice, with only one additional photon, @xmath ebits can
be produced, and we expect a value of @xmath ebits to be achievable.
Clearly, due to the requirement of having single photons, producing a
larger amount of entanglement will be more difficult with current
technology, even though, as we have shown here, there is no fundamental
limit.

### Chapter 7 Spin entanglement loss by local correlation transfer to
the momentum

Bipartite and multipartite entanglement is considered a basic resource
in most applications of quantum information, communication, and
technology  (see for instance Refs. [ NC00 , GMD02 ] ). Entanglement is
fragile, and it is well-known that in some cases interactions with an
environment external to the entangled systems may decrease the quantum
correlations, degrading this valuable resource [ YE02 , YE03 , YE04 ,
DH04 , NS05 , CMPB05 , SMDZ06 ] . Momentum acts as a very special
environment which every particle possesses and cannot get rid of.
Consider for instance a bipartite system which initially is
spin-entangled and with the momentum distributions factorized. It will
decrease its spin-spin correlations provided any of the two particles
entangles its spin with its momentum. This simple idea was studied in
the natural framework of special relativity, where changing the
reference frame induces Wigner rotations that entangle each spin with
its momentum [ PST02 , Cza05 , AM02 , GA02 , PS03 , CW03 , GBA03 ,
LMDS06 ] . However, this is just a kinematical, frame-dependent effect
only, and not a real dynamical interaction. On the other hand, this type
of reasoning is also related to which-path detection [ SZ97 ] . In
addition, an experiment observing photon polarization disentanglement by
correlation transfer, in this case to the photon’s position, was
performed [ SMKR01 ] . Can local interactions entangling spin with
momentum produce the loss of non-local spin-spin entanglement? To our
knowledge this question has not been explored in the literature. More
remarkably, any particle owns a certain momentum distribution acting as
an intrinsic environment, which can never be eliminated by improving the
experimental conditions. But how does this fact affect the spin-spin
correlations? This is the question we want to analyze [ LLS06a ] in this
chapter.

In Section 7.1 we consider a bipartite system, composed by two @xmath
fermions or two photons, which are initially in a Bell spin state @xmath
. We use a formalism that shows the decrease of spin entanglement
whenever an interaction locally entangling spin with momentum takes
place. We obtain the negativity @xmath [ VW02 ] in terms of an integral
depending on the spin rotation angle conditional to the momentum. In
Section 7.2 we analyze this physical phenomenon in two specific
situations: (i) Two spin- @xmath fermions in a @xmath Bell state, with
Gaussian momentum distributions, that fly apart while one of them passes
through a local magnetic field. Their spin entanglement decreases as a
consequence of the transfer of correlations to the momentum of the
latter fermion. And (ii) Two photons in a polarization @xmath Bell
state, with Gaussian momentum distributions, which separate while one of
them traverses an optically-active medium. This medium will entangle the
polarization with the momentum and thus decrease the polarization
entanglement. This is an unavoidable source of decoherence. In Section
7.3 we show that the apparent purely quantum communication resulting
from these procedures is not possible. Classical communication has to be
exchanged for the protocol to operate. The chapter ends with our
conclusions.

#### 7.1 Spin entanglement loss by correlation transfer to the momentum

We consider a maximally spin-entangled state for two @xmath fermions
@xmath and @xmath , or two photons @xmath and @xmath . The case we
analyze is that in which the two particles are far apart already. This
avoids dealing with symmetrization issues. Indeed, our state is the
maximally entangled one for two @xmath spins or polarizations,
containing 1 ebit.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding momentum vectors of
particles @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with bimodal momentum distribution @xmath . We consider for the time
being this kind of distribution for illustrative purposes. At the end of
this section we generalize our results to arbitrary momentum
distributions of the two particles. @xmath and @xmath represent either
spin vectors pointing up and down along the @xmath -axis, in the
fermionic case, or right-handed and left-handed circular polarizations,
in the photonic case. If we trace out the momentum degrees of freedom in
Eq. ( 7.1 ), we obtain the usual spin Bell state, @xmath .

We consider a local interaction which entangles the spin of each
particle with its momentum through a real unitary (orthogonal)
transformation @xmath . We choose a real transformation for the sake of
simplicity and in order to obtain fully analytical results. The
generalization for inclusion of complex phases is straightforward but
adds nothing of relevance in this section. We will take it fully into
account in Sec. 7.2 .

Each state vector in Eq. ( 7.2 ) transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath produce a spin-momentum entangled state whenever
@xmath . The effect of this local interaction is that a part of the
non-local spin-spin entanglement is transferred to the spin-momentum
one, and the degree of entanglement of the spins decreases. To show
this, we consider the state ( 7.1 ) evolved with the transformation
@xmath , and trace out the momenta.

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath   @xmath            (7.4)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . It can be appreciated in Eq. ( 7.4 ) that the expression
is decomposable in sum of tensor products of 2 @xmath 2 spin blocks,
each corresponding to each particle. We compute now the different
blocks, corresponding to the four possible tensor products of the states
( 7.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . This way, it is possible to compute the
effects of the local interaction @xmath in the state @xmath after
tracing out the momentum. We choose equal interaction angles for the two
particles, @xmath , as a natural simplification. The resulting bipartite
spin state is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . The entanglement measure we will use is the
negativity [ VW02 ] , defined as @xmath , where @xmath is the smallest
eigenvalue of the partial transpose (PT) matrix of Eq. ( 7.5 ). It is
very easily computable, and is found to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this expression it can be appreciated that for @xmath the
entanglement remains maximal (1 ebit), and for @xmath separating from
@xmath the entanglement decreases, until @xmath , where it vanishes and
the state becomes separable. We plot this behavior in Figure 7.1 ,
showing the negativity @xmath in Eq. ( 7.6 ) as a function of @xmath and
@xmath . Every local interaction producing spin-momentum entanglement
will in general diminish the initial maximal spin-spin entanglement of
the two particles, thus degrading this resource. This result is valid
either for @xmath fermions or photons, as they both have a
two-dimensional internal Hilbert space.

The generalization of Eq. ( 7.6 ) to a uniform distribution with @xmath
different momenta is straightforward, and the spectrum of the
corresponding PT matrix is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a resulting negativity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

We take now the continuous limit, for an arbitrary momentum distribution
@xmath for each particle. We suppose for the sake of simplicity @xmath ,
although the spatial distributions do not overlap, as the two particles
are far away. Accordingly, @xmath will be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that this expression involves an integration over the momentum
variables @xmath and @xmath , associated to the same particle (not to
each of them). We point out that, according to ( 7.9 ), in the case
where momentum does not entangle with spin (i.e. whenever @xmath is a
constant), then @xmath and thus the spin-spin entanglement remains
maximal. Otherwise, the spin-spin entanglement would decrease due to the
transfer of correlations to the spin-momentum part.

The loss of spin entanglement under a spin-momentum entangling
transformation can take place in a variety of possible situations.
Wigner rotations that appear under relativistic change of reference
frame entangle each spin with its momentum producing loss of spin-spin
entanglement [ PST02 , Cza05 , AM02 , GA02 , PS03 , CW03 , GBA03 ,
LMDS06 ] . This is just a kinematical-relativistic effect, not due to a
dynamical interaction. In the rest of the chapter we focus on two
relevant examples of these interactions, taking fully into account the
complex phases: a local homogeneous magnetic field, for the two-fermion
case, and a local optically-active medium, for the two-photon case.

#### 7.2 Applications

##### 7.2.1 Two fermions and a local magnetic field

In this section we analyze a bipartite system, composed by two @xmath
neutral fermions @xmath and @xmath , which are initially far apart and
in a Bell spin state @xmath , with factorized Gaussian momentum
distributions. We consider that one of them traverses a region where a
finite, homogeneous magnetic field exists. As a result, it will transfer
part of its spin correlations to the momentum.

The initial spin-entangled state for the two fermions @xmath and @xmath
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding momentum vectors of
particles @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with Gaussian momentum distribution @xmath . In Eqs. ( 7.11 ) we are not
indicating explicitly the particle index. In the center of mass frame,
@xmath , and we consider that the two particles are flying apart from
each other. @xmath and @xmath represent spin vectors pointing up and
down along the @xmath -axis, respectively. If we trace out momentum
degrees of freedom in Eq. ( 7.10 ), we obtain the usual spin Bell state,
@xmath .

Suppose a local interaction which entangles the spin of fermion @xmath
with its momentum through a unitary transformation @xmath . In this case
we choose a magnetic field @xmath which is constant on a bounded region
@xmath of length @xmath , along the direction of @xmath , vanishes
outside @xmath , and extends infinitely with a constant value along the
other two orthogonal directions, as shown in Figure 7.2 . We take @xmath
along the direction orthogonal to @xmath , so it is divergenceless,
@xmath , and we quantize the spin along @xmath so that @xmath , with
@xmath the corresponding spin component. Due to the rotational
invariance of the spin singlet, this choice is completely general. In
momentum space, the problem reduces to one dimension, the one associated
to the direction of @xmath . We will denote from now on @xmath to the
corresponding momentum coordinate.

The system Hamiltonian can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the magnetic moment of our neutral particle.
Accordingly, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From the first of the above equations we obtain @xmath like using
matching conditions at @xmath . The second and third equations give the
spin evolution. By inspection we see that i) the spin remains parallel
to @xmath if it was initially so and, ii) the spin is constant in this
case @xmath . Hence, in spite of choosing a case where the spin is
conserved, its entanglement with the momentum decreases the spin
correlations with the idle fermion.

The effect of the magnetic field on particle @xmath can be seen in its
state. Behind the region @xmath , the resulting state vector as
transformed from the one in Eq. ( 7.11 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) is the transmission coefficient associated to
the mesa (well) potential induced by @xmath , for initial spin up
(down). It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , as given by ( 7.13 ), @xmath and @xmath for spin @xmath .
As expected for @xmath , @xmath . The initial state is preserved so no
spin-momentum correlations are generated. In general, for @xmath ,
@xmath , producing spin-momentum entanglement. We are considering here
just transmission through the region @xmath , without taking into
account the reflection of the wave packets. We suppose all the
measurements will take place beyond @xmath so we may normalize the final
transmitted state to 1. Finally, the net effect of this local
interaction is the reshuffling of spin-momentum correlations in the
state of the active fermion. Accordingly, the degree of spin-spin
entanglement between both particles decreases. As was done in Eq. ( 7.4
), we evolve the state ( 7.10 ) with the transformation @xmath and trace
out the momenta

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (7.16)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath . The traces corresponding to particle @xmath give just the
initial spin states, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , because @xmath
is just the identity for @xmath . The resulting, properly normalized
spin-spin state is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The negativity for this state is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression for @xmath is rather illuminating and its behavior easy
to understand. For the initial state ( 7.10 ) @xmath (1 initial ebit),
and, as long as the magnetic field is increased, @xmath and @xmath
become more different, making the term @xmath smaller, and diminishing
@xmath .

On the other hand, the wider @xmath the more destructive interference
between @xmath and @xmath will occur, reducing @xmath . We plot in
Figure 7.3 the negativity @xmath as a function of @xmath , with @xmath ,
for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , 2, and 3. All quantities are
measured with respect to a global arbitrary energy scale. The
entanglement goes to zero with increasing @xmath , and the wider @xmath
, the lesser the entanglement. A similar behaviour arises from the
cumulative effect of the barrier; the larger @xmath , the smaller the
entanglement. We show in Figure 7.4 this behavior, plotting @xmath as a
function of @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

##### 7.2.2 Two photons and an optically-active medium

In this section we analyze a bipartite system, composed by two photons
@xmath and @xmath , which are far apart in a polarization Bell state
@xmath with factorized Gaussian momentum distributions. We consider that
the photon @xmath traverses a region where a finite, optically-active
medium, exists. As a result, part of its spin correlations will be
transferred to the momentum.

Basically the mathematical formalism used for the two-fermion case is
also valid here, with @xmath and @xmath indicating right-hand and
left-hand circular polarizations, which we will denote by R and L
indices. The transmission coefficient in the WKB approximation, at
lowest order, takes now the form of a complex phase, depending on the
polarization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the refractive indices are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , @xmath are two of the matrix elements of the susceptibility
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is produced, for example, by an isotropic dielectric placed in a
magnetic field @xmath directed along @xmath , which is also the
direction of photon propagation. @xmath is the dielectric length that
the photon traverses. @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the cyclotron frequency @xmath , @xmath is the electron charge,
@xmath its mass, @xmath the resonance frequency of the optically-active
medium, @xmath the number of electrons per unit volume, and @xmath the
vacuum electric permittivity.

The next order correction would include factors @xmath in the
denominators of the transmission coefficients. However, the
approximation that considers these factors coincides exactly with the
lowest order one when taking into account just linear terms in @xmath .
We will consider the realistic case in which @xmath is small as compared
to the photon average energy. Thus we will work from the very beginning
just with the transmission coefficients ( 7.20 ).

The negativity @xmath , obtained for this case in analogy with the
two-fermion case, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the average momentum of photon @xmath , @xmath its
momentum width, and @xmath .

We plot in Figure 7.5 the negativity @xmath in Eq. ( 7.24 ) as a
function of @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . All quantities are
measured with respect to a global arbitrary energy scale. The
entanglement decreases as the magnetic field @xmath or the length @xmath
of the dielectric increase. We plot also in Figure 7.6 the negativity
@xmath as a function of @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
Surprisingly, and opposite to the two-fermion case, the entanglement
increases as the momentum width @xmath of the photon is larger. This
effect comes from the fact that for larger widths, centered at @xmath ,
the contribution from the region around the resonance frequency @xmath ,
in which the effect of the medium is appreciable, becomes smaller. On
the other hand, in the limit of negligible width, the spin could not get
entangled with the momentum so in this limit the spin-spin entanglement
would remain maximal. We observe then that there is a region of
intermediate widths @xmath in which the spin-spin entanglement becomes
minimal. Finally, we plot in Figure 7.7 the negativity @xmath as a
function of @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The larger @xmath
corresponds in this figure to the higher curves. These graphics show
that the entanglement decreases mainly for resonance frequencies @xmath
around the average momentum @xmath . It also shows the surprising
behavior mentioned above: For wider @xmath , the entanglement is larger,
and the interval of @xmath for which the entanglement decreases is
wider, as expected according to the previous analysis.

#### 7.3 Is purely quantum communication feasible?

A cautious reader may immediately object that, in principle, our
preceding analysis seems to suggest the feasibility of communication
through a purely quantum channel, i.e. without classical communication,
as in all quantum-informational protocols. Let us illustrate this point
with the following proposal based in the previous two-fermion case. As
usual, Alice and Bob will be the corresponding observers of each
fermion. The joint spin-spin state is given by equation ( 7.17 ), which
immediately drives one to the subsequent reduced spin state for fermion
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

But the quantities @xmath depend on the magnetic field @xmath ( cf.
equations ( 7.18 ) and ( 7.15 )), which can be controlled by Alice .
This allows them to agree on the following procedure. They agree on
communicating with a binary alphabet with classical bits @xmath and
@xmath . If Alice were to communicate @xmath , she would adjust @xmath
so that the reduced spin state for Bob is, for example,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

They prepare a statistically significative amount of pairs of fermions
under such conditions. Then Bob, when measuring the spin upon his
fermion, will typically obtain spin up in the @xmath of the measurements
and spin down in the remaining @xmath . He thus deduces that Alice is
sending the bit @xmath . On the contrary, if Alice were to communicate
the bit @xmath , she would adjust @xmath so that the reduced spin state
for Bob is, for example,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

They also prepare a statistically significative amount of pairs and Bob
perfoms his measurements. He will detect @xmath of them in the spin down
state and @xmath in the spin up state. He thus deduces that Alice is
sending the bit @xmath . Notice that this information transmission is
carried out without the assistance of classical communication.

The flaw stems from the disregarding of the wave packet reflection in
Alice’s site. This can be seen in two complementary ways. On one hand,
to perform a genuine information transmission in which Bob’s fermion is
actually carrying information encoded by Alice, he must be able to
discern between those fermions whose pairs have been reflected in
Alice’s barrier potential, so that he can securely discard them (they
are not carrying information at all). And this is only possible if Alice
classically communicates this information to Bob.

On the other hand, a detailed calculation taking into account the
reflection coefficients, hence without the normalization appearing in
the denominator of ( 7.18 ), shows that Bob’s reduced spin state will be
given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes the corresponding reflection coefficient for spin
@xmath and momentum @xmath . The calculation reveals that Bob gains no
information whatsoever from Alice’s decisions, unless she classically
informs Bob about them. Mathematically this can be expressed through the
unitary character of the process. If no classical information is
exchanged, the evolution is locally unitary ( @xmath ) and thus cannot
change the entanglement shared by both parties (the entanglement class
is invariant under locally unitary evolution). Consequently no
information through the purely quantum channel can be obtained. On the
contrary, if Alice classically sends information to Bob, she is actually
selecting a subset of her incoming fermions, i.e. she is projecting her
state ( @xmath , where @xmath is an orthogonal projector ¹ ¹ 1 More
generally, it can also be a POVM, depending on whether the information
provided by Alice is complete or not [ Per95 ] . ), which is a
nonunitary operator which changes the entanglement class. This fact
allows them to exploit the initial quantum correlations between their
fermions to establish a communication protocol. This example shows once
more the impossibility of using quantum correlations, i.e. entanglement
to exchange information without the aid of classical communication.

In summary, we showed the spin entanglement loss by transfer of
correlations to the momentum of one of the particles, through a local
spin-momentum entangling interaction. This phenomenon, already analyzed
for a non-interacting particular case in the context of Wigner rotations
of special relativity, may produce decoherence of Bell spin states. The
momentum of each particle is a very simple reservoir and indeed it is
one that cannot be eliminated by improving the experimental conditions,
due to Heisenberg’s principle. We show that an @xmath fermion (photon),
which initially belongs to a Bell spin state, may lose its spin
correlations due to this physical phenomenon when traversing a local
magnetic field (optically-active medium). These specific media entangle
each component of the spin state of the particle with its momentum, like
in a Stern-Gerlach device. This could have implications for quantum
communication and information processing devices.

### Chapter 8 Schmidt decomposition with discrete sets of orthonormal
functions

While multipartite entanglement and mixed states entanglement are
resulting very difficult to study theoretically, entanglement of pure
states of systems with just two components is much better known and very
interesting for applications [ Eke91 , BW92 , BBC @xmath 93 , BBM @xmath
98 , BPM @xmath 97 ] . The Schmidt decomposition [ Sch06 , EK95 ] is a
valuable tool for analyzing these states entanglement. This procedure
(not to be confused with the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization procedure,
which is a different one) relies on the singular value decomposition of
a square matrix [ NC00 ] . It allows to express an arbitrary pure
bipartite state as ‘sum of diagonal biorthogonal products’. This way the
entanglement of this state is easily evaluated and ready to use. In
Appendix A we explain in detail the Schmidt decomposition procedure,
both for finite dimensional systems and for those described by
continuous variables.

In this chapter we obtain an alternative way [ LL05a ] to compute the
Schmidt decomposition for systems described with continuous variables,
different to the usual one. It has the advantage of preserving the
analytical dependence of the states, and it is well motivated due to the
research community concern in entanglement. Here we consider the case of
continuous variables entanglement. For us, these variables may be @xmath
which commute as phase space variables do. We also refer to continuous
variable entanglement in systems described by momentum and/or energy
observables. Precisely, the entanglement of continuous variables stems
from the original EPR article [ EPR35 ] . The systems with continuous
variables have been studied thoroughly both theoretically and
experimentally, [ Vai94 , FSB @xmath 98 , LB99 , Gie01 , GECP03 , AB05 ,
BvL05 ] and references therein. However, the treatment of the
entanglement of systems with continuous variables, from a practical
point of view, is far from straightforward. Until now, obtaining the
Schmidt decomposition in the continuous case required solving the
corresponding integral equations [ PBP00 , LWE00 , CLE02 , CLE03 , LE04
] . They had to be discretized, losing the continuous dependence of the
initial state. Here we propose a method [ LL05a ] to perform the Schmidt
decomposition for this case, to the accuracy desired, keeping the
continuous character of the variables. This method consists of two
steps:

1.  We decompose the bipartite system wave function, @xmath , by using
    two denumerable and complete sets of orthonormal functions, @xmath ,
    @xmath , of @xmath , in the form:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    The purpose of this step is to transform the continuous problem into
    a discrete one (a necessary step for the numerical computation),
    while preserving the continuous dependence of @xmath .

2.  Then we apply the (finite dimensional) Schmidt procedure to ( 8.1 )
    in order to write the wave function @xmath as diagonal sum of
    biorthogonal terms:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The orthonormal functions @xmath , @xmath -the modes- will be some
particular linear combinations of @xmath , @xmath , respectively. Notice
that we are using the Schmidt procedure for discrete systems to obtain
the decomposition for the continuous case. This is much more tractable,
as it implies diagonalizing matrices instead of solving integral
equations.

The rationale for this procedure is the expectation that only a few
@xmath will suffice: A handful of appropriate orthonormal functions will
approximate @xmath to the desired accuracy. We finish by pointing out
some properties of this method, namely

-   We obtain complete analytic characterization of the modes @xmath ,
    @xmath to the desired precision. Our method surpasses the standard
    numerical procedures in that keeps the continuous features present
    in @xmath .

-   We remark the portability of the attained modes @xmath , @xmath that
    are ready for later uses.

-   For the physical systems analyzed, we found that the number of
    @xmath functions required is small. For example, in the biphoton
    case analyzed in Chapter 9 , the accuracy (error) was of around
    @xmath with @xmath @xmath matrices. Considering the case of two
    electrons which interact via QED, studied in detail in Chapter 2 ,
    the error was of @xmath with @xmath matrices.

We consider a bipartite quantum system formed by two subsystems @xmath
and @xmath . Some examples are two photons entangled by parametric
down-conversion, a photon emitted by an excited atom and as a result
entangled with it or two charged particles which interact electrically.
This system is described by the pure vector state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are the creation operators of a particle
associated to the subsystems @xmath and @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are
continuous variables associated to @xmath and @xmath respectively, which
can represent momenta, energies, frequencies, or the like. In general,
the analysis is made in an ad hoc kinematical situation in which @xmath
and @xmath turn out to be one-dimensional variables, @xmath , @xmath .
In this chapter we assume this is the case. In addition, there can be
discrete variables (like the spin) to be treated with the Schmidt
method, that we do not include here to avoid unwieldy notation.

Our method works as follows:

We consider two denumerable and complete sets of orthonormal @xmath
functions @xmath , @xmath @xmath , each one associated to each
particular subsystem @xmath ( @xmath ). These functions obey

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

1.  Our first step is to expand the wave function @xmath as a linear
    combination of the @xmath , translating the continuous problem into
    a discretized one. Thus we work with the discrete coefficients of
    the linear combination, though the continuous character of the state
    is preserved in the @xmath dependence of the @xmath functions. The
    expansion reads:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where the coefficients @xmath are given by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

2.  Our second step is to apply the Schmidt decomposition (see Appendix
    A ) to the discretized pure bipartite state ( 8.5 ), as is usually
    done for finite dimension Hilbert spaces (diagonalizing matrices,
    instead of solving integral equations). In order to do this, it is
    necessary to truncate the expansion ( 8.5 ), something that is
    possible to a certain accuracy due to the fact that @xmath ( @xmath
    is in principle normalizable), and the expansion is in orthonormal
    functions, so the coefficients @xmath go to 0 with increasing @xmath
    (see below).

    We truncate the series ( 8.5 ) at @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath ,
    without loss of generality. The Schmidt procedure leads to

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.8)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.9)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

    Here the matrix @xmath is the (transposed) eigenvectors matrix of
    @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath .

There are two sources of error in this procedure:

-   Truncation error: This is the largest source of error in our method.
    Inescapably, the series ( 8.5 ) must end at some finite @xmath ,
    @xmath when attempting to obtain some specific result. This step is
    possible to a certain accuracy because the function @xmath is
    square-integrable and we are expanding it into orthonormal
    functions, so @xmath and thus @xmath when @xmath .

    The particular choice of the orthonormal functions @xmath will
    affect how fast the @xmath go to zero. Hence, the election of these
    functions for a particular physical problem will be a delicate task.
    To reach the same accuracy with different sets @xmath it will be
    necessary in general to consider a different pair of cut-offs @xmath
    for each of the sets.

-   Numerical error: This is a better controlled source. It includes the
    error in calculating the coefficients @xmath via ( 8.6 ) and the one
    produced when diagonalizing the matrix @xmath .

The suitable quantity to control the convergence for a particular @xmath
and a specific set @xmath is the well known (square) distance @xmath
between the function @xmath and the Schmidt decomposition obtained with
cut-offs @xmath (mean square error):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression gives the truncation error. It will go to zero with
increasing cut-offs according to the specific @xmath chosen.

Another easily computable, less precise way of controlling the
convergence is given by the fact that (with no cut-offs) @xmath and thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

is other measure of the truncation error, where here @xmath is
calculated with cut-offs @xmath . Would we compute the @xmath exactly,
then @xmath . In practice this can not be done because our @xmath are
the eigenvalues of the @xmath matrix @xmath , that depend slightly on
@xmath . Both distances behave in a very similar way, as we show in FIG.
9.1 and FIG. 9.2 , though @xmath is more easily computable than @xmath .

The choice of the two sets of orthonormal functions for a particular
physical problem, @xmath can be approached from two different points of
view, according to the feature one desires to emphasize: Localizability
properties or convergence improving.

#### 8.1 Localization point of view

The choice of the orthonormal functions in a particular problem can be
done according to the specific intervals in which the variables @xmath
take values for that case. Typical examples of discrete sets of
orthonormal functions are the orthogonal polynomials, defined in a
variety of intervals. For example, a possible choice to describe one
dimensional momenta @xmath , are the Hermite polynomials, @xmath . The
equivalence sign indicates here that the polynomial must be accompanied
by the square root of the weight function in order to be correctly
orthonormalized, and normalization factors must be included. If, on the
other hand, the variable of interest in a specific problem is bounded
from below, like the energy of a free massless particle @xmath , then
the election could be Laguerre polynomials, @xmath .

The criterion for choosing the orthonormal functions @xmath according to
the intervals in which @xmath , @xmath are defined has a fundamental
character. For example, the localizability in configuration space of the
Fourier transforms of the modes ( 8.8 ), ( 8.9 ), depends critically on
the intervals in which these modes are defined [ BB98 , Lam02 ] . Only
if we choose the functions @xmath to be defined exactly in the same
intervals as the amplitude @xmath , may the Fourier transforms of the
modes have the right localization properties. In spite of that, this
point of view may not be the most suitable one, as it may give slower
convergence than the point of view presented below.

#### 8.2 Convergence point of view

In this case, the choice is approached with the goal of improving the
convergence. The @xmath are chosen here according to the functional form
of @xmath . The closer the lowest modes are to @xmath the lesser the
number of them necessary to obtain the required accuracy. We are looking
for @xmath that maximize @xmath for low @xmath , @xmath . In some cases
this practical point of view will be more useful than the fundamental
one: the convergence will be faster. For example, suppose the amplitude
for a particular problem is of the form @xmath , with @xmath a slowly
varying function of @xmath , @xmath . In this particular case it is
reasonable to choose the functions @xmath as Hermite polynomials,
because their weight functions are indeed gaussians. This leads to
@xmath .

### Chapter 9 Entanglement in Parametric Down-Conversion

In this chapter we consider a realistic case of biphotons already
studied in the literature [ LWE00 , LE04 ] : two photons entangled in
frequency through parametric down-conversion. We apply our method to
this physical system in order to obtain the Schmidt decomposition and
the structure of modes without losing the analytic character within the
target accuracy.

The system under study is a biphoton state generated by parametric
down-conversion (PDC) of an ultrashort pump pulse with type-II phase
matching. The amplitude in this particular case takes the form [ LWE00 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath are the frequencies associated to the ordinary and
extraordinary fields respectively, @xmath and @xmath are the inverse of
group velocities at the frequency @xmath , @xmath is the inverse group
velocity at the pump frequency @xmath , @xmath is the PDC crystal length
and @xmath is the width of the initial pulse. Typical values for these
parameters are @xmath ps, @xmath ps, @xmath ps @xmath , @xmath mm and
@xmath ps @xmath .

We perform now the following change of variables:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and thus obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have applied our method to the function ( 9.4 ) (once normalized)
according to Chapter 8 , in the following way:

We choose as orthonormal functions Hermite polynomials, because their
weights are gaussians and a Gaussian appears in ( 9.4 ). These
polynomials were used in [ UBW03 ] for PDC in some particular cases
which are exactly solvable. The orthonormal sets we chose, looking for
maximizing the @xmath ( 8.6 ) for the lowest @xmath , @xmath , were

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This choice of polynomials is suitable for the convergence approach
(section 8.2 ), taking into account that @xmath and thus the interval of
definition of @xmath can be restricted to a region centered in @xmath of
width @xmath in @xmath .

We have considered cut-offs @xmath taking values @xmath and followed the
steps of Chapter 8 . We have computed the eigenvalues @xmath of the
Schmidt decomposition ( 8.7 ) for each pair @xmath . We have also
computed the modes ( 8.8 ) and ( 8.9 ).

In FIG. 9.1 we plot the distance @xmath ( 8.11 ) as a function of @xmath
, to show how fast the convergence is. With @xmath the truncation error
is of @xmath . We also plot in FIG. 9.2 the distance @xmath ( 8.12 ),
which serves as another measure of the convergence, as a function of
@xmath . We obtained @xmath .

Regarding now the most precise case considered, @xmath , we plot in FIG.
9.3 the eigenvalues @xmath for different values of @xmath , observing
good agreement with the results existing in the literature [ LWE00 ] .
For this case we also plot in FIG. 9.4 the modes ( 8.8 ) and ( 8.9 ) for
@xmath , confirming the validity of the method when comparing with [
LWE00 ] .

The modes are given explicitly by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the values of the coefficients @xmath are obtained through ( 8.8 )
and ( 8.9 ). The actual properties of the modes ( 9.6 ) depend on these
values. In fact, the parity and number of nodes is determined by them,
taking into account that @xmath is a polynomial of degree @xmath ,
parity @xmath and having @xmath nodes.

A good approximation to the @xmath obtained with our procedure is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression has a deviation (square distance) of @xmath from the
whole mode obtained including terms until @xmath , which is the greatest
power appearing for @xmath . On the other hand, @xmath . From ( 9.7 ) it
can be seen that in this mode the even components are greater than the
odd ones (these are negligible), so it is an even state, as shown in
FIG. 9.4 .

Another example is the approximation to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This has a deviation (square distance) of @xmath from the whole mode
obtained including terms until @xmath . On the other hand, @xmath . More
terms are needed in ( 9.8 ), because they go to zero more slowly with
increasing powers of @xmath . Here the most important components are the
odd ones (the even ones are negligible), leading to an odd parity state,
as shown in FIG. 9.4 .

To show how the convergence of the method depends on the specific family
pairs of orthonormal functions @xmath , @xmath chosen, we consider the
cases of Hermite orthonormal functions depending on a parameter @xmath
related to the width of the Gaussian, fixed for each family pair:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We applied our method to the amplitude ( 9.4 ) with these sets of
orthonormal functions, for @xmath , and cut-offs @xmath . We show in
table 9.1 the values of @xmath for these specific parameters.

Clearly, the convergence is better for the case @xmath , which we used
in the preceding calculations. In case we chose another type of
orthonormal function for ( 9.4 ) (Laguerre, Legendre,…), the convergence
would have been much worse because of the specific shape of that
amplitude.

### Chapter 10 Momentum entanglement in unstable systems

#### 10.1 Time evolution of bipartite entanglement

Writing about time in scattering theory is rather tricky, because the in
and out states are asymptotic states which come from and leave to the
spatial infinite, i. e., very large distances compared to the
interaction distance. Thus the time between emission and detection of
the particles is very large compared to the interaction period.
Interesting situations arise when the time lapse between preparation and
detection is finite. Some examples are entangled systems which fly apart
from each other but still lie in the same region, or the effect of the
interaction between particles during a finite time interval. In these
cases, it is necessary to use a finite time evolution formalism (see
Chapter 2 ). This implies that the time integral of the action is
restricted to a finite interval @xmath . Associated to this finiteness
of the integration interval for the time coordinate is the
non-conservation of energy at short times. The point is that, instead of
a Dirac delta @xmath , a function of the kind

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

is obtained when performing the integral in @xmath , where @xmath is the
difference between the final and initial energies. The interpretation of
this is that the finite time evolution allows non-conservation of energy
for short elapsed times compared with the interaction time interval. In
the large- @xmath limit, the sinc function ( 10.1 ) converges to the
@xmath and thus the usual scattering expression is recovered. The
situation changes when we initially have an unstable system, like an
excited atom or a resonance. In this case, the system has a certain
width @xmath wherever inelastic decay channels are open (see below). For
these systems, there is an additional term @xmath in one of the
exponentials of the time-dependent amplitude, so this exponential goes
to @xmath with increasing @xmath . The effect is that, at large times,
the remaining amplitude of decay from the initial state @xmath to the
final state @xmath is just a Lorentzian curve [ CLE02 ] with a global
time-dependent phase

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this chapter we study [ LL05b ] the @xmath dependence of the time
evolution of momentum entanglement for unstable systems. In the @xmath
case, as we have indicated, a function ( 10.1 ) appears in the
transition amplitude between the initial and final states, for a finite
time lapse. The entanglement in energies increases as this function goes
to @xmath with increasing time, because the @xmath -function is the
(non-normalizable) state with highest (infinite) entanglement (see
Chapter 11 ). On the other hand, if @xmath , the entanglement in
energies of the decay amplitude increases with @xmath until it reaches a
maximum. This is the entanglement of ( 10.2 ), which remains constant in
the subsequent time evolution. Notice that the smaller the value of
@xmath , the larger this constant value is and the later it is reached,
as we will explicitly show in this chapter.

The elastic (non decay) amplitude has been extensively studied in the
literature [ Kha57 , CSM77 ] .These analysis show the presence of power
corrections @xmath at long times. Here we consider the decay amplitude,
obtaining power corrections in @xmath that introduce entanglement, as
they are not factorizable. This is of great interest as these
corrections may be sizeable in some relevant cases [ JMS @xmath 05 ] .

We consider a non-elementary unstable system @xmath in an excited state
@xmath with mass @xmath which decays into a ground state @xmath with
mass @xmath emitting a particle @xmath with mass @xmath (see FIG. 10.1
). This system could be an excited atom which emits a photon and gets
down to the ground state, an unstable nucleus which radiates, or the
like. In the atom example @xmath is the atom mass, @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the energy difference of the internal atom levels @xmath and
@xmath , and @xmath . For simplicity we consider that the emitted
particle is a scalar. Our aim is to study the evolution with @xmath of
the entanglement in the final state momenta for different values of
@xmath . The Hamiltonian we consider @xmath is customized for analyzing
the process @xmath . @xmath is the free Hamiltonian of system @xmath and
particle @xmath . @xmath is the interaction Hamiltonian.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath , @xmath are the kinetic energies of system @xmath in states
@xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the kinetic energy of particle @xmath .
@xmath is the energy difference between levels @xmath and @xmath ,
including the mass differences @xmath . @xmath is the coupling constant
between the states @xmath ( @xmath in state @xmath and no particles
@xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath in state @xmath and @xmath particle @xmath
), that are the only ones that are taken into account in the present
approximation.

We denote in the following @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the
state of system @xmath with momentum @xmath and internal state @xmath ,
with no particles @xmath . @xmath is the state of system @xmath with
momentum @xmath and internal state @xmath and one particle @xmath with
momentum @xmath .

The amplitude for the decay @xmath during the time interval @xmath can
be given [ CTDRG92 ] as

  -- -- -- --------
           (10.5)
  -- -- -- --------

where the time evolution operator @xmath can be obtained integrating the
resolvent operator @xmath along @xmath (see FIG. 10.2 ), i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the case we are interested in, where the @xmath particle in the
final state behaves as a mere spectator, it is useful to split the space
of states by means of the projectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath includes states of the form @xmath . We consider only transitions
between states @xmath and @xmath induced by @xmath . Thus @xmath and
@xmath .

After some algebra it follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Near the real axis

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the energy shift and the width
of the excited state @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Due to ( 10.11 ) @xmath needs two Riemann sheets because there is a
discontinuity in @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath does not vanish.

The resolvent matrix element is then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath .

With all this, integrating along the contour of FIG. 10.2 , by Cauchy
theorem, ( 10.5 ) transforms into

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we consider @xmath as a constant parameter and we neglect the
energy shift @xmath . The integral along @xmath vanishes when the
contour is taken to infinity. @xmath is the integral along path @xmath
which lies on the first and second Riemann sheets. It gives the
power-law corrections in @xmath for large times. It was discussed in [
Kha57 , CSM77 ] . For instance, for @xmath , it is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The dependence of ( 10.16 ) on the final energies is different from that
of the first term on the rhs of ( 10.15 ), and thus the entanglement in
final momenta is also different. Eberly et al. [ CLE02 , CLE03 ]
analyzed the dominant part of this term showing the leading role of the
Lorentzian in the features of the final state entanglement. Here we want
to connect these results, valid for unstable systems, to the case where
the initial state is more and more stable. The contribution from ( 10.16
) gets lesser as @xmath gets thinner. Thence we firstly neglect it,
analyzing the entanglement associated to the amplitude @xmath . We will
justify this approximation later for the particular cases analyzed.

The behavior of @xmath for critical values of @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

( 10.19 ) and ( 10.20 ) correspond to amplitudes with no entanglement in
the final energies @xmath and @xmath : they are separable amplitudes. (
10.18 ) contains a @xmath function leading asymptotically to @xmath ,
already discussed [ LL05a ] (see Chapter 11 ). Finally, ( 10.21 )
produces the Lorentzian entanglement in @xmath and @xmath multiplied by
a separable phase. The entanglement of ( 10.21 ) does not evolve with
time, because the separable phase can be factorized. Summarizing: For
@xmath the entanglement increases monotonically with time towards the
maximum entanglement possible, associated to the @xmath -function. For
@xmath , the entanglement grows with time until it reaches a maximum,
which is the corresponding value for the Lorentzian ( 10.21 ) [ CLE02 ]
. The greater the value of @xmath for fixed @xmath , the greater the
entanglement. The wider the value of @xmath for fixed @xmath , the
lesser the entanglement. The fact that the asymptotic attainable
entanglement decreases for increasing @xmath is rather surprising at
first sight. A wider width @xmath is associated to a stronger
interaction, that would in principle generate more entanglement. We
interpret this result in the following way. A wider width @xmath has
associated a shorter mean life so that the particles reach faster the
asymptotic limit. Accordingly, they interact during a shorter period and
generate less entanglement. This is related to the fact that the
exponential term that goes to zero, @xmath , decreases exponentially
faster for a linear growth in @xmath .

#### 10.2 A specific example

To explicitly illustrate the reasonings of section 10.1 with a specific
case, we consider an initial state @xmath for system @xmath with
Gaussian distribution in momentum @xmath , centered in @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using ( 10.4 ) we have @xmath . Then, we obtain the amplitude @xmath for
the decay of the state @xmath into a state @xmath in a time @xmath
computing the relevant matrix element ( 10.15 ).

For the case where @xmath (in state @xmath ) and @xmath are detected in
opposite directions from the initial position of system @xmath (in state
@xmath ) we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Above we have used dimensionless parameters @xmath obtained by
multiplying or dividing by @xmath , for instance @xmath .

We obtained the Schmidt decomposition of the bipartite amplitude ( 10.23
), according to Chapter 8 , for @xmath and @xmath . We observed the
contribution from @xmath was always lesser than @xmath times of the
total amplitude ( 10.23 ) (for the considered cases).

In FIG. 10.3 we plot the Schmidt number @xmath [ GRE94 ] versus @xmath
for @xmath @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . @xmath is a measure
of the entanglement of a pure bipartite state, that gives the number of
effective terms in its Schmidt decomposition. @xmath , @xmath for
separable states, and, the larger is @xmath , the larger the
entanglement. The graphic was made by computing the Schmidt
decomposition for five values of @xmath and four values of @xmath (with
an error lesser than @xmath , see Chapter 8 , in all the points but two,
and lesser than @xmath in these two points, which were harder to
compute; however, we remark that the attained precision is good for our
present purposes, which consist of showing a general behavior of @xmath
as a function of @xmath and @xmath ) and afterwards a polinomial
interpolation for obtaining the continuous figure. As we have shown in
this chapter, the entanglement grows with @xmath in the beginning, and
keeps growing for @xmath while for @xmath it reaches a maximum. For each
@xmath , the wider the value of @xmath , the lesser the entanglement.
This is a surprising result because @xmath is wider for stronger
interactions, which presumably would create more entanglement. However,
the stronger the interaction, the faster the asymptotic limit is
reached. As a result, the system saturates before at a lower degree of
entanglement, as we show here.

In FIG. 10.4 we plot the Schmidt number @xmath versus @xmath for @xmath
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The graphic was made by using
the computed points of the previous figure (see above) and afterwards a
polinomial interpolation for obtaining the continuous figure. The
entanglement decreases with @xmath . For each @xmath , the longer the
time @xmath , the greater the entanglement.

#### 10.3 Remarks

For the sake of completeness we point out that the term ( 10.16 ) may be
important when @xmath is not so small, and there is a time in which this
term becomes larger than the @xmath term. This value of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The value of @xmath for which the term ( 10.16 ) becomes larger than the
other terms ( @xmath term and Lorentzian term) for the case here
considered of @xmath , @xmath and for @xmath is around @xmath , i.e., of
@xmath order, which does not seem to be a realistic value in principle.
However, some recent results [ JMS @xmath 05 ] point to the possibility
of decay in S-wave in such a way that the width is larger than the
difference in energies between excited and ground states. In such a
case, the contribution from @xmath would be relevant.

In summary, we analyzed the generation of momentum entanglement in the
decay of unstable systems described by a decay width @xmath . We verify
that, as expected, the entanglement grows with time until reaching an
asymptotic maximum. On the other hand, unexpectedly, the wider the decay
width @xmath , the lesser the asymptotic attainable entanglement. We
explain this apparently surprising result in terms of the fact that for
wider width the mean life is shorter, so that the system evolves faster
(during a shorter period) and can reach lesser entanglement than with
longer mean lives.

### Chapter 11 Maximum entanglement: The Dirac delta

One interesting (non-normalizable) amplitude when studying continuous
variable entanglement is the Dirac delta. In this chapter we give [
LL05a ] a concise description of its entanglement content based on the
method we proposed in Chapter 8 for computing the Schmidt decomposition
of an amplitude with continuous variables.

In this case we have (see Chapter 8 ) @xmath and we take the same
interval @xmath for @xmath and @xmath to apply our method, for analyzing
its entanglement. We consider complete sets of orthonormal functions
satisfying @xmath . A particular case is when they are real functions,
as for example the typical orthogonal polynomials (Legendre, Hermite,
Laguerre, Chebyshev,...) are. We must take into account that the Dirac
delta is not a function but a distribution, and indeed is outside @xmath
. However, we can calculate the @xmath and study how much entanglement
does this state have. We obtain straightforwardly @xmath . This gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is just the resolution of the identity as given in ( 8.4 ). The
Schmidt decomposition of the Dirac delta is not unique, because all the
weights @xmath are equal to one (they are degenerate). In fact, the
decomposition can be done with any complete, denumerable set of
orthonormal functions, in the form ( 8.4 ). This expression can be seen
as an infinite entanglement case, in the sense explained below. The fact
that all the weights are equal to one, makes sense only because we are
considering a distribution, not an @xmath state. The sum of the squares
of the weights, which must be equal to the square of the norm of the
function @xmath , diverges because the Dirac delta is not
square-integrable.

A possible measure of the entanglement of a state @xmath in its Schmidt
decomposition ( A.14 ) is given by the von Neumann entropy [ NC00 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is usually called the entropy of entanglement.

The state of @xmath closer to ( 11.1 ) is the case of an entangled state
with @xmath diagonal terms with equal @xmath , when @xmath goes to
infinity. To be correctly normalized it verifies @xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the maximum entanglement case. This provides an estimate of the
entropy of the Dirac delta (were it in @xmath ). Another well-known way
of obtaining the amount of entanglement of the Dirac delta is
considering it as the limit of infinite squeezing of a bipartite
Gaussian state [ Gie01 ] . However, to our knowledge, the Schmidt
decomposition of the Dirac delta has never been obtained before. We
believe ours is an elegant result, that may clarify the entanglement
structure of this distribution.

## Part III Multipartite entanglement

### Chapter 12 Sequential quantum cloning

#### 12.1 Quantum cloning sequentially implemented

Multipartite entangled states stand up as the most versatile and
powerful tool to perform information-processing protocols in quantum
information science [ BD00 ] . They arise as an invaluable resource in
tasks such as quantum computation [ DE98 , RB01 ] , quantum state
teleportation [ BEA00 ] , quantum communication [ ABH @xmath 01 ] and
dense coding [ BW92 ] . As a result, the controllable generation of
these states becomes a crucial issue in the quest for
quantum-informational proposals. However, the generation of multipartite
entangled states through single global unitary operations is, in
general, an extremely difficult experimental task. In this sense, the
sequential generation studied by Schön et al. [ SSV @xmath 05 , SHW
@xmath 06 ] , where at each step one qubit is allowed to interact with
an ancilla, appears as the most promising avenue. The essence of this
sequential scheme is the successive interaction of each qubit
initialized in the standard state @xmath with an ancilla of a suitable
dimension @xmath to generate the desired multiqubit state. In the last
step, the qubit-ancilla interaction is chosen so as to decouple the
final multiqubit entangled state from the auxiliary @xmath -dimensional
system, yielding [ SSV @xmath 05 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are @xmath dimensional matrices arising from the
isometries @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath being the Hilbert spaces for
the ancilla and the @xmath th qubit, respectively, and where @xmath and
@xmath denote the initial and final states of the ancilla, respectively.
The state ( 12.1 ) is, indeed, a Matrix-Product State (MPS) ( cf. [
Eck05 , PGVWC06 ] and multiple references therein), already present in
spin chains [ AKLT87 ] , classical simulations of quantum entangled
systems [ Vid03 ] and density-matrix renormalization group techniques [
VPC04 ] . Moreover, it was proven that any multiqubit MPS can be
sequentially generated using the recipe of Ref. [ SSV @xmath 05 ] .
Notice that in this formalism, the mutual qubit-ancilla interaction in
each step @xmath completely determines the matrices @xmath , @xmath ,
whereas we enjoy some freedom to build such an interaction from a known
@xmath . This freedom stems from the very fact that in the proposed
scheme only the initial state @xmath for each qubit will be relevant.

Here we consider [ DLL @xmath 06 ] the possibility of implementing
quantum cloning based on a sequential protocol with the help of an
ancillary system. This problem is certainly far from being an
application of Ref. [ SSV @xmath 05 ] , given that the initial and final
states are unknown. In this sense, any proposed strategy will be closer
to the open problem of which global unitary operations (certainly not
all of them) can be implemented through a sequential procedure. Despite
the fundamental no-cloning theorem [ WZ82 , Die82 ] , stating the
impossibility to exactly clone an unknown quantum state, there exist
several cloning techniques with a given optimal fidelity [ SIGA05 ] (see
Appendix B ). These procedures differ either from the initial set of
states to be cloned or from symmetry considerations. In general, an
optimality condition of the cloning procedure is obtained via the
maximization of the fidelity between the original qubit and each final
clone state. We will show how to perform sequentially both the universal
symmetric [ BH96 , GM97 ] and the economical phase-covariant symmetric
quantum cloning [ DM03 , BDM05 ] from one qubit to @xmath clones. In the
first case, a global unitary evolution transforms any input state @xmath
in a set of @xmath clones whose individual reduced states @xmath carry
maximal fidelity with respect to @xmath : @xmath . This cloning
procedure is fully described by the evolution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the initial blank state, @xmath and @xmath denotes
the normalized completely symmetric state with @xmath qubits in state
@xmath and @xmath qubits in state @xmath . As a relevant feature it must
be noticed that the presence of @xmath additional so-called anticlones
is necessary in order to perform this cloning procedure with the optimal
fidelity. The anticlone state @xmath refers to the fact that they
transform under rotations as the complex conjugate representation. For
concreteness sake we have chosen @xmath in coincidence with the seminal
paper by Bužek and Hillery [ BH96 ] , where @xmath . In the second case,
motivated by quantum cryptoanalysis, the goal is to clone only those
states belonging to the equatorial plane of the Bloch sphere, i.e. those
such that @xmath . Furthermore, we have only focused upon the cases
where no anticlones are needed (hence the term economical). Under this
assumption, imposing the purity of the joint state, the number of clones
@xmath must be odd [ DM03 ] . The cloning evolution is now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and where we have followed the same convention as above. In
order to employ the sequential ancilla-qubit device as a quantum cloning
machine we will firstly elucidate the minimal dimension required for the
ancilla. The basic idea is to express the final states ( 12.2 ) and (
12.3 ) in its MPS form, following Vidal’s recipe [ Vid03 ] (see Appendix
C ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

We identify the matrices @xmath by matching indices in expressions (
12.1 ) and ( 12.4 ). The indices @xmath run from @xmath to @xmath ,
where @xmath , @xmath denoting the rank of the reduced density matrix
@xmath for the bipartite partition @xmath of the composite system [
Vid03 ] . To clone an arbitrary input qubit state @xmath , we exploit
linearity and determine the minimal dimension @xmath of the ancilla to
perform the cloning for the state @xmath and then similarly for the
state @xmath . Then we combine both results in a single ancilla to
obtain its desired minimal dimension @xmath . Let us focus upon the
symmetric universal cloning of @xmath . To determine the minimal
dimension @xmath of the ancilla we need to compute @xmath , which can be
undertaken without the exact MPS expression for the state. We need some
previous results:

###### Proposition 1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be multipartite states of the same system related
through an invertible local operator @xmath for the partition @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recalling that the rank of @xmath coincides with the rank of the
coefficient matrix @xmath of the corresponding state for that partition
@xmath , the application of the invertible local operator @xmath amounts
to changing the local basis of each part @xmath and @xmath in which the
coefficient matrix is expressed. Since the rank is invariant under local
changes of basis, we will have @xmath for the bipartite partition @xmath
. Hence @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 2.

Let @xmath be the coefficient matrix of the state ( 12.2 ) for the
partition @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

In virtue of the preceding proposition and using the invertible local
operator @xmath , where @xmath denotes the normalized symmetrizing
operator for @xmath qubits, we only need to compute the rank of the
coefficient matrix of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the states are no longer completely symmetrized. Given the
orthonormality of the involved states and the number of different
components ( @xmath ), it is clear that there are only @xmath different
rows, whereas the rest are all null, i.e. @xmath . ∎

Finally we prove the following

###### Proposition 3.

Let @xmath be the coefficient matrix of state ( 12.2 ) for the partition
@xmath , where @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

The key point is to realize that the matrices @xmath are obtained from
@xmath by appropriately adjoining rows or columns to make them longer.
From the preceding proof it is clear that there are only @xmath
different rows in @xmath , the rest being all null, thus the reordering
procedure to build the other matrices cannot increase the former rank.
Hence the stated result. ∎

With all these propositions it elementarily follows that @xmath ,
i.e. that the minimal dimension @xmath to clone the @xmath state is
@xmath , namely the number of clones to produce. Repeating the same
argument for the initial state @xmath we also conclude that the minimal
dimension of the ancilla to clone the @xmath state is @xmath , as
expected. Now we must combine both results to find @xmath for an
arbitrary unknown state @xmath . It is a wrong guessing to think that it
should also be @xmath and, consequently, a different scheme must be
given. The MPS expression of ( 12.2 ) for the original state @xmath
determines the @xmath -dimensional matrices @xmath , whereas the
corresponding MPS expression for the original state @xmath determines
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath can be calculated explicitly and will play an
important role below.

We propose now to double the dimension of the ancilla, @xmath , in order
to implement a deterministic protocol of sequential quantum cloning.

###### Protocol 1.

Let @xmath . Then

1.   Encode the unknown state @xmath in the initial ancilla state @xmath
    .

2.   Allow each qubit @xmath to interact with the ancilla according to
    the preceding @xmath -dimensional matrices @xmath .

3.   Perform a generalized Hadamard transformation upon the ancilla :

      -- -------- -- ----------
                     
         @xmath      (12.10a)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Note that the choice @xmath (based on pedagogical reasons) could be
    changed, equivalently, to @xmath . In this way, Eq. ( 12.10a ) would
    not display entangled states but simple linear superpositions.

4.   Perform a measurement upon the ancilla in the local basis @xmath .

5.   If the result is @xmath (which happens with probability @xmath ),
    the qubits are already in the desired state; if the result is @xmath
    (probability @xmath ), perform a local @xmath phase gate upon each
    qubit, then they will end up in the desired state.

###### Proof.

After the first two steps, the joint state of the ancilla and the qubits
is @xmath , where originally @xmath . After the Hadamard rotation (step
iii), this state becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The remaining steps follow immediately from this expresion and from
linearity [ GM97 ] .

∎

Notice that despite the measurement process in step (iv), the final
desired state is obtained with probability @xmath . In summary, the
minimal dimension @xmath of the ancilla for cloning @xmath qubits is
@xmath , i.e. it grows linearly with the number of clones even although
the dimension of their space grows exponentially ( @xmath ). The reader
can straightforwardly convince himself that were we to clone a @xmath
-dimensional system, the minimal dimension for the ancilla would be
@xmath , with an obvious generalization of the preceding argument. For
the symmetric phase-covariant cloning, the same arguments can be
reproduced provided we realize that the first term of the r.h.s. of Eq.
( 12.3 ) can adopt a similar form to ( 12.2 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath for all @xmath , and similarly for the second term. Thus
for symmetric phase-covariant cloning the minimal dimension for the
ancilla is @xmath . We see that the dimension of the ancilla @xmath also
grows linearly with the number of clones, although it is now lesser than
above. This is a direct consequence of reducing the set of possible
original states to clone.

#### 12.2 A specific illustrative case: @xmath

In this section we explicitly compute the isometries for the universal
symmetric quantum cloning from 1 qubit to 3 clones. We will show how the
dimension of the ancilla is indeed @xmath . We will be mainly using the
formalism for computing the MPS form of an arbitrary multipartite state
by Vidal [ Vid03 ] . The final state after the cloning procedure for the
@xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Along this section we will be using mainly the notation
@xmath instead of @xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath for the sake of
clarity, although sometimes and in the following section we will switch
from one notation to the other. , according to Gisin and Massar [ GM97 ]
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now compute the Schmidt decomposition for the entangled state ( 12.12
) in the partition @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the Schmidt vectors of the subsystem
corresponding to qubits 2 to 5, and @xmath , @xmath are the Schmidt
coefficients, given by @xmath , @xmath .

According to the protocol developed in [ Vid03 ] , we have, following
its notation, (see Eq. ( 12.4 ) above)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.14)
     @xmath      (12.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We proceed now iteratively, computing the Schmidt decomposition for
state ( 12.12 ) in the partition @xmath . It easily follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (12.16)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the Schmidt vectors of the
subsystem corresponding to qubits 3 to 5, and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are the Schmidt coefficients, given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

According to [ Vid03 ] , we have in this case

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.17)
     @xmath      (12.18)
                 (12.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We proceed now with the partition @xmath of the state @xmath . Eq. (
12.12 ) is indeed the Schmidt decomposition for this partition, where
the Schmidt vectors of the subsystem associated to qubits 4 and 5 are
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

With the notation @xmath we denote here the combination maximally
symmetrized.

Following [ Vid03 ] , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.20)
     @xmath      (12.21)
                 (12.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally we compute the Schmidt decomposition of @xmath in the remaining
partition @xmath , which turns to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (12.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Schmidt vectors associated to the subsystem of qubit 5 are
@xmath and @xmath , and the Schmidt coefficients are @xmath , @xmath .

In this case we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.25)
     @xmath      (12.26)
                 (12.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally we have the remaining matrices @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (12.28)
  -- -- -- ---------

The last step left is to match the @xmath and @xmath with the @xmath
(isometries) of Eq. ( 12.1 ). An easy comparison between Eqs. ( 12.1 )
and ( 12.4 ) yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (12.29)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The interested reader may straightforwardly check the isometry condition
@xmath , @xmath that the matrices verify, as expected. Some remarks are
to be pointed out:

-   The dimension of the ancilla Hilbert space is in this case @xmath
    (the matrices @xmath explicitly calculated have dimension 3 @xmath
    3), in concordance with the results of the previous section: the
    dimension @xmath equals the number of clones @xmath for the
    universal symmetric cloning (3, in this particular example). The
    global dimension for this case, @xmath , is, according to our
    protocol stated in previous section, @xmath .

-   Notice the change of order between the matrices @xmath and Vidal’s
    matrices @xmath and @xmath : we have expressed the @xmath matrices
    in order to be applied from right to left, sequentially, upon the
    initial state @xmath . The matrices 1 to 3 create the three clones
    in a highly entangled state with the ancilla, and the remaining
    matrices 4 and 5 uncouple the clones from the ancilla by creating
    the two anticlones. The final state of the ancilla after successive
    application of the five matrices @xmath results @xmath , as the
    interested reader may readily check.

-   The previous matrices are the corresponding to the sequential
    generation of state ( 12.12 ), which is the cloning of state @xmath
    . In order to clone an arbitrary superposition @xmath , according to
    our protocol, the sequential generation of the cloning of state
    @xmath is needed. This state is obtained from state ( 12.12 ) by
    doing the substitution @xmath . Accordingly, the matrices @xmath are
    obtained from the ones ( 12.29 ) by @xmath , where @xmath . The
    global unitary operations are 6 @xmath 6 matrices built from @xmath
    and @xmath by diagonal blocks, according to our protocol 1 .

#### 12.3 Isometries in the general case @xmath

For the symmetric universal cloning @xmath we now give in detail the
@xmath dimensional matrices @xmath driving us to a concrete sequential
scheme. The procedure for the calculation in this case follows the same
lines of the previous example, although here the method relies in a
highly symbolic notation based on maximally symmetrized states.

To explicitly obtain the isometries, we firstly compute the Schmidt
decomposition (see Appendix A ) for the multipartite state @xmath ,
where here @xmath denotes the maximally-symmetrized state with @xmath
qubits @xmath and @xmath qubits @xmath . We will be interested in the
Schmidt decomposition for the @xmath bipartition, that gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath follow directly from straightforward
combinatorics.

Expression ( LABEL:isoMeq1 ) will be the basis for our computation of
the isometries.

We consider now the general state with @xmath clones and @xmath
anticlones for the initial qubit @xmath [ GM97 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.31)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the first vector in the explicitly indicated tensor product
corresponds to the clones and the second one to the anticlones, and
@xmath .

The Schmidt decomposition of ( 12.31 ) for the @xmath bipartition, is,
according to ( LABEL:isoMeq1 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (12.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The (normalized) Schmidt vectors of the previous decomposition
associated to the subspace of qubits @xmath are directly read from it
and are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (12.33)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (12.34)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and @xmath .

According to the protocol developed in [ Vid03 ] , we have, following
its notation, (see Eq. ( 12.4 ) above)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.35)
     @xmath      (12.36)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now proceed iteratively, just as in the @xmath case shown above. We
compute the Schmidt decomposition for every bipartition, @xmath , @xmath
, extract the Schmidt coefficients, @xmath , and the Schmidt vectors,
@xmath , and, applying Vidal’s recipe, we obtain the @xmath matrices. We
made the calculation along this lines, by splitting it in 3 steps: the
partitions with @xmath , that create the clones. The partition with
@xmath , that attains the multiqubit state of the clones with highest
entanglement with the ancilla of all the sequential protocol, and the
remaining partitions with @xmath , that create the anticlones. The need
for this splitting of the computation is due to the different role of
clones and anticlones: they are not mutually symmetric. The result of
our computation is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the coefficients @xmath are the normalization coefficients of the
corresponding Schmidt vectors as outlined for the @xmath case in this
chapter, and previously in this section. They are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.37)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The corresponding isometries @xmath for the universal symmetric cloning
@xmath of qubits, built upon the @xmath matrices and @xmath vectors,
according to our protocol, are given in Table 12.1 .

The matrices @xmath coincide also with the ones for the symmetric
phase-covariant cloning just by doing the substitutions @xmath and
@xmath .

Here @xmath (we use the convention @xmath if @xmath ) and @xmath .
Complementarily, we also have @xmath , where by @xmath we indicate
@xmath . The reader can readily check that the minimal dimension for the
ancilla is @xmath . When sequentially applying these matrices to the
initial state @xmath of the ancilla, one can check, as expected, that if
we were to stop at the @xmath th step, the @xmath clones would have
already been produced with the desired properties, although in a highly
entangled state with the ancilla. To arrive at a final uncoupled state,
the remaining @xmath anticlones must be operated upon by the ancilla.

In conclusion, following the idea that some (certainly not all) unitary
operations upon a multiqubit state can be implemented sequentially by
successive interactions between each qubit and an ancilla, we have shown
how to reproduce both the symmetric universal and symmetric
phase-covariant cloning operations. For the universal cloning we have
proved that the minimal dimension for the ancilla must be @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the number of clones, thus showing a linear dependence.
The original state must be encoded in a @xmath dimensional state. For
the phase-covariant case, the dimension @xmath of the ancilla can be
reduced to @xmath , even lower. In both cases, the ancilla ends up
uncoupled to the qubits. Along similar lines, this sequential cloning
protocol can be adapted to other proposals, such as asymmetric universal
quantum cloning or other state-dependent cloning. This procedure can
have notable experimental interest, since it provides a systematic
method to furnish any multiqubit state using only sequential two-body
(qubit-ancilla) operations.

### Chapter 13 Inductive classification of multipartite entanglement
under stochastic local operations and classical communication

A comprehensive understanding of entanglement is still lacking, mainly
because it is a highly counterintuitive feature of quantum systems
(non-separability [ Bel87 ] ) and because its analysis can be undertaken
under different, although complementary, standpoints. As prominent
examples the subjects of deciding in full generality whether a given
state carries entanglement or not and how much entanglement the system
should be attributed to are vivid open questions (cf. e.g. [ Bru02 ] and
references therein). This state of affairs is critical in multipartite
systems, where most applications find their desired utility.

Among others, part of the efforts are being dedicated to classify under
diversely motivated criteria the types of entanglement which a
multipartite system can show. It is in this sense desirable,
independently of these criteria, to have classification methods valid
for any number @xmath of entangled systems. One of these most celebrated
criteria to carry out such a classification was provided in [ DVC00 ] .
In physical terms Dür et al. defined an entanglement class as the set of
pure states which can be interrelated through stochastic local
operations and classical communications (SLOCC hereafter) or
equivalently, as those pure states which can carry out the same
quantum-informational tasks with non-null possibly different
probabilities. They also proved the mathematical counterpart of this
characterization: two states @xmath and @xmath of a given system belong
to the same entanglement class if, and only if, there exist invertible
local operators (ILO’s hereafter; that is, nonsingular matrices), which
we agree on denoting as @xmath such that @xmath . Moreover, they
provided the first classification under this criterion of tripartite
multiqubit entanglement, giving birth to the two well-known genuine
entanglement triqubit classes named as @xmath and @xmath classes. Later
on, exploiting some accidental facts in group theory, Verstraete et al.
[ VDMV02 ] gave rise to the classification of @xmath -qubit states.

Regretfully none of the previous works allowed one to succeed in
obtaining a generalizable method. In the second case, the exploitation
of a singular fact such as the isomorphism @xmath is clearly useless in
a general setting; in the first case, the use of quantitative
entanglement measures specifically designed for three qubits, as the
@xmath tangle [ CKW00 ] , to discern among different entanglement
classes discourages one to follow up the same trend, since we would have
to be able to build more generic entanglement measures, per se a
formidable task. However, Verstraete et al. [ VDM03 ] succeeded in this
approach by introducing the so-called normal forms, namely those pure
states such that all reduced local operators are proportional to the
identity matrix. These authors also provided a systematic, mostly
numerical, constructive procedure to find the ILO’s bringing an
arbitrary pure state to a normal form. Furthermore, the use of these
normal forms allowed them to introduce entanglement measures
(entanglement monotones [ Vid00 ] , indeed), which offered the
possibility to quantify the amount of entanglement in the original
state. For completeness’ sake let us recall that classification under
SLOCC is coarser than that using only local unitaries, that is in which
every @xmath is unitary. Nevertheless relevant results in this realm can
be found in the literature [ GRB98 , AAC @xmath 00 , CHS00 , GAFW06 ] .

Here we offer [ LLSS06 ] an alternative and complementary approach to
the classification under SLOCC based on an analysis of the singular
value decomposition (SVD) of the coefficient matrix of the pure state in
an arbitrary product basis. The coefficient matrix is chosen according
to the partition @xmath with the subsequent goal of establishing a
recursive procedure allowing one to elucidating the entanglement classes
under SLOCC provided such a classification is known with one less qubit.
The key feature in this scheme is the structure of the right singular
subspace, i.e. of the subspace generated by the right singular vectors
of the coefficient matrix, set up according to the entanglement classes
which its generators belong to. As a secondary long-term goal, the
approach seeks possible connections to the matrix product state (MPS)
formalism ( cf. [ Eck05 , PGVWC06 ] and multiple references therein),
which is becoming increasingly ubiquitous in different fields such as
spin chains [ AKLT87 ] , classical simulations of quantum entangled
systems [ Vid03 ] , density-matrix renormalization group techniques [
VPC04 ] and sequential generation of entangled multiqubit states [ SSV
@xmath 05 , SHW @xmath 06 ] .

This chapter uses a more mathematical notation. The canonical
orthonormal basis in @xmath will be denoted by @xmath (correspondingly
in physics the kets @xmath ). Normalization is not relevant in
elucidating the entanglement class which a state belongs to. Thus we
will deal with unnormalized vectors and non-unit-determinant ILO’s. In
the SVD of an arbitrary matrix (cf. appendix), @xmath and @xmath will
denote the left and right unitary matrix, whereas @xmath will stand for
the diagonal possibly rectangular matrix with the singular values as
entries. In the multiqubit cases, we will agree on denoting by small
Greek letters @xmath vectors belonging to @xmath , whereas capital Greek
letters @xmath will denote a generic entangled state in @xmath .

The chapter is organized as follows. In section 13.1 the entanglement of
two qubits is revisited with a reformulation of the Schmidt
decomposition criterion in terms of the singular subspaces. In section
13.2 the extension to the three-qubit case is developed in detail and
the principles of the generalization to multipartite and
arbitrary-dimension systems are discussed in section 13.3 . Some
concluding remarks close the chapter.

#### 13.1 Bipartite entanglement

##### 13.1.1 The Schmidt decomposition criterion revisited

The determination of entanglement of pure states of bipartite systems in
any dimensions, in general, and in two dimensions (qubits), in
particular, was solved long ago with the aid of the well-known Schmidt
decomposition [ Sch06 , EK95 ] (see Appendix A ), by which any bipartite
state can be written as a biorthogonal combination

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath denotes the dimension of
subsystem @xmath . If @xmath except for only one index @xmath , then the
state is a product state; on the contrary, if @xmath for two or more
indices, then the state is an entangled state. Furthermore, @xmath
coincides with the common eigenvalues of both reduced density operators.
Thus, to practically determine the entangled or separable character of a
given pure state all we must do is to compute the spectrum of @xmath or
@xmath or equivalently to analyze the dimensionality of their ranges.
This is the backbone in the study of @xmath partite entanglement carried
out in [ DVC00 ] .

Followingly in order to pave the way for a generalization to
multipartite systems, we will reformulate the Schmidt decomposition
criterion for bipartite systems focusing upon the subspace generated by
the singular vectors. We need the next

###### Definition 5.

We will denote by @xmath (resp. @xmath ) the subspace generated by the
left (resp. right) singular vectors, i.e. @xmath (resp. @xmath ).

We can now state the following

###### Theorem 1.

Let @xmath and @xmath denote the matrix of coefficients of @xmath in an
arbitrary common product basis. Then @xmath is a product state if and
only if @xmath (or alternatively @xmath ).

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath denote bases in @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Then any vector @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the complex coeficients of @xmath , which we arrange
as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix @xmath always admits a SVD, given by @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath are unitary matrices and @xmath is a diagonal matrix with
entries @xmath (the singular values, indeed). Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting ( 13.4 ) into ( 13.2 ) and identifying new bases @xmath and
@xmath we arrive at the well known Schmidt decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number of non-null singular values coincides with the rank of @xmath
, which in turn coincides with the dimensions of @xmath and @xmath .

∎

From the proof we can deduce a practical method to recognize where a
bipartite system is entangled or not:

###### Corollary 1.

Let @xmath denote the state of a bipartite quantum system and @xmath its
coefficient matrix in an arbitrary product basis. Then @xmath is a
product state if, and only if, @xmath .

##### 13.1.2 Classification of two-qubit entanglement under SLOCC

We only need one further tool to find the classification of bipartite
entanglement under SLOCC, which is established as follows:

###### Proposition 4.

Let @xmath denote two two-qubit states related by SLOCC, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are non-singular operators upon @xmath . Then
their corresponding coefficient matrices @xmath in an arbitrary product
basis are related through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Just substitute @xmath in ( 13.6 ) and identify indices. ∎

The key idea in our analysis is to recognize the effect of the ILO’s
@xmath upon the singular vectors. If @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is a left
(resp. right) singular vector for the matrix coefficient @xmath , then
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) is a left (resp. right) ‘‘singular vector’’ ¹ ¹ 1
Notice that they cannot rigorously be singular vectors, since the ILO’s
are not in general unitary, thus they do not preserve the orthogonality
of @xmath and @xmath . We will understand these “singular vectors” in a
loose sense, in which they substitute the original singular vectors in
the SVD of the coefficient matrix. for the new matrix coefficient @xmath
. In order to ease the notation, we will agree hereafter on relating
@xmath and @xmath through @xmath , which allows us to drop the transpose
and Hermitian conjugation ² ² 2 The transpose and Hermitian conjugation
are referred to the chosen product basis in which @xmath is constructed.
in future considerations.

The case of two qubits is elementary, since there is no much space to
discuss. The bases in which the coefficient matrix will be expressed are
the canonical orthonormal basis @xmath in @xmath . Only two options are
present: either @xmath or @xmath . In the first case, after choosing
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.8b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

the new coefficient matrix will turn into @xmath , which corresponds to
the product state @xmath . We will agree on stating that @xmath belongs
to the entanglement class denoted by @xmath .

In the second case, where @xmath , after choosing @xmath and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (13.9a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (13.9b)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

the new coefficient matrix will be @xmath , which corresponds to the
entangled state @xmath . Now we say that @xmath belongs to the class
@xmath .

The reader can readily check by simple inspection how in the first case
the canonical matrix @xmath has rank one, whereas in the second it has
rank @xmath , as expected. In summary, only two classes are possible,
namely @xmath and @xmath .

#### 13.2 Tripartite entanglement

The classification of tripartite pure states is performed along the same
lines, namely choosing the ILO’s @xmath so that the final coefficient
matrix reduces to a canonical one. In order to find such canonical
matrices, we must be exhaustive in the considerations of all
possibilities when discussing about @xmath and @xmath .

The analysis of tripartite entanglement can be undertaken upon three
possible coefficient matrices, arising from the three different ways to
group the indices, that is, since @xmath , where as before @xmath
denotes the canonical orthonormal basis in @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.10c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

There is no loss of generality in choosing one of them, since the
analysis will be exhaustive. Hereafter we will choose @xmath . Notice
that now the left singular vectors of @xmath belong to @xmath whereas
the right singular vectors are in @xmath . Also, we immediately realize
that only two possibles options arise, namely @xmath or @xmath , since
there are at most two positive singular values. The recursivity appears
when classifying the different structures which the subspace @xmath can
show. The classification of these subspaces is performed according to
the entanglement classes which their generators belong to. In order to
do that we need the following result, which was firstly proved in the
context of entanglement theory in [ STV98 ] . We offer an alternative
proof in order to illustrate our methods.

###### Proposition 5.

Any two-dimensional subspace in @xmath contains at least one product
vector.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a two-dimensional subspace of @xmath . With no loss of
generality two entangled vectors can be chosen as generators of @xmath
with coefficient matrices given by @xmath and @xmath being an arbitrary
rank-2 matrix in the product canonical basis. Then it is always possible
to find non-null complex numbers @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath has
rank one ³ ³ 3 Notice that @xmath must be chosen to be an eigenvalue of
@xmath . . ∎

In other words, this proposition shows that @xmath always equals either
@xmath or @xmath , where implicit are the assumptions that different
indices denote linear independence and in the last case only one product
unit vector can be found. Thus, with the same convention, the right
singular subspace @xmath can show six different structures, namely
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We can now state
our result, already contained in [ DVC00 ] with different criteria:

###### Theorem 2.

Let @xmath be the pure state of a tripartite system. Then @xmath can be
reduced through SLOCC to one of the following six states, which
corresponds to the six possible entanglement classes, according to the
following table:

###### Proof.

We discuss depending on @xmath :

1.  @xmath . In this case, @xmath . Choose the ILO’s @xmath , @xmath so
    that

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                       
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.11a)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.11b)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.11c)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

    Then the new coefficient matrix will be

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.12)
                  @xmath   @xmath      (13.13)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    which corresponds to the state @xmath , and where the dots @xmath
    indicates the irrelevant character of that entry.

2.  @xmath . In this case @xmath . Choose the ILO’s so that

      -- -------- -- -------- -- ----------
                                 
         @xmath                  (13.14a)
         @xmath      @xmath      (13.14b)
         @xmath      @xmath      (13.14c)
      -- -------- -- -------- -- ----------

    Then the new coefficient matrix will be

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.15)
                  @xmath   @xmath      (13.16)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    which corresponds to the state @xmath .

3.  @xmath . In this case @xmath and @xmath , where the matrix @xmath
    has rank @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are linear independent
    (orthonormal, indeed). Choose the ILO’s so that

      -- -------- -- ----------
                     
         @xmath      (13.17a)
         @xmath      (13.17b)
         @xmath      (13.17c)
         @xmath      (13.17d)
         @xmath      (13.17e)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Then the new coefficient matrix will be

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13.18)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

    which corresponds to the state @xmath .

4.  @xmath . In this case @xmath and @xmath , where the matrix @xmath
    has rank @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are linear independent
    (orthonormal, indeed). Choose the ILO’s so that

      -- -------- -- ----------
                     
         @xmath      (13.19a)
         @xmath      (13.19b)
         @xmath      (13.19c)
         @xmath      (13.19d)
         @xmath      (13.19e)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Then the new coefficient matrix will be

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13.20)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

    which corresponds to the state @xmath .

5.  @xmath . In this case @xmath and @xmath , where the matrix @xmath
    has rank @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are linear independent
    (orthonormal, indeed). Choose the ILO’s so that

      -- -------- -- ----------
                     
         @xmath      (13.21a)
         @xmath      (13.21b)
         @xmath      (13.21c)
         @xmath      (13.21d)
         @xmath      (13.21e)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Then the new coefficient matrix will be

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13.22)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

    which corresponds to the state @xmath .

6.  @xmath . In this notation, implicit is the assumption that only one
    product unit vector can be found in @xmath . In this case @xmath can
    be chosen so that @xmath . Thus the singular vectors can always be
    expressed as @xmath and @xmath , where the matrix @xmath has rank
    @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are linear independent
    (orthonormal, indeed). Choose the ILO’s so that

      -- -------- -- ----------
                     
         @xmath      (13.23a)
         @xmath      (13.23b)
         @xmath      (13.23c)
         @xmath      (13.23d)
         @xmath      (13.23e)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Then the new coefficient matrix will be

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13.24)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

    which corresponds to the state @xmath .

Since there is no more options for the subspace @xmath we have already
considered all possible alternatives. ∎

In conclusion, we have found that there are six classes of entanglement,
named after [ DVC00 ] as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
theorem also indicates how to practically classify a given state @xmath
: compute the SVD of its coefficient matrix and elucidate the structure
of @xmath . We include a further proposition comprising the practical
implementation of this result. We need to introduce the following
definition.

###### Definition 6.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary vector. We associate a two-dimensional matrix
@xmath to @xmath by defining

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This definition will be mainly applied to the right singular vectors of
the coefficient matrix @xmath . As usual, the singular values of @xmath
will be denoted by @xmath , in nonincreasing order, and @xmath denotes
the spectrum of a matrix @xmath . Our proposal to implement the
preceding result is

###### Theorem 3.

Let @xmath denote the pure state of a tripartite system and @xmath its
coefficient matrix according to the partitions @xmath (cf. ( 13.10a )-(
13.10c )). Then

1.   If @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath belongs to the @xmath class.

2.   If @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath belongs to the @xmath
    class.

3.   If @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath belongs to the @xmath
    class.

4.   If @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath belongs to the @xmath
    class.

5.   If @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , @xmath belongs to the @xmath
    class.

6.   If @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is
    non-degenerate, @xmath belongs to the @xmath class.

7.   If @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is
    degenerate, @xmath belongs to the @xmath class.

8.   If @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is
    non-degenerate, @xmath belongs to the @xmath class.

9.   If @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is
    degenerate, @xmath belongs to the @xmath class.

###### Proof.

The first four cases are elementary, since it is a matter of detection
of the vector which factorizes. The final five cases correspond to true
tripartite entangled states. If @xmath for @xmath , it is clear that
there exist two product vectors belonging to @xmath , thus @xmath
belongs to the @xmath class. If @xmath and @xmath we need to check
whether an ILO applied upon the first qubit can reduce the rank of the
transformed @xmath . As it can be deduced from the preceding proofs, an
ILO upon the first qubit amounts to constructing a linear combination
between the two right singular vectors, which is equivalent to find new
matrices @xmath , with @xmath . If @xmath , then by multiplying this
expression to the left by @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is immediate to realize that it is possible to reduce the rank of
@xmath to @xmath and to choose @xmath such that @xmath is nonsingular
provided the spectrum of @xmath is non-degenerate, in which case @xmath
belongs to the @xmath class. If the spectrum is degenerate, thus both
eigenvalues being null, no further reduction is possible and @xmath
belongs to the @xmath class.
Finally if @xmath , reasoning along similar lines if both eigenvalues of
@xmath are equal, only one rank can be reduced keeping the
nonsingularity of @xmath and @xmath belongs again to the @xmath class,
whereas if the eigenvalues are different, both ranks can be reduced to
@xmath keeping the nonsingularity of @xmath and @xmath belongs to the
@xmath class. ∎

As a final remark let us indicate how close, despite the apparent
differences in the approach, our analysis runs to that performed in [
DVC00 ] : the ranges of the reduced density operators are indeed
generated by the corresponding singular vectors, and the study of these
ranges drove them and has driven us to the same final result. The change
of method is motivated by the attempt to find a generalizable criterion
not using entanglement measures specifically built upon the number of
qubits of the system, such as the @xmath tangle [ CKW00 ] . With this
approach it is not necessary to consider at any stage the reduced
density matrices and entanglement measures upon them.

#### 13.3 Generalizations (@xmath)

The generalization of the preceding approach to pure states of arbitrary
multipartite systems is two-folded. On the one hand, the generalization
to multiqubit states can be implemented inductively:

###### Theorem 4.

If the entanglement classes under SLOCC are known for @xmath qubits, the
corresponding entanglement classes for @xmath qubits are also known.

###### Proof.

We proceed by induction. We have proved in preceding sections that this
statement is true for @xmath and have explicitly found the entanglement
classes for @xmath . For a given @xmath -qubit system, write the
coefficient matrix @xmath . Because of the induction hypothesis one
knows in advance the classification of the right singular subspaces of
@xmath according to @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath , where each
@xmath and @xmath belong to one (possibly the same) of the entanglement
classes of @xmath qubits. Choose the ILO’s @xmath so that the two first
columns of @xmath (the transformed right singular vectors) are expressed
as linear combinations of the canonical vectors of the entanglement
classes corresponding to the structure of @xmath and choose the ILO
@xmath so that @xmath drops out as many non-null entries as possible
(typically @xmath will be the inverse of a rank @xmath submatrix of
@xmath ). The result is the canonical matrix for an entanglement class
of @xmath qubits. ∎

There is an important remark in the preceding inductive construction,
already stated in [ DVC00 ] and explicitly shown in [ VDMV02 ] : there
will be a continuous range of states with a similar right singular
subspace but with no ILO’s connecting them. Let us illustrate this
peculiar fact with an explicit example. When considering @xmath partite
entanglement, there will exist @xmath a priori structures of the right
singular subspace of the coefficient matrix, arising from @xmath
possible one-dimensional right singular subspaces @xmath , where @xmath
belongs to one of the six entanglement classes of @xmath , times four
possible sites for the fourth added qubit, plus @xmath possible
bidimensional right singular subspaces @xmath , corresponding to the
@xmath ways to choose the classes for @xmath which @xmath and @xmath
belong to. An example will be @xmath , with the already convention that
only one product vector and no @xmath belongs to @xmath , i.e. @xmath ,
where the vectors with @xmath are pairwise linearly independent. In
order to only have one product vector and the rest being @xmath vectors,
we must have (up to permutations) @xmath , with @xmath .
Recalling that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.27a)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the matrix @xmath will be non-singular, it is immediate to find
ILO’s @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.28a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.28b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

which corresponds to a coefficient matrix given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.29)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the coefficients @xmath corresponds to the coordinates of the
transformed @xmath in the canonical basis. Choosing @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.30)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.31)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which corresponds to the canonical vector

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (13.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, different @xmath will yield different entanglement classes under
non-singular local operators @xmath . Notice that this vector belongs
neither to the @xmath class nor to the @xmath class nor to the @xmath
class (containing the cluster state of four qubits -see below). It is a
peculiar feature that two infinitesimally close states could belong to
distinct entanglement classes, so a deeper elucidation of this point is
on due and will be carried out also elsewhere. For the time being, we
will agree on attributing all states reducible to ( 13.32 ) by ILO’s
@xmath , independently of the particular vector @xmath , the same
entanglement properties under SLOCC and analogously for arbitrary @xmath
-partite multiqubit systems.

This allows us to find an upper bound for the number of genuine @xmath
-partite entanglement classes. Firstly, notice that e.g. the right
singular subspace @xmath in the @xmath partite case actually contains
structures with different properties, namely ⁴ ⁴ 4 As usual, different
indices denote linear independence. @xmath (and permutations), @xmath
(and permutations) and @xmath . All of them drives us to at least one
factor qubit in the final canonical state, except one, that is, there
will correspond one right singular subspace structure @xmath to each
genuine @xmath entanglement class.

This is rigorously proved in the following

###### Proposition 6.

Let @xmath be the right singular subspace of the coefficient matrix in
an arbitrary product basis of an @xmath -qubit pure state. If @xmath is
supported in a product space @xmath , then the state belongs to a
product class @xmath , where @xmath denotes a class of @xmath -partite
entanglement.

###### Proof.

Under the above assumption, @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath .
We can always find an ILO @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where also @xmath , hence @xmath , where @xmath denotes the Weyl matrix
@xmath . Since we can always write @xmath , the coefficient matrix can
always be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.34)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The remaining ILO’s @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , can always be chosen so
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.35)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes a canonical matrix of an @xmath -partite
entanglement class. This proves that the second qubit factorizes, as the
reader may check. ∎

With appropiate permutations, this result applies to any qubit.

If we denote by @xmath the number of @xmath partite entanglement
classes, there will be at most

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.36)
  -- -------- -- ---------

genuine entanglement classes for @xmath qubits. Besides, the number of
degenerate @xmath entanglement classes will be at most @xmath
(corresponding to the @xmath possible factor positions which the @xmath
th qubit can occupy), thus

###### Corollary 2.

Let @xmath denote the number of @xmath partite entanglement classes
under SLOCC. Then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.37)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equality will be in general unattainable, since, as in the case of
tripartite entanglement, only a few distinct true entanglement classes
exist, coming out from the only actually different structures which the
right singular subspace can adopt (only two in the case of tripartite
systems; cf. proposition 5 ).

Another benefit of the present approach arises when deciding whether two
states belong to the same entanglement class or not. As an example, let
us include a one-line proof that the @xmath qubit GHZ state @xmath and
the cluster state @xmath [ BR01 ] do not belong to the same class [ WZ00
] . Their respective right singular subspaces are @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath denote two-qubit Bell states. It is immediate to conclude
that they are different, since none @xmath belong to @xmath (write the
coefficient matrix of a generic vector in @xmath in terms of two
coordinates @xmath and @xmath and check that it is impossible to choose
the latter so that the matrix corresponds to @xmath ). These states
belong to the respective so-called ⁵ ⁵ 5 The first one is named by a
natural extension of the tripartite case; the second, after its
representative @xmath . @xmath and @xmath classes, characterized by the
above right singular subspaces.

On the other hand, to find a wider generalization one can focus upon
arbitrary dimensional entangled systems. The leit motiv is still the
same, with the important exception that the dimension of the right
singular subspace can grow up to the dimension of the Hilbert space of
the first subsystem. Thus the analysis of the possible structures which
@xmath may adopt is now much more complex.

We include as an illustrative immediate example the analysis of all
entanglement classes under SLOCC of any bipartite @xmath -dimensional
system: there exist @xmath entanglement classes, which can be denoted as
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , …, @xmath , whose canonical states will
elementarily be @xmath , for each class @xmath . They correspond to
canonical matrices given by @xmath , so that we can state the following

###### Theorem 5.

Let @xmath be the pure state of a bipartite quantum system with
coefficient matrix in an arbitrary product basis denoted by @xmath .
Then @xmath belongs to the @xmath class, @xmath , if, and only if,
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Choose @xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then the coefficient matrix (in blocks) will turn out to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (13.40)
  -- -------- -- ---------

∎

For more general cases, the difference stems solely in the higher
computational complexity.

We have developed a recursive inductive criterion to classify
entanglement under SLOCC in multipartite systems in pure states which
allows one to find the entanglement classes for @xmath qubits provided
this classification is known for @xmath qubits. The method rests on the
analysis of the right singular subspace of their coefficient matrix,
which is chosen according to the partition @xmath , hence a @xmath
rectangular matrix. Then one must elucidate the classification of the
one- and two-dimensional right singular subspaces according to the
entanglement classes which their generators belong to. As a consequence,
this construction reveals a systematic way to detect the entanglement
class of a given state without resorting to quantitative measures of
entanglement. In arbitrary-dimensional generalizations, the same scheme
must be followed with the exception that the dimension of the right
singular subspaces is higher and their structure now depends on several
generators.

For @xmath it has been showed that within each right singular subspace
structure, there could exist a continuous infinity of states not
connected through invertible local operators. Additionally, up to this
continuous degree of freedom within each right singular subspace
structure, we have found an upper bound for the number of classes on
@xmath qubits in terms of the number of classes of @xmath qubits.

#### 13.4 The @xmath classes

Here we give, in Table 13.2 and without explicit calculation, our result
for the @xmath entanglement classes under SLOCC according to our method.
The specific details of the calculation may be found in [ LLSS07a ] .

Agreeing to consider each structure of @xmath as a single entanglement
class, we have found @xmath degenerate and @xmath genuine classes
(totally @xmath classes), where permutation is explicitly included in
the counting. Taking into account the permutation among the qubits,
@xmath genuine classes can be considered, recopiled in table 13.2 . As
expected, in most of the classes a continuous range of strictly
non-equivalent states is contained, although with similar structure.

This result allows us to predict that there will be at most @xmath
entanglement classes (permutation included) for @xmath -partite systems,
@xmath at most genuine and @xmath at most degenerate (cf. [ LLSS06 ] ).
This classification stands up as a formidable task.

As a final remark, let us conjecture that a possible connection with the
MPS formalism is probable to exist. In this formalism ( cf. [ Eck05 ,
PGVWC06 ] and multiple references therein) any pure state is written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that adjoining a further @xmath -th qubit amounts to adjoining a
further @xmath matrix in the trace giving the coefficients. In the
analysis carried out above, this last added qubit is equivalent to
increase the dimension of the right singular subspace @xmath . Our
conjecture is that the structure of @xmath should be read from the
properties of the @xmath matrices @xmath , so that the succesion of
structures of @xmath should run parallel to that of the matrices @xmath
.

### Chapter 14 Conclusions

In this Thesis I have obtained a series of results related to quantum
entanglement. The interest of entanglement is manifest, both from a
fundamental point of view in quantum mechanics, or in order to process
and transmit information with quantum systems more efficiently than with
classical ones. Its study is thus very relevant, and here I have
contributed with some developments that I believe may help in the
understanding of this mysterious physical property of quantum systems.
In order to do this, I have mainly followed three research lines related
to three different aspects of entanglement:

-   Entanglement and Relativistic Quantum Theory.

    -    Dynamics of momentum entanglement in lowest-order QED [ LLS06b
        ] .

        We have analyzed the momentum entanglement generation among two
        electrons which interact in QED by exchanging virtual photons.
        We show that surprisingly, @xmath matrix theory produces
        pathological results in this case: the entanglement in Møller
        scattering would be divergent for incident particles with
        well-defined momentum. In order to manage with these
        divergences, that would be physical (entanglement is a
        measurable magnitude, with a physical meaning), we made the
        calculation for electrons with Gaussian momentum distributions
        which interact for a finite time. The divergences disappear,
        but, remarkably, the attainable entanglement would not be
        bounded from above.

    -    Generation of spin entanglement via spin-independent scattering
        [ LL06 ] .

        Here we have considered the spin entanglement among two or more
        identical particles, generated in spin-independent scattering.
        We show how the spatial degrees of freedom act as ancillas
        creating entanglement between the spins to a degree that will
        depend in general on the specific scattering geometry
        considered. This is genuine entanglement among identical
        particles as the correlations are larger than merely those
        related to antisymmetrization. We analize specifically the
        bipartite and tripartite case, showing also the degree of
        violation of Bell’s inequality as a function of the scattering
        angle. This phenomenon is unrelated to the symmetrization
        postulate but does not appear for unlike particles.

    -    Relativity of distillability [ LMDS06 ] .

        In this work we have studied the Lorentz invariance of usual
        magnitudes in quantum information, like the degree of
        entanglement or the entanglement distillability. We introduce
        the concepts of relativistic weak and strong isoentangled and
        isodistillable states that will help to clarify the role of
        Special Relativity in the quantum information theory. One of the
        most astonishing results in this work is the fact that the very
        separability or distillability concepts do not have a
        Lorentz-invariant meaning. This means that a state which is
        entangled (distillable) for one observer may be separable
        (nondistillable) for another one that propagates with a finite
        @xmath speed with respect the first one. This is an
        all-versus-nothing result, in opposition to previous results on
        relativistic quantum information, which showed that a certain
        entanglement measure was not relativistically-invariant (but
        always remained larger than zero).

    -    Dirac equation and relativistic effects in a single trapped ion
        [ LLSS07b ] .

        Here we have introduced a method for simulating Dirac equation,
        a quantum-relativistic wave equation for massive, spin- @xmath
        particles, in a single trapped ion. The four-component Dirac
        bispinor is represented by four metastable, internal, ionic
        states, which, together with the motional degrees of freedom,
        could be controlled and measured. We show that paradigmatic
        effects of relativistic quantum mechanics unaccesible to
        experimental verification in real fermions, like Zitterbewegung
        , Klein’s paradox, Wigner rotations, and spontaneous symmetry
        breaking produced by a Higgs boson, could be studied.

-   Continuous-variable entanglement.

    -    How much entanglement can be generated between two atoms by
        detecting photons? [ LGRC07 ] .

        We have proved that in experiments with two atoms an arbitrary
        degree of entanglement between them may be reached, by only
        using linear optics and postselection on the light they emit,
        when taking into account additional photons as ancillas. This is
        in contrast to all current experimental proposals for entangling
        two atoms, that were only able to obtain one ebit.

    -    Spin entanglement loss by local correlation transfer to the
        momentum [ LLS06a ] .

        We have shown the decrease of the initial spin-spin entanglement
        among two @xmath fermions or two photons, due to local
        correlation transfer from the spin to the momentum degree of
        freedom of one of the two particles. We explicitly show how this
        phenomenon works in the case where one of the two fermions
        (photons) traverses a local homogeneous magnetic field
        (optically active medium), losing its spin correlations with the
        other particle.

    -    Schmidt decomposition with complete sets of orthonormal
        functions [ LL05a ] .

        We have developed a mathematical method for computing analytic
        approximations of the Schmidt modes of a bipartite amplitude
        with continuous variables. In the existing literature various
        authors compute the Schmidt decomposition in the continuous case
        by discretizing the corresponding integral equations. We
        maintain the analytical character of the amplitude by using
        complete sets of orthonormal functions. We give criteria for the
        convergence control and analyze the efficiency of the method
        comparing it with previous results in the literature related to
        entanglement of biphotons via parametric down-conversion.

    -    Momentum entanglement in unstable systems [ LL05b ] .

        We have analyzed the dynamical generation of momentum
        entanglement in the decay of unstable non-elementary systems
        described by a decay width @xmath . We study the degree of
        entanglement as a function of time and as a function of @xmath .
        We verify that, as expected, the entanglement grows with time
        until reaching an asymptotic maximum, while, the wider the decay
        width @xmath , the lesser the asymptotic attainable
        entanglement. This is a surprising result, because a wider width
        is associated to a stronger interaction that would presumably
        create more entanglement. However, we explain this result as a
        consequence of the fact that for wider width the mean life is
        shorter, so that the system evolves faster (during a shorter
        period) and can reach lesser entanglement than with longer mean
        lives.

-   Multipartite entanglement.

    -    Sequential quantum cloning [ DLL @xmath 06 ] .

        Not every unitary operation upon a set of qubits may be
        implemented sequencially through successive interactions between
        each qubit and an ancilla. Here we have analyzed the operations
        associated to the quantum cloning sequentially implemented. We
        show that surprisingly the resources (Hilbert space dimension
        @xmath ) of the ancilla grow just linearly with the number of
        clones @xmath to obtain. Specifically, for universal symmetric
        quantum cloning we obtain @xmath and for symmetric phase
        covariant quantum cloning, @xmath . Moreover, we obtain for both
        cases the isometries for the qubit-ancilla interaction in each
        step of the sequential procedure. This proposal is easily
        generalizable to every quantum cloning protocol, and is very
        relevant from the experimental point of view: three-body
        interactions are very difficult to implement in the laboratory,
        so it is fundamental to reduce the protocols to sequential
        operations, which are mainly two-body interactions.

    -    Inductive classification of multipartite entanglement under
        SLOCC [ LLSS06 , LLSS07a ] .

        Here we have proposed an inductive procedure to classify @xmath
        -partite entanglement under stochastic local operations and
        classical communication (SLOCC) when the classification for
        @xmath qubits is supposed to be known. The method relies in the
        analysis of the coefficients matrix of the state in an arbitrary
        product basis. We illustrate this method in detail with the
        well-known bi- and tripartite cases, obtaining as a by-product a
        systematic criterion to establish the entanglement class of a
        pure state without using entanglement measures, in opposition to
        what has been done up to now. The general case is proved by
        induction, allowing us to obtain un upper bound for the number
        of entanglement classes of @xmath -partite entanglement in terms
        of the number of classes for @xmath qubits. We also give our
        complete classification of the @xmath case.

### Appendix A The Schmidt decomposition

In this appendix we briefly review the Schmidt decomposition procedure [
Sch06 , EK95 , PBP00 ] to express an arbitrary bipartite pure state as
‘sum of biorthonormal products’.

#### a.1 Finite-dimension Hilbert space

We begin with an arbitrary pure, normalized state, pertaining to a
finite dimension Hilbert space, associated to a bipartite system of
subsystems @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with no loss of generality, and @xmath , @xmath are two
orthonormal bases associated to @xmath and @xmath respectively.

Expression ( ) does not show the degree of entanglement of the state
@xmath , because one cannot tell in principle whether this state is a
product state (in which case the degree of entanglement would be zero)
or not (in which case the state would be entangled). To address this
question, and to quantify the degree of entanglement (‘how much’), it is
useful to express the state @xmath in its Schmidt decomposition. To do
this, firstly we construct the density matrix of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and now we take traces over the largest subspace (between the subspaces
related to @xmath and @xmath ), in this case, the subspace associated to
subsystem @xmath ( @xmath by hypothesis).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we diagonalize the matrix @xmath , obtaining the (transposed) matrix
@xmath of eigenvectors and the eigenvalues @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus the eigenvectors @xmath of @xmath , result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we can write ( A.2 ), expressing @xmath as a function of @xmath via
@xmath , in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we define the (unnormalized) states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus it follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expression ( A.8 ) represents the density matrix of the pure state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last step is to correctly normalize the states @xmath , getting the
orthonormal states @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the Schmidt decomposition we have obtained is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are orthonormal bases by construction and thus (
A.11 ) is a decomposition of @xmath in diagonal biorthonormal terms.

A quick inspection of ( A.11 ) tells us whether the state @xmath is
entangled or not. If the decomposition has just one term, the state is a
product: not entangled. If the decomposition has more than one term, the
state is entangled. The situation is different for some specific cases
that we do not review in this appendix, like for a pair of identical
particles [ SCK @xmath 01 , ESBL02 , GM04 ] (see Chapter 2 ) or whenever
superselection rules are present [ SVC04a , SVC04b ] .

A suitable magnitude to quantify the degree of entanglement of the state
@xmath is the entropy of entanglement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a product state, @xmath . For an entangled state, @xmath , and the
more entangled is @xmath , the greater is @xmath .

#### a.2 Infinite-dimension Hilbert space

In this section we review the Schmidt decomposition procedure for
continuous-variable states.

Now we consider a continuous pure bipartite state, pertaining to an
infinite dimension Hilbert space, associated to a bipartite system, of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are the creation operators of a particle
associated to the subsystems @xmath and @xmath which form the system.
@xmath and @xmath are continuous variables associated to @xmath and
@xmath respectively, which can represent one dimensional momenta,
energies, light frequencies, or the like. In general, @xmath , @xmath .

The amplitude @xmath can then be expressed, via the Schmidt
decomposition, as ‘sum of biorthonormal products’ in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are solutions of the integral
eigenstate equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### a.3 The singular value decomposition

We include the relevant properties of the SVD of an arbitrary matrix and
suggest the interested reader to consult e.g. [ HJ91 ] for a
comprehensive analysis of this decomposition with the corresponding
proofs. The set of @xmath complex matrices will be denoted as usual by
@xmath and the group of unitary matrices of dimension @xmath will be
denoted by @xmath . The main result can be stated as

###### Theorem 6.

(Singular Value Decomposition) Let @xmath . Then @xmath can always be
decomposed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a diagonal matrix with non-negative
entries, i.e. @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

The columns of @xmath and @xmath and the positive entries of @xmath
receive a special name:

###### Definition 7.

The columns of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) are the left (resp. right)
singular vectors of @xmath . The positive entries of @xmath are the
singular values of @xmath .

Notice that with this definition any @xmath dimensional matrix will have
@xmath left singular vectors and @xmath right singular vectors; since
the relevant singular vectors will be those associated to non-null
singular values, we agree, as usual, on referring as singular vectors
only to the latter, i.e. to those @xmath and @xmath for which @xmath .
Another common convention is the decreasing order of the singular values
in the diagonal of @xmath : @xmath .

The singular vectors are highly nonunique or equivalently there always
exist another unitary matrices @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath ,
where these new unitary matrices depend of the former @xmath and @xmath
and the multiplicities of each singular value [ HJ91 ] . However this
fact has not been exploited in Chapter 13 .

One of the main consequences of the SVD is that the rank of a given
matrix @xmath coincides with the rank of @xmath , i.e. with the number
of positive singular values, which, in turn, coincides with the
dimension of the subspace generated by the left (or right) singular
vectors. This is the basis to the analysis of entanglement of a pure
state upon its coefficient matrix in a product basis performed in
Chapter 13 .

### Appendix B Quantum cloning

In this appendix we briefly review the no-cloning theorem of quantum
mechanics and two types of approximate quantum cloning (to a certain
fidelity): Universal symmetric quantum cloning, and phase-covariant
quantum cloning. For a thorough review of the field, see [ SIGA05 ] .

#### b.1 No-cloning theorem

Quantum mechanics forbids to exactly copy quantum states while leaving
unperturbed the original state [ WZ82 , Die82 ] . This is a fundamental
property lying at the very core of quantum mechanics, and proofs can be
found based in unitarity and also in linearity.

###### Theorem 7.

(No-cloning theorem) No quantum operation exists that can duplicate with
fidelity 1 an arbitrary quantum state.

Linearity-based proof:

###### Proof.

We proceed with a reductio ad absurdum by considering the @xmath case
(two clones). We begin by considering that perfect cloning can be
realized by a unitary operation such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the blank state into which the clone would be produced,
and @xmath the internal state of the cloning machine. In particular, for
two orthogonal states @xmath and @xmath , it is verified

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

But then, due to linearity, it is verified

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is incompatible with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies that Eq. ( B.1 ) may hold for the states of an orthonormal
basis, but not for their superpositions. ∎

Unitarity-based proof:

###### Proof.

We proceed with a reductio ad absurdum by considering the @xmath case
(two clones). We begin by considering that perfect cloning can be
realized by a unitary operation such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a certain state @xmath . But for a different input state @xmath of
the cloning system, it should be verified

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking the inner product of Eqs. ( B.6 ) and ( B.7 ), and imposing
unitarity, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

But Eq. ( B.8 ) can only hold (for non-orthogonal states @xmath and
@xmath ) in case @xmath , which is impossible given that @xmath and
@xmath are different states. Eq. ( B.8 ) may only hold in case @xmath
and @xmath are orthogonal, but that would only allow to clone, as in the
previous proof, the states of an orthonormal basis, and not their
superpositions. ∎

#### b.2 Optimal approximate cloning

Since the seminal work by Bužek and Hillery [ BH96 ] , which obtained
the optimal Symmetric Universal Quantum Cloning Machine (SUQCM) for the
@xmath cloning of qubits, a lot of research has been done in order to
obtain the optimal unitary operations that clone an arbitrary quantum
state maximizing the fidelity (for a thorough review, see [ SIGA05 ] ).
Here we review the optimal SUQCM [ BH96 , GM97 ] for @xmath cloning of
qubits, and the economical phase-covariant symmetric quantum cloning [
DM03 , BDM05 ] , which has applications in cryptography. These are
mainly the two cases considered in our proposal of sequential quantum
cloning exposed in Chapter 12 .

###### Definition 8.

A Quantum Cloning Machine (QCM, unitary operation) is called universal
if it copies all the states with equal fidelity. On the other hand, it
is called symmetric if at the output all the clones have the same
fidelity.

##### b.2.1 Symmetric universal quantum cloning machine: @xmath case for
qubits

The general formula for the @xmath cloning of qubits was provided by
Gisin and Massar [ GM97 ] . The unitary operation associated to the
cloning machine is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the initial blank state, @xmath and @xmath denotes
the normalized completely symmetric state with @xmath qubits in state
@xmath and @xmath qubits in state @xmath . It must be noticed that the
presence of @xmath additional so-called anticlones is necessary in order
to perform this cloning procedure with the optimal fidelity. The
anticlone state @xmath refers to the fact that it transforms under
rotations as the complex conjugate representation.

##### b.2.2 Economical phase-covariant symmetric quantum cloning: @xmath
case for qubits

This is a case of state-dependent cloning. Here the motivation is to
clone at best an arbitrary state of a subspace of the whole Hilbert
space of one qubit. In fact, the phase-covariant QCM is defined as the
QCM that copy at best states of the equator ( @xmath ) of the Bloch
sphere, i.e., those states of the form @xmath . We have only focused
upon the cases where no anticlones are needed (hence the term
economical). Under this assumption, imposing the purity of the joint
state, the number of clones @xmath must be odd [ DM03 ] . The optimal
machine in this case was obtained by D’Ariano and Macchiavello [ DM03 ]
, and is associated to the operation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

### Appendix C Matrix-Product States

In this appendix we review the protocol [ Vid03 ] for expressing a
multipartite pure state in its matrix-product form (MPF, cf. [ Eck05 ,
PGVWC06 ] and multiple references therein), already present in spin
chains [ AKLT87 ] , classical simulations of quantum entangled systems [
Vid03 ] and density-matrix renormalization group techniques [ VPC04 ] .

We begin with a multiqubit state pertaining to a Hilbert space @xmath ,
expressed in the computational basis,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our aim is to obtain its MPF, i.e., to express it in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are two- and three-tensors and @xmath are vectors. The
indices @xmath and @xmath take values in @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, being @xmath . Here @xmath is the rank of the reduced
density matrix @xmath of the partition @xmath of the multipartite state
( C.1 ).

In order to obtain Eq. ( C.2 ) we first compute the Schmidt
decomposition (SD, see Appendix A ) of state ( C.1 ) according to the
partition @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in rhs of last equality we have expanded each Schmidt vector
@xmath in terms of the computational basis for the qubit 1.

The next step is to expand each Schmidt vector @xmath in the
computational basis for qubit 2

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next we express each vector @xmath in terms of the at most @xmath
Schmidt vectors @xmath of the bipartition @xmath and the associated
Schmidt coefficients @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we insert Eq. ( C.5 ) in Eq. ( C.4 ) and the resulting expression in
Eq. ( C.3 ), and obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Proceeding iteratively in this way, by making the @xmath SD associated
to the successive bipartitions of state ( C.1 ), we arrive
straightforwardly to Eq. ( C.2 ). This is basically the protocol
developed in [ Vid03 ] .
