# 1 General Notation

Let @xmath denote the set of finite cardinals, @xmath .

Throughout, we fix an element @xmath of @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath and let @xmath be a symbol. We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, @xmath , and this will usually be a subset of some ambient set,
@xmath . If @xmath , @xmath , and, if @xmath is a group, @xmath . If
@xmath , @xmath , the @xmath -tuple, and @xmath , the empty product. We
define @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , analogously. Thus, if @xmath ,
@xmath . Finally, @xmath .

For elements @xmath , @xmath of a group @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , the conjugacy class of @xmath in @xmath . The
group of all automorphisms of @xmath will be denoted by @xmath .

An ordering of a set will mean a total order for the set. An ordered set
is one endowed with a specific ordering. We will speak of @xmath -tuples
for a given set and @xmath -tuples of elements of a given set.

## 2 Outline

Let @xmath . Then @xmath is a one-relator group which is freely
generated by the set @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the subgroup of @xmath consisting of all automorphisms
of @xmath which map the set @xmath to itself. Let @xmath denote @xmath ,
and, for @xmath , let @xmath denote the group of all automorphisms of
@xmath which map the set @xmath to itself. Then @xmath is a subgroup of
index two in @xmath . We call @xmath the algebraic mapping-class group
of the surface of genus @xmath with @xmath boundary component and @xmath
punctures; see [ 18 ] for background on algebraic mapping-class groups.

Frequently, @xmath will be denoted @xmath and called the @xmath -string
braid group . (The similar symbol @xmath denotes a certain Coxeter
diagram.)

In Section 3 , we define @xmath , we review Artin’s 1925 proof that
@xmath generates @xmath , and we present intermediate results that we
shall apply in subsequent sections. In Section 4 , we recall the
definition of Artin groups, specifically @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In
Section 5 , we verify Artin’s 1925 result that @xmath , by combining
Magnus’ 1934 proof, Manfredini’s observation that @xmath , and the van
der Waerden trick, to condense the calculations involved.

In Section 6 , we use results of Section 4 to recover the Dehornoy-Larue
trichotomy for @xmath and the Dehornoy right-ordering of @xmath ; this
represents a substantial simplification. Let us emphasize that we verify
directly that @xmath satisfies the trichotomy, in contrast with the
approach by Larue [ 22 ] of using the trichotomy for @xmath to verify
that @xmath acts faithfully on @xmath .

In Section 7 , we review the action of @xmath on the set of ends of
@xmath . The argument of Thurston given in [ 27 ] yields the Dehornoy
right-ordering of @xmath , but not the trichotomy. By analysing further,
we obtain new results about the @xmath -orbit of @xmath in @xmath .

In Section 8 , for each @xmath , we introduce @xmath , the algebraic
mapping-class group of the disc with @xmath @xmath -points. We recall
the Crisp-Paris proof of the Birman-Hilden result that the natural map
from @xmath to @xmath is injective, and then modify an argument of Steve
Humphries to show that there is a natural identification @xmath . The
new results obtained in Section 7 then provide additional information in
this context.

In Section 9 , we review some applications by Perron-Vannier [ 26 ] of
the above Birman-Hilden result, and discuss connections with the actions
given by Wada [ 29 ] and studied by Shpilrain [ 28 ] and Crisp-Paris [
10 ] , [ 11 ] .

Following a kind suggestion of Patrick Dehornoy, we studied the analysis
of the @xmath -orbit of @xmath in @xmath given by David Larue [ 21 ] .
Larue’s approach is combinatorial and uses polygonal curves in the
punctured disc. By combining Larue’s approach with Whitehead’s use of
graphs, we were able to simplify Larue’s main arguments, and we record
our combinatorial approach in an appendix. We also show how Larue’s
results imply the results we had obtained, more easily, by studying
ends, in Section 7 .

## 3 Artin’s generators of @xmath

In this section we describe the famous generating set of @xmath . Let us
fix more notation related to @xmath and @xmath .

###### 3.1 Notation.

Let @xmath . Consider an @xmath -tuple @xmath for @xmath , and an
element @xmath of @xmath .

If @xmath in @xmath , we say that @xmath is an expression for @xmath .
We say that the expression @xmath is reduced if, for all @xmath , @xmath
in @xmath . For each element of @xmath , there exists a unique reduced
expression called the normal form .

Suppose that @xmath is the normal form for @xmath . We define the length
of @xmath to be @xmath . The set of elements of @xmath whose normal
forms have @xmath as an initial segment is denoted @xmath ; and, the set
of elements of @xmath whose normal forms have @xmath as a terminal
segment is denoted @xmath . The elements of @xmath are said to begin
with @xmath , and the elements of @xmath are said to end with @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the group of permutations of @xmath acting on the
right (on @xmath ).

Let @xmath . There exists a unique permutation @xmath , and a unique
@xmath -tuple @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath , and, for
each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For each @xmath , let @xmath . If
@xmath , then @xmath . In particular, @xmath . We define @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath . We write @xmath .

Let @xmath be the subset determined by, for all @xmath and all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the literature, @xmath is sometimes represented in @xmath -matrix
notation, for example, in the format

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall often find it convenient to compress the dots and say that
@xmath and @xmath are determined by the expressions

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

We shall apply the following result in different situations.

###### 3.2 Lemma (Artin [3]).

Let @xmath . Let @xmath and, for each @xmath , let @xmath .

1.  

2.   Suppose that there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
    @xmath ; moreover, for each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath both begin
    with the same element of @xmath .

3.   Suppose that there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
    @xmath ; moreover, for each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath both begin
    with the same element of @xmath .

4.   Suppose that, for each @xmath , @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i). There exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath , we have

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.2.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , there is no cancellation in the expression
@xmath for @xmath ; hence

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.2.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

For all @xmath , @xmath ; hence, @xmath has the same first letter as
@xmath , and, @xmath .

Since @xmath , we see, from ( 3.2.2 ), that @xmath has the same first
letter as @xmath . Also, @xmath .

By ( 3.2.1 ), @xmath ; hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath .

It now follows that @xmath , and (i) is proved.

(ii). There exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath , we have

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.2.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , there is no cancellation in the expression
@xmath for @xmath ; hence

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.2.4)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

For all @xmath , @xmath ; hence, @xmath has the same first letter as
@xmath , and, @xmath .

Since @xmath , we see that @xmath .

By ( 3.2.3 ), @xmath ; hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath .

It now follows that @xmath , and (ii) is proved.

(iii). Since @xmath and @xmath , we see that there is no cancellation
anywhere in the expression @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, all the elements of @xmath are trivial.

For each @xmath , @xmath ; hence, all the elements of @xmath are
trivial. Also, @xmath . Hence @xmath is trivial. Thus @xmath . ∎

The following is then immediate.

###### 3.3 Proposition (Artin [3]).

For each @xmath , either @xmath , or there exists some @xmath such that
@xmath . Hence, @xmath . ∎

###### 3.4 Remarks.

If @xmath has odd length, then @xmath has odd length, and @xmath , with
equality being achieved only if every odd letter of @xmath equals @xmath
. Similar statements hold with @xmath in place of @xmath .

Let @xmath and let @xmath denote the minimum length of @xmath as a word
in @xmath . Thus, @xmath . Hence, @xmath . Proposition 3.3 gives an
algorithm for writing @xmath as a word in @xmath of length at most
@xmath , and we have now seen that @xmath ∎

## 4 Definition of Artin groups

###### 4.1 Definition.

A Coxeter diagram @xmath consists of a set @xmath together with a
function @xmath such that, for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The elements of @xmath are called the vertices of @xmath , and, for
@xmath , we say that @xmath is the number of edges joining @xmath and
@xmath ; we can depict @xmath in a natural way. We then define the Artin
group of @xmath , denoted @xmath , to be the group presented with
generating set @xmath and relations saying that, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that if @xmath , then no relation is imposed. Notice also that if
@xmath is empty, then @xmath is the trivial group. ∎

###### 4.2 Notation.

(i). Let @xmath denote the Coxeter diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Clearly, @xmath is empty. We define @xmath to be empty also.

Thus, in @xmath , the vertex set is @xmath , and, for each @xmath , the
number of edges joining @xmath to @xmath is @xmath

Thus, @xmath has a presentation with generating set @xmath and relations
saying that, for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(ii). Let @xmath denote the Coxeter diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Here, the vertex set is @xmath , and, for each @xmath , the number of
edges joining @xmath to @xmath is @xmath

(iii). For @xmath , let @xmath denote the Coxeter diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Here, the vertex set is @xmath , and, for each @xmath , the number of
edges joining @xmath to @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

## 5 Artin’s presentation of @xmath

In this section, we verify Artin’s result that there exists an
isomorphism @xmath determined by @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath . We express this by writing @xmath

###### 5.1 Proposition.

There exists a homomorphism @xmath determined by @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath , and @xmath is surjective.

###### Proof.

(a). Suppose that @xmath . We have the following.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

(b). Suppose that @xmath . We have the following.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath

Together, (a) and (b) show that there exists a homomorphism
@xmath determined by @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath .
By Artin’s Proposition 3.3 , @xmath , and, hence, @xmath is surjective.
∎

In the remainder of this section, we shall use induction on @xmath to
show that the surjective homomorphism @xmath of Proposition 5.1 is an
isomorphism. Notice that @xmath endows @xmath with a canonical action on
@xmath .

The following is precisely [ 24 , Proposition 1] and, also, [ 10 ,
Proposition 2.1(2)] .

###### 5.2 Lemma (Manfredini [24]).

If @xmath , then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

For @xmath , the result is clear.

For @xmath , we have the following.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
              
  -- -------- --

From the case @xmath , we see that there exists a homomorphism
@xmath

For each @xmath , let @xmath denote the element @xmath of @xmath . For
each @xmath and @xmath , let @xmath denote @xmath , resp. @xmath , resp.
@xmath , if @xmath , resp. @xmath , resp. @xmath . We shall see that
@xmath ; this immediately implies that there exists a homomorphism
@xmath determined by @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath , which is then clearly inverse to @xmath , and the
result will be proved.

For each @xmath , we shall show, by decreasing induction on @xmath ,
that, for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath . For @xmath , this is
trivial, and, for @xmath , it follows from the case @xmath . Suppose
that @xmath .

1.  

2.  For each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath , by hypothesis.

3.  For each @xmath , @xmath and, hence, @xmath .

4.  @xmath .

5.  For each @xmath , @xmath .

6.  @xmath

7.  @xmath

Now the result follows by induction. ∎

We write @xmath to denote the @xmath -stabilizer of the conjugacy class
@xmath under the @xmath -action on @xmath . The Reidemeister-Schreier
rewriting technique automatically gives a useful presentation of @xmath
, but applying the technique can be rather tedious. Once the
presentation has been found, we can verify it directly using the van der
Waerden trick, as in the following proof.

###### 5.3 Theorem (Magnus [23]).

If @xmath , then there exists a homomorphism

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Moreover, the following hold.

1.  

2.  @xmath is injective.

3.   For each @xmath , @xmath in @xmath .

4.   The image of @xmath is @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us write @xmath and @xmath .

In @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, hence, @xmath . By Lemma 5.2 , @xmath , and we see that there exist
a homomorphism @xmath determined by .

Let @xmath , thought of as a generic @xmath -tuple, and consider the
free left @xmath -set @xmath , with left @xmath -transversal @xmath .

We construct a right @xmath -action on @xmath such that @xmath becomes
an @xmath -bi-set. For each @xmath , we define the right action of the
generator @xmath on the left @xmath -set @xmath , by specifying the
action on the given left @xmath -transversal as follows.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

We now verify that the relations of @xmath are respected.

(a). Suppose that @xmath . We have the following.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

(b). Suppose that @xmath . We have the following.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Now (a) and (b) prove that the relations of @xmath are respected. Hence,
we have a right @xmath -action on @xmath .

Notice that @xmath . Also, for each @xmath , @xmath . It follows that,
for each @xmath , @xmath . Hence, @xmath is injective. This proves (i).

Recall that @xmath .

Let @xmath .

We shall show by decreasing induction on @xmath that

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

If @xmath , then ( 5.3.1 ) holds. Now suppose that @xmath , and that (
5.3.1 ) holds. Conjugating ( 5.3.1 ) by @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By induction, ( 5.3.1 ) holds.

Now @xmath . This proves (ii). Also, @xmath .

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the map of sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, for each @xmath , we have the following, in @xmath .

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath

This proves that @xmath is a map of right @xmath -sets, and, hence,
@xmath must be surjective. Thus, @xmath , and, hence, the index of
@xmath in @xmath is at most @xmath .

Consider the action of @xmath on the set of conjugacy classes @xmath in
@xmath . For any @xmath , @xmath acts as the transposition @xmath . In
particular, the index of @xmath in @xmath is @xmath . Also, the elements
of @xmath fix @xmath , and, hence, @xmath . By comparing indices, we see
that @xmath . This proves (iii). ∎

###### 5.4 Theorem (Artin).

@xmath

###### Proof.

This is trivial for @xmath . Hence, we may assume that @xmath and that
the homomorphism @xmath , of Proposition 5.1 , determined by @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath is an isomorphism; and it
remains to show that the surjective homomorphism @xmath is injective.

Consider an element @xmath of the kernel of @xmath . In particular,
@xmath fixes @xmath in the @xmath -action on @xmath . By Theorem 5.3
(iii), @xmath lies in the image of the homomorphism @xmath determined by
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath . Thus,
we may express @xmath as a product of two words

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now,

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.4.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Consider the homomorphism @xmath determined by @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath . Let @xmath . By Theorem 5.3
(ii),

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus the two @xmath -tuples @xmath and @xmath for @xmath become
conjugate in @xmath under @xmath . By Theorem 5.3 (i), @xmath is
injective. Since @xmath freely generates a free subgroup of @xmath , we
see that @xmath also freely generates a free subgroup of @xmath . From (
5.4.1 ), we see that @xmath must be the trivial word.

Hence, @xmath in @xmath . By the induction hypothesis, @xmath in @xmath
. Hence @xmath in @xmath .

Now the result holds by induction. ∎

Combining Lemma 5.2 , Theorem 5.3 and Theorem 5.4 , we have the
following.

###### 5.5 Corollary (Artin-Magnus-Manfredini).

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- --

###### 5.6 Historical Remarks.

In 1925, Artin [ 3 ] found the above presentation of @xmath by an
intuitive topological argument but, later, in [ 4 ] , he indicated that
there were difficulties that could be corrected. In 1934, Magnus [ 23 ]
gave an algebraic proof that the relations suffice. In 1945, Markov [ 25
] gave a similar algebraic proof. In 1947, Bohnenblust [ 7 ] gave a
similar algebraic proof; in 1948, Chow [ 8 ] simplified the latter
proof. All these algebraic proofs of the sufficiency of the relations
involve the Reidemeister-Schreier rewriting process for the subgroup of
index @xmath .

Larue [ 22 ] gave a new algebraic proof of the sufficiency of the
relations, by using the Dehornoy-Larue trichotomy [ 14 ] for braid
groups. We shall proceed in the opposite direction. Proofs of the
trichotomy for @xmath tend to be more difficult than proofs that @xmath
, and we shall now see that Artin’s generation argument easily gives the
trichotomy for @xmath . ∎

## 6 The Dehornoy-Larue trichotomy

###### 6.1 Definitions.

Let @xmath .

We say that @xmath is @xmath -neutral if @xmath lies in the subgroup of
@xmath generated by @xmath .

We say that @xmath is @xmath -positive if @xmath and @xmath can be
expressed as the product of a finite sequence of elements of @xmath such
that at least one term of the sequence is @xmath . We say that @xmath is
@xmath -positive if @xmath and, for some @xmath , @xmath can be
expressed as the product of a finite sequence of elements of @xmath such
that at least one term of the sequence is @xmath .

We say that @xmath is @xmath -negative if @xmath is @xmath -positive,
that is, @xmath and @xmath can be expressed as the product of a finite
sequence of elements of @xmath such that at least one term of the
sequence is @xmath .

If @xmath satisfies exactly one of the properties of being @xmath
-neutral, @xmath -positive @xmath -negative, we say that @xmath
satisfies the @xmath -trichotomy . ∎

###### 6.2 Historical Remarks.

View @xmath as a subgroup of @xmath in a natural way, and let @xmath
denote the union of the resulting chain; thus @xmath . Dehornoy [ 14 ,
Theorem 6] gave a one-sided ordering of @xmath ; the positive semigroup
for this ordering is the set of ‘ @xmath -positive’ elements of @xmath .

Let @xmath . By replacing @xmath with @xmath if necessary, we can apply
Dehornoy’s result to deduce that there exists some @xmath such that
@xmath is @xmath -negative in @xmath , or @xmath . Larue [ 21 ] showed
that this implies that @xmath , and that this in turn implies that
@xmath can be expressed as the product of a finite sequence, of length
at most @xmath , of elements of @xmath . Thus, every element of @xmath
satisfies the @xmath -trichotomy. Larue’s work is surveyed in [ 16 ,
Chapter 5] . Topological versions of these results can be found in [ 19
] and [ 16 , Chapter 6] .

We shall give elementary direct proofs of the foregoing results and
replace Larue’s bound @xmath with the much smaller bound @xmath .
Larue’s proof contains interesting information that we shall rework in
the Appendix. ∎

Part (iii) of the following seems to be new.

###### 6.3 Lemma.

Let @xmath and let @xmath be an element of @xmath such that @xmath . Let
@xmath and, for each @xmath , let @xmath .

1.  

2.   Suppose that there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
    @xmath and @xmath ; moreover, if @xmath , then @xmath .

3.   Suppose that there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
    @xmath and @xmath .

4.   Suppose that, for each @xmath , @xmath and, for each @xmath ,
    @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

For each @xmath , let @xmath .

(i). The first part follows from Artin’s Lemma 3.2 (i). Notice that, if
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath .

(ii) follows from Lemma 3.2 (ii).

(iii). Recall that @xmath Hence, @xmath , and, hence, @xmath Since
@xmath , the hypotheses imply that there is no cancellation anywhere in
the expression @xmath . Hence,

  --------- -- -------- --
  (6.3.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we see that @xmath , and

  --------- -- -------- --
  (6.3.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we see that

  --------- -- -------- --
  (6.3.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Now, @xmath Therefore, there is no cancellation in @xmath , and, by (
6.3.3 ), @xmath . By Lemma 3.2 (iii), @xmath . ∎

As in Remarks 3.4 , we deduce the following from Lemma 6.3 by induction
on @xmath .

###### 6.4 Corollary (Larue [21]).

Let @xmath and let @xmath .

1.  

2.   Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath -negative or @xmath
    -neutral. In more detail, @xmath can be expressed as the product of
    a sequence, of length at most @xmath , of elements of @xmath .

3.   Moreover, @xmath is @xmath -neutral if and only if @xmath . ∎

###### 6.5 Notation.

For each @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the automorphisms of @xmath
determined by

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Then @xmath . The normal form in @xmath factorizes into an alternating
product with factors which are normal forms of non-trivial elements of
@xmath alternating with factors which are normal forms of non-trivial
elements of @xmath . On @xmath , @xmath acts as conjugation by @xmath ,
while @xmath interchanges the two free generators. On @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath act as the identity map. ∎

The next result gives three trichotomies, called (a), (b) and (c), which
hold for elements of @xmath . Attribution is not sharply defined, but it
is reasonable to attribute (b) to Dehornoy [ 14 ] , and (a) and (c) to
Larue [ 21 ] .

###### 6.6 Theorem (Dehornoy-Larue [14], [21]).

Let @xmath , let @xmath and consider the following nine conditions.

(a1). @xmath . (a2). @xmath . (a3). @xmath . (b1). @xmath is @xmath
-neutral. (b2). @xmath is @xmath -negative. (b3). @xmath is @xmath
-positive. (c1). @xmath (c2). @xmath . (c3). @xmath .

Then: (a1) @xmath (b1) @xmath (c1); (a2) @xmath (b2) @xmath (c2); (a3)
@xmath (b3) @xmath (c3).

Exactly one of (b1), (b2), (b3), holds; that is, @xmath satisfies the
@xmath -trichotomy in @xmath .

###### Proof.

(a1) @xmath (b1) by Corollary 6.4 (ii). We shall use (a1) and (b1)
interchangeably in the remainder of the proof.

(b1) @xmath (c1). If @xmath is @xmath -neutral, then so is @xmath . It
follows that @xmath and @xmath . Thus, @xmath .

(a2) @xmath (b2). If (a2) holds, then Corollary 6.4 (i) shows that (b1)
or (b2) holds. Since (a1) fails, (b1) fails. Thus (b2) holds.

(b2) @xmath (c2). Using Notation 6.5 , we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the composition of injective self-maps of @xmath can be bijective
only if all the factors are bijective, we see that (b2) @xmath (c2).

(a3) @xmath (b3). We translate into algebra the crucial reflection
argument of [ 16 , Corollary 5.2.4] .

Suppose that (a3) holds.

With Notation 3.1 , let @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath . It follows
that @xmath . Hence, @xmath . Hence,
@xmath . On conjugating by @xmath , we see that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the automorphism of @xmath determined by @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath . For each @xmath , @xmath It follows
that @xmath . Notice that @xmath belongs to @xmath . Also, @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By Corollary 6.4 (i), @xmath can be expressed as the product of a finite
sequence of elements of @xmath . It is not difficult to check that, for
each @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . Hence @xmath can be expressed as the
product of a finite sequence of elements of @xmath . Hence, (b3) or (b1)
holds. Since (a3) holds, (a1) fails, and (b1) fails. Thus (b3) holds.

(b3) @xmath (c3). If @xmath is @xmath -positive, then @xmath is @xmath
-negative, and, by (b2) @xmath (c2), @xmath and, hence, @xmath .

(c1) @xmath (a1). Suppose that (a1) fails. Then (a2) or (a3) holds.
Hence (c2) or (c3) holds. Hence (c1) fails.

(c2) @xmath (a2) and (c3) @xmath (a3) are proved similarly.

Thus the desired equivalences hold.

Since exactly one of (a1), (a2), (a3) holds, exactly one of (b1), (b2),
(b3) holds. ∎

The following gives the Dehornoy right-ordering of @xmath ; recall the
definition of @xmath -positive from Definitions 6.1 .

###### 6.7 Theorem.

For each @xmath exactly one of the following holds: @xmath ; @xmath is
@xmath -positive; @xmath is @xmath -positive. The set of @xmath
-positive elements of @xmath is the positive cone of a right-ordering of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the largest element of @xmath such that @xmath . The
natural subscript-shifting isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath induces an
isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath . Notice that @xmath is mapped to an
element of @xmath which is not @xmath -neutral; by Theorem 6.6 , this
image is @xmath -positive or @xmath -negative but not both. Hence
exactly one of @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -positive.

It is easy to see that the product of two @xmath -positive elements of
@xmath is @xmath -positive.

Hence the set of @xmath -positive elements of @xmath is the positive
cone for a right-ordering of @xmath , the Dehornoy right-ordering. ∎

## 7 Ends, right-orderings and squarefreeness

###### 7.1 Review.

A (reduced) end of @xmath is a function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that, for each @xmath , @xmath . The function is then represented
as a right-infinite reduced product, @xmath or @xmath .

We denote the set of ends of @xmath by @xmath , or simply by @xmath if
there is no risk of confusion.

An element of @xmath is said to be squarefree if, in its reduced
expression, no two consecutive terms are equal; for example: @xmath is a
squarefree end; @xmath is a non-squarefree word.

For each @xmath , we define the shadow of @xmath in @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, for example, @xmath .

We shall now give @xmath an ordering, @xmath . The first step is, for
each @xmath , to assign an ordering, @xmath , to a partition of @xmath
into @xmath or @xmath subsets, depending as @xmath or @xmath , as
follows. We set

  ------------------------------------ -------- -------- -- --
                                                @xmath      
  If @xmath and @xmath , then we set                        
                                       @xmath   @xmath      
                                                @xmath      
                                                @xmath      
  If @xmath and @xmath , then we set                        
                                       @xmath   @xmath      
                                                @xmath      
                                                @xmath      
  ------------------------------------ -------- -------- -- --

Hence, for each @xmath , we have an ordering @xmath of a partition of
@xmath into @xmath or @xmath subsets.

If @xmath and @xmath are two different (reduced) ends, then there exists
@xmath such that @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath .
Then @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , but lie in different elements of
the partition of @xmath into @xmath or @xmath subsets. We then order
@xmath and @xmath according to the order of the elements of the
partition of @xmath that they belong to. This completes the definition
of the ordering @xmath of @xmath .

We remark that the smallest element of @xmath is @xmath and the largest
element of @xmath is @xmath . ∎

###### 7.2 Review.

Following Nielsen-Thurston [ 9 ] , [ 27 ] , we now define the action of
@xmath on @xmath and show that it respects the ordering; our treatment
will be quite elementary compared to the usual approaches.

We assume that @xmath , and we first define the action of @xmath on
@xmath .

Consider any reduced end @xmath . There is then a unique factorization
@xmath or @xmath , where, in the former case, @xmath is a finite
sequence of non-trivial words, and @xmath is a reduced end, and, in the
latter case, @xmath is an infinite sequence of non-trivial words, and in
both cases, the @xmath alternate between elements of @xmath , and
elements of @xmath . We shall express this factorization as @xmath .

Recall, from Notation 6.5 , that we have the factorization @xmath . On
@xmath , @xmath acts as conjugation by @xmath , while @xmath
interchanges the two free generators. On @xmath , @xmath and @xmath act
as the identity map. This completes the description of the action of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath on @xmath .

It is not difficult to show that, for any reduced ends @xmath and @xmath
, if @xmath , then for all @xmath , if @xmath , then @xmath . Thus,
@xmath is the limit of @xmath as @xmath tends to @xmath .

It is clear that @xmath , @xmath and, hence, @xmath act bijectively on
@xmath . Hence we have the action of @xmath on @xmath . It is then not
difficult to verify that we have an action of @xmath on @xmath .

We next show that @xmath respects the ordering of @xmath . We do this by
considering all the ways that two reduced ends can be compared, and the
resulting effect of @xmath and @xmath . We represent the information in
tables. In all of the following, we understand that @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath are reduced expressions for elements of @xmath , and
@xmath . Since @xmath does not begin with @xmath , @xmath begins with
@xmath or @xmath or @xmath . We make the convention that @xmath acts
trivially on the right on @xmath .

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Here, the case @xmath does not present any problems.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath

Here, @xmath does not end with @xmath , and, hence, @xmath ends with
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

The remaining tables are clearly of the same form as the last one. Thus
we have proved that the action of @xmath respects the ordering of @xmath
. It follows that the action of @xmath respects the ordering of @xmath .
Similarly, the actions of @xmath respect the ordering of @xmath . Hence
@xmath acts on @xmath . ∎

###### 7.3 Remarks (Thurston [27]).

The (right) action of @xmath on @xmath gives rise to many right
orderings of @xmath .

Let us use the left-to-right lexicographic ordering on @xmath , and
consider the @xmath -orbit of @xmath . It is not difficult to show that
the @xmath -stabilizer of @xmath is trivial. Thus we have an injective
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the ordering of @xmath induced by pullback from @xmath
. Clearly @xmath is a right-ordering of @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath is @xmath -negative, then, as in the proof of
Theorem 6.6 (b2) @xmath (c2), we have @xmath . Since @xmath , we see
that @xmath . Hence @xmath and @xmath . Similar arguments with @xmath ,
@xmath , show that, if @xmath is @xmath -positive (resp. @xmath
-negative), then @xmath (resp. @xmath ). Hence the right-ordering we
have obtained from @xmath coincides with the Dehornoy right-ordering.
However, the study of ends does not seem to readily yield the @xmath
-trichotomy. ∎

The following will be useful in the study of squarefreeness.

###### 7.4 Lemma.

Let @xmath , let @xmath , and let @xmath . Then, in @xmath , the
following hold:

1.  

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

6.   If @xmath , then one of the following holds:

    1.  

    2.  @xmath ;

    3.  @xmath ;

    and, hence, @xmath , that is, @xmath

###### Proof.

Recall that:

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

( i ). It is straightforward to see that @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the element of @xmath such that @xmath ; notice that
@xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath , and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath is completely cancelled in @xmath , and,
moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, ( i ) holds.

( ii ) is clear.

( iii ). It is straightforward to see that @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the element of @xmath such that @xmath ; notice that
@xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath , and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath is completely cancelled in @xmath , and,
moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, ( iii ) holds.

( iv ) follows from ( i )-( iii ).

( v ). It is not difficult to see that

@xmath

Case 1. @xmath .

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath .

In both subcases, (a) holds.

Case 2. @xmath .

Here, @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove that (b) holds, it remains to show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, @xmath that is, @xmath . We can write @xmath where @xmath .
Then @xmath , in normal form. Thus it suffices to show that @xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath , since @xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath , since @xmath does not lie in the submonoid of
@xmath generated by @xmath , nor in the submonoid generated by @xmath .

In both subcases, (b) holds.

In both cases, ( v ) holds. ∎

The following appeared as [ 5 , Lema 2.2.17] .

###### 7.5 Theorem.

If @xmath then, for each @xmath , @xmath is a squarefree end.

###### Proof.

This is clear if @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, every word in @xmath is squarefree and does not end in @xmath .
Hence, every end in @xmath is squarefree.

Thus, we may assume that @xmath .

Recall that @xmath , and, hence, @xmath . Let @xmath denote @xmath . By
Lemma 7.4 ( v ), @xmath does not lie in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that @xmath permutes the elements of each of the following sets:
@xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath ; and, @xmath . Hence @xmath does not lie in
@xmath . By Lemma 7.4 ( iv ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath does not lie in the latter set either, and, hence, @xmath
is a squarefree end. Since @xmath , the desired result holds. ∎

We now obtain new information about the @xmath -orbit of @xmath in
@xmath .

###### 7.6 Corollary.

Let @xmath , let @xmath , and let @xmath .

1.  

2.  @xmath is a squarefree word in @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

4.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall from Notation 3.1 that we write @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath .

It is not difficult to see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 7.5 , @xmath is a squarefree end. Hence, @xmath is a
squarefree word, and @xmath .

Since @xmath is a squarefree word, @xmath is also a squarefree word.
Hence (i) holds.

Also, @xmath implies that @xmath and, hence, @xmath and, also, @xmath .
In particular, (ii) holds.

Let @xmath be the automorphism of @xmath determined by @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . Also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , we see that @xmath .
Now replacing @xmath with @xmath gives (iii). ∎

In Remark IV.3 , we shall give a second proof of Corollary 7.6 using
Larue-Whitehead diagrams.

## 8 Actions on free products of cyclic groups

###### 8.1 Notation.

Throughout this section, we assume that @xmath and we fix a positive
integer @xmath .

Let @xmath be a partition of @xmath . Thus, @xmath is an @xmath -tuple
for @xmath such that @xmath .

Let @xmath be an @xmath -tuple for @xmath .

We let @xmath denote the group with presentation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath is isomorphic to a free product of cyclic groups, @xmath ,
where @xmath is interpreted as @xmath , and @xmath is also written
@xmath with no exponent.

We let @xmath denote the group of all automorphisms of @xmath which map
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to themselves.

We let @xmath denote the group of all automorphisms of @xmath which map
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to themselves.

In the case where all the @xmath are @xmath , we get groups denoted
@xmath and @xmath . Notice that @xmath is the subgroup of @xmath
consisting of those elements such that the permutation in @xmath ,
arising from the permutation of @xmath , lies in the natural image of
@xmath in @xmath .

There are natural maps

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (8.1.1)      @xmath   @xmath   
  (8.1.2)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

Since ( 8.1.2 ) is of index two in ( 8.1.1 ), we see that ( 8.1.1 ) is
injective, resp. surjective, resp. bijective, if and only if ( 8.1.2 )
is. ∎

For topological reasons, we suspect that ( 8.1.1 ) and ( 8.1.2 ) are
isomorphisms. In this section, we shall prove that this holds in the
case where all the @xmath are equal or @xmath . We begin by proving
that ( 8.1.1 ) and ( 8.1.2 ) are injective, which seems to be new.

###### 8.2 Theorem.

With Notation 8.1 , the maps

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (8.1.1)      @xmath   @xmath   
  (8.1.2)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

are injective.

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is an element of the kernel of ( 8.1.1 ) or ( 8.1.2
). Clearly, @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath have the same image in @xmath .
By Theorem 7.5 , @xmath is an @xmath -tuple of squarefree words in
@xmath , and, hence, has the same normal form in @xmath and in @xmath .
Hence @xmath as @xmath -tuples for @xmath . Thus @xmath , and the result
is proved. ∎

###### 8.3 Historical Remarks.

Let us now restrict to the classic case where @xmath . Here, for an
integer @xmath , we are considering the action of @xmath on @xmath , and
it induces maps

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (8.3.1)      @xmath   @xmath   
  (8.3.2)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

Theorem 8.2 shows that these maps are injective. Birman-Hilden [ 6 ,
Theorem 7] gave a topological proof that ( 8.3.2 ) is injective, thus
answering a question of Magnus. Crisp-Paris [ 11 ] gave an elegant
algebraic proof of the injectivity of ( 8.3.2 ) using the trichotomy
argument of Larue [ 22 ] and Shpilrain [ 28 ] . The Crisp-Paris argument
can be summarized as follows.

For each @xmath , let @xmath denote the set of elements of @xmath whose
free-product normal form begins with an element of @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is a non-trivial element of @xmath . We will show
that @xmath acts non-trivially on @xmath .

We may assume that @xmath . By Theorem 6.7 , by replacing @xmath with
@xmath if necessary, we may assume that @xmath is @xmath -negative. Thus
there exists some @xmath such that @xmath is the product of a finite
sequence of elements of @xmath , and @xmath appears at least once in the
sequence.

With Notation 6.5 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath . Because the elements of @xmath act as injective self-maps
on @xmath , it follows that @xmath , and, hence, @xmath acts
non-trivially on @xmath , as desired. ∎

Let us now verify the surjectivity of the maps ( 8.3.1 ) and ( 8.3.2 ).
The case where @xmath was verified by Stephen Humphries [ 2 ,
Lemma 2.1.7] .

###### 8.4 Notation.

Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath denote the greatest
integer not exceeding @xmath . Then @xmath is a set of representatives
for the integers modulo @xmath . For @xmath , we define @xmath by @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath ; we
extend @xmath to all of @xmath by using normal forms for the free
product @xmath .

Let @xmath . There exists a unique permutation @xmath , and a unique
@xmath -tuple @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath , and, for
each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For each @xmath , let @xmath . We
define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath . We write @xmath
. ∎

The following is similar to Artin’s Lemma 3.2 .

###### 8.5 Lemma.

Let @xmath , @xmath and let @xmath . Let @xmath . For each @xmath , let
@xmath . For each @xmath , let @xmath , @xmath denote the elements of
@xmath determined by the following: there exists some @xmath such that
@xmath ; there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . In particular,
@xmath .

1.  

2.   Suppose that there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
    @xmath .

3.   Suppose that there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
    @xmath .

4.   If @xmath , there exists some @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i). Let @xmath . There exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Since
@xmath , we have

  --------- -- -------- --
  (8.5.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

since @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is a free-product normal form for
@xmath .

Claim. @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then @xmath , and, hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, if @xmath , @xmath .

Thus, @xmath if @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . ∎

Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 8.5.1 ), @xmath ; hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath .

For each @xmath , @xmath , and, hence, @xmath .

Also, @xmath ; in particular, @xmath .

It now follows that @xmath .

(ii). Let @xmath . There exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Since
@xmath , we have

  --------- -- -------- --
  (8.5.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is a free-product normal form for
@xmath . Hence, @xmath

Claim. @xmath .

###### Proof.

For any @xmath , then @xmath , and, hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as claimed. ∎

Hence @xmath

For all @xmath , @xmath ; hence, @xmath .

Since @xmath , we see that @xmath .

By ( 8.5.2 ), @xmath ; hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath .

It now follows that @xmath , and (ii) is proved.

(iii). If @xmath , we choose a distinguished element of @xmath as
follows.

If, for some @xmath , @xmath , we take any such @xmath to be our
distinguished element of @xmath .

Consider then the case where, for all @xmath , @xmath . Thus, there is
no further cancellation in @xmath . Since @xmath fixes @xmath , it is
not difficult to see that, for all @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath , it
is then not difficult to show that there exists some @xmath such that
@xmath . We take any such @xmath to be our distinguished element of
@xmath .

Let @xmath denote our distinguished element of @xmath .

Notice that @xmath and that @xmath . Hence, @xmath , and, hence, @xmath
.

Case 1. @xmath .

Here, @xmath and, by (i), @xmath .

Case 2. @xmath

Here, @xmath , and, hence, @xmath . Here, @xmath and, by (ii), @xmath .
∎

###### 8.6 Theorem.

Let @xmath , @xmath . The natural map @xmath is an isomorphism, and,
hence, the natural map @xmath is an isomorphism.

With Notation 8.1 , the maps @xmath and @xmath are isomorphisms. ∎

The following is essentially an algebraic translation of a part of a
topological argument in [ 26 , Section 3] .

###### 8.7 Proposition.

With Notation 8.1 , let @xmath be a subgroup of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of finite index, and let @xmath be the subgroup of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

consisting of elements which map @xmath to itself. Then, either the
induced map @xmath is injective or @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath , and that @xmath acts as the identity on @xmath .
We shall show that @xmath or @xmath .

Let @xmath .

For any @xmath , right multiplication by @xmath permutes the elements of
the finite set @xmath , so there exists some positive integer @xmath
such that @xmath acts trivially on @xmath . In particular, @xmath and,
hence, @xmath .

Hence, there exists some positive integer @xmath such that @xmath . Now
@xmath for some @xmath , and, hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath has infinite order in @xmath , we see that @xmath . Thus
@xmath fixes @xmath .

Consider any @xmath . Since @xmath , there exists some positive integer
@xmath such that @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath commutes with @xmath . A straightforward normal-form
argument shows that @xmath .

Hence there exists an integer @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath is
a conjugate of @xmath , the cyclically-reduced form of @xmath is @xmath
. Either @xmath , or there must be cyclic cancellation, and a
straightforward analysis then shows that @xmath . Since @xmath was
arbitrary, this completes the proof. ∎

## 9 The @xmath-group @xmath

###### 9.1 Notation.

Recall that @xmath We define @xmath to be the @xmath -group consisting
of the set of elements of @xmath which have even exponent sum in the
@xmath . It is not difficult to see that @xmath is a free group of rank
@xmath , and that there is induced a map from @xmath to @xmath . Since
@xmath , @xmath has a @xmath -action; we say that @xmath is a @xmath
-group, and that @xmath is a @xmath -subgroup of @xmath .

Proposition 8.7 shows that, if @xmath , then the map from @xmath to
@xmath is injective, and we say that the @xmath -action is faithful ,
and that @xmath is a faithful @xmath -group. ∎

Over the course of this section, we shall choose various free generating
sets of @xmath to obtain interesting actions. In the next two examples,
we identify @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

###### 9.2 Example.

Now that algebraic proofs of the requisite theorems are known to us, let
us review [ 18 , Example 15.6] which was an algebraic approximation of
results in [ 26 , Section 3] .

Let @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the commutator @xmath of group elements @xmath , @xmath is @xmath
. Let @xmath denote the group of all automorphisms of @xmath which fix
@xmath . Then @xmath is free of rank @xmath with ordered free generating
set @xmath , and @xmath is the group of all automorphisms of @xmath
which fix @xmath .

We now recall some Dehn-twist elements of @xmath from Definitions 3.10
and Remarks 5.1 of [ 18 ] .

For each @xmath , we define @xmath , @xmath by

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

For each @xmath , we define @xmath by

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Let us identify @xmath with @xmath via

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath

Notice that @xmath is then identified with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which equals @xmath . Hence @xmath is identified with @xmath .

This corresponds to the surface of genus @xmath with one boundary
component arising as a two-sheeted branched cover of a sphere with one
boundary component and @xmath double points. Then @xmath becomes
embedded in @xmath via the homomorphism represented as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Clearly, in the preceding example, the subgroup @xmath of @xmath is also
embedded in @xmath , but it is more natural to remove from the surface a
handle containing the boundary component (a sphere with three boundary
components or a ‘pair of pants’), and embed @xmath in @xmath , as
follows.

###### 9.3 Example.

Now that algebraic proofs of the requisite theorems are known to us, let
us review [ 18 , Example 15.7] which was an algebraic approximation of
results in [ 26 , Section 3] .

Let @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath . Then @xmath is free of rank @xmath with free
generating set @xmath and distinguished element @xmath such that @xmath
. Let @xmath denote the group of all automorphisms of @xmath which map
@xmath to itself, and fix @xmath and @xmath . It can be shown that
@xmath acts faithfully on the subset @xmath of @xmath .

Here, @xmath represents an arc from the base-point of one boundary
component, to the base-point of the other boundary component. Karen
Vogtmann calls such an arc a ‘tether joining the basepoint to the second
boundary component’. For any surface-with-boundaries, A’Campo [ 1 ,
Section 4, Remarque 6] , [ 26 , p.232] identifies basepoints of all the
boundary components, which makes tethers into loops, to obtain a
topological quotient space whose fundamental group is acted on,
faithfully, by the mapping-class group of the surface-with-boundaries.

We now recall some Dehn-twist elements of @xmath from Definitions 3.10
and Remarks 5.1 of [ 18 ] .

For each @xmath , we define @xmath , @xmath by

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

For each @xmath , we define @xmath by

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath

and we define @xmath

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Let us identify @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath via the map
@xmath determined by

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

This corresponds to the surface of genus @xmath with two boundary
components arising as a two-sheeted branched cover of a sphere with one
boundary component and @xmath double points. Now @xmath is embedded in
@xmath via a homomorphism represented as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , Proposition 8.7 shows that this is an embedding. In the
case where @xmath , the interpretation of the notation is as follows:
@xmath is mapped to @xmath ; @xmath fixes @xmath and sends @xmath to
@xmath . ∎

Clearly, in the preceding example, the subgroup @xmath of @xmath is also
embedded in @xmath , but it is more natural to remove from the surface a
disc containg the two boundary components (a sphere with three boundary
components or a ‘pair of pants’), and embed @xmath in @xmath , as in
Example 9.2 .

We next discuss the Perron-Vannier isomorphism @xmath for @xmath . The
following was shown to us by Mladen Bestvina.

###### 9.4 Lemma.

Let @xmath . Then, @xmath has a unique automorphism @xmath of order two
which fixes @xmath and interchanges @xmath and @xmath . The semidirect
product @xmath has presentation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

Notice that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , and the latter is @xmath .
The result now follows easily. ∎

Part of the following appears in [ 26 ] and [ 10 ] .

###### 9.5 Theorem (Perron-Vannier [26]).

Let @xmath . The semidirect product @xmath has presentation

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- -- -- --
                                                                                                                                                                                       
  Hence, @xmath has a unique automorphism @xmath of order two which fixes @xmath and interchanges @xmath and @xmath . The double semidirect product @xmath has presentation            
                                                                                                                                                                                       
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- -- -- --

###### Proof.

By Corollary 5.5 , we have a presentation

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

If we impose the relation @xmath , we transform @xmath into @xmath , and
we have

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

Here, there exists a retraction to @xmath with kernel the normal
subgroup generated by @xmath . This normal subgroup contains @xmath for
all @xmath . By Lemma 9.4 , the normal subgroup has presentation

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

and this agrees with the desired presentation. ∎

###### 9.6 Remarks.

Corollary 5.5 says that, for @xmath , we can go down by index @xmath
from @xmath by squaring the last generator, and arrive at @xmath .

Theorem 9.5 says that, for @xmath , we can kill the square of the new
last generator, go down by index 2, and arrive at @xmath . ∎

We now record some other free generating sets of @xmath which appear in
the literature.

###### 9.7 Examples.

Recall Notation 9.1 . In particular, the @xmath -action on @xmath is
faithful if @xmath .

(1). For each @xmath , set @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath is a free
generating set for @xmath , and, for each @xmath , the action of @xmath
on @xmath is determined by

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

interpretated appropriately for @xmath and @xmath .

(2). For each @xmath , set @xmath in @xmath , Then @xmath is a free
generating set for @xmath , and, for each @xmath , @xmath acts on @xmath
as follows.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath

(3). We next consider the free generating set used in the proof of [ 11
, Proposition A.1(2)] .

For each @xmath , set @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath is a free
generating set for @xmath , and, for each @xmath , @xmath acts on @xmath
as follows,

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Let @xmath ; then @xmath acts as follows.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

(4). By reflecting the previous example, we can invert the elements of
@xmath .

For each @xmath , set @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath is a free
generating set for @xmath , and, for each @xmath , @xmath acts on @xmath
as follows.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Let @xmath ; then @xmath acts as follows.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

∎

###### 9.8 Historical Remarks.

Let us view @xmath as a subgroup of @xmath by suppressing @xmath . Then
the @xmath -group @xmath becomes a faithful @xmath -group, even if
@xmath .

Wada [ 29 ] defined various left actions of @xmath on a free group of
rank @xmath . All but four of them are obviously non-faithful, and two
of the remaining four actions are obviously equivalent up to changing
the free generating set, leaving three actions to be studied for
faithfulness. Shpilrain [ 28 ] ingeniously used the @xmath -trichotomy
to prove that these three are all faithful. Crisp-Paris [ 11 ,
Proposition A.1(2)] showed that the second and third of these three Wada
actions are equivalent up to changing the free generating set. They
correspond to Examples 9.7 (2), (4), above, with @xmath suppressed.
Notice that our actions on the right are the inverses of their actions
on the left. In summary, the second and third Wada actions are obtained
by choosing suitable free generating sets of the Perron-Vannier @xmath
-group @xmath .

The first Wada action is constructed by choosing a non-zero integer
@xmath , and, for each @xmath , letting @xmath act on @xmath via

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Edward Formanek has pointed out that @xmath is then a free generating
set of a faithful @xmath -subgroup of @xmath , where faithfulness can be
seen from the fact that the @xmath -action is the standard Artin action
with respect to this free generating set. This gives a transparent proof
that the first Wada action is faithful. ∎

Appendix. Larue-Whitehead diagrams

In this appendix, we rework ideas from Larue’s thesis [ 21 , Chapter 2
and Appendix A] , using combinatorial arguments to obtain a description
of the @xmath -orbit of @xmath when @xmath . A topological treatment of
similar ideas was given in [ 19 ] , and it was arrived at independently
of [ 21 ] . See [ 16 , Chapters 5, 6] .

## I Self-homeomorphisms

This section is purely motivational. We shall briefly indicate the
mapping-class viewpoint of the braid group, and the Jordan-curve nature
of the Whitehead graphs of the elements in the @xmath -orbit of @xmath
if @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the complex plane, and @xmath the Riemann sphere, or
projective complex line, @xmath . For each @xmath and each non-negative
real number @xmath , let @xmath , resp. @xmath , denote the closed,
resp. open, disc in @xmath with centre @xmath and radius @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the surface formed by deleting from a sphere an open
disc and @xmath points. We shall think of the discs and points as being
distinguished rather than deleted; for example, it is then meaningful to
speak of the self-homeomorphisms of @xmath as permuting the points. We
take as our model of @xmath the sphere @xmath having @xmath as its set
of @xmath distinguished points, and @xmath as its distinguished open
disc. We are particularly interested in the set @xmath , and, in our
diagrams, we shall mark these points out by drawing discs of small radii
around them.

For each distinguished point @xmath , we have a distinguished oriented
tether, or arc, @xmath , joining @xmath to @xmath . We label the right
flank of this oriented arc @xmath , and label the left flank @xmath ; we
then cut @xmath open along these arcs and obtain a @xmath -gon, with
clockwise boundary label @xmath ; see Fig. I.1.4 . We shall use @xmath
and @xmath interchangeably in this section. Performing the boundary
identifications then gives back @xmath .

The self-homeomorphism @xmath of @xmath given by @xmath fixes the
boundary of @xmath and interchanges @xmath and @xmath ; see Fig. I.1.1 .
For each @xmath ,

@xmath , let @xmath denote the self-homeomorphism of @xmath which, on
@xmath , acts as the identity map, and, on @xmath , acts by @xmath .
Then @xmath generates a group @xmath of self-homeomorphisms of @xmath ,
which will shed light on the @xmath -orbit of @xmath . To describe the
induced action of @xmath on the fundamental group of @xmath , we first
give @xmath a CW-structure by specifying a graph @xmath embedded in
@xmath .

For each @xmath , we have vertices @xmath and @xmath , and an oriented
straight edge @xmath joining @xmath to @xmath . For each @xmath , we
have an oriented straight edge @xmath joining @xmath to @xmath , and an
oriented straight edge @xmath joining @xmath to @xmath . This completes
the description of the graph @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath can be seen in
Fig. I.1.2 . Each distinguished point @xmath is the midpoint of the
rectangle in @xmath cut out by the path @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the (free) fundamental groupoid of @xmath , and let
@xmath denote the (free) fundamental group of @xmath at @xmath . The
subgraph of @xmath spanned by @xmath is a maximal subtree of @xmath ,
and @xmath then determines a free generating set @xmath of @xmath ;
explicitly, for each @xmath , @xmath .

The path @xmath cuts out a rectangle in @xmath ; the complementary
region in @xmath together with the graph @xmath is then a retract of
@xmath . Let @xmath denote homotopy for closed paths at @xmath in @xmath
. We can identify the fundamental groupoid of @xmath with @xmath We then
identify @xmath with the fundamental group of @xmath at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Consider the action of @xmath on the graph @xmath . For @xmath , the
result can be seen

seen in Fig. I.1.3 . The crucial point is that @xmath , and all the
other elements of @xmath are fixed by @xmath ; this makes the action
quite simple algebraically. Then, @xmath , and, for the free generator
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, for this element, @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the latter homotopy can be seen directly by collapsing the
elements of @xmath , which lie in the maximal subtree. Thus, we see that
@xmath acts on @xmath as the automorphism @xmath .

It follows that the action of any given element of @xmath on @xmath is
induced by some self-homeomorphism @xmath . The interesting feature now
is that @xmath carries the oriented Jordan curve @xmath to an oriented
Jordan curve @xmath . Recall that @xmath is obtained by edge
identification from the @xmath -gon with clockwise, boundary label
@xmath . The Jordan curve @xmath has as its preimage, in the @xmath
-gon, the union of a family of (disjoint) oriented arcs. These arcs can
be used to reconstruct @xmath , since the Jordan curve cyclically reads
off @xmath from its meetings with the labelled oriented tethers; notice
that the set of tethers is now dual to the set of generators @xmath .
The purpose of this appendix is to define and study a combinatorial
representation of the family of arcs, and recover Larue’s
characterization of the elements of @xmath .

Although it will not be used in our arguments, let us mention the fact
that, on collapsing the interior of each labelled edge of the @xmath
-gon to a labelled vertex, each oriented arc in the family becomes an
oriented edge, and we recover the (directed, multi-edge, non-cyclic)
Whitehead graph of @xmath ; see Fig. I.1.4 .

## Ii Nested sets

We now introduce some formal definitions that will allow us to associate
a combinatorial Jordan curve to each element of @xmath .

###### II.1 Definitions.

Let @xmath be a finite ordered set, and let @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the number of elements of @xmath . Then @xmath is
order-isomorphic to @xmath in a unique way, and we assign to @xmath the
induced metric, denoted @xmath . Thus @xmath if and only if @xmath and
no element of @xmath lies strictly between @xmath and @xmath .

Recall that the elements of @xmath are called @xmath -tuples for @xmath
.

Let @xmath be elements of @xmath . We say that @xmath is nested with
@xmath (for @xmath ) if @xmath are distinct elements of @xmath , and
either both of, or neither of, @xmath and @xmath lie between @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . It is not difficult to see that, in this event,
@xmath is nested with @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -tuples of @xmath .

We say that @xmath is an @xmath -tuple without repetitions if @xmath for
all @xmath in @xmath .

We say that @xmath is an ascending @xmath -tuple (for @xmath ) if @xmath
in @xmath .

We say that @xmath is nested (for @xmath ) if, for all @xmath in @xmath
, @xmath is nested with @xmath for @xmath .

We let @xmath act on @xmath , on the left, by @xmath . For example,
@xmath , and, hence, @xmath . The ascending rearrangement of @xmath is
the unique ascending @xmath -tuple for @xmath that lies in the @xmath
-orbit of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a @xmath -tuple for @xmath .

A permutation @xmath is said to embed @xmath in a plane if @xmath is
ascending for @xmath , and both @xmath and @xmath are nested in @xmath .

We say that @xmath is a planar @xmath -tuple (for @xmath ) if there
exists some @xmath which embeds @xmath in a plane. (If no two
consecutive terms of @xmath are equal, @xmath is then unique, but we
shall not need this fact.) There is then an associated diagram formed as
follows. We assign, to each point @xmath the label @xmath ; notice that
this means that the label of @xmath is @xmath . For each @xmath , we
join @xmath (labelled @xmath ) to @xmath (labelled @xmath ) by an
oriented semi-circle in the upper half-plane, and for each @xmath , we
join @xmath (labelled @xmath ) to @xmath (labelled @xmath ) by an
oriented semi-circle in the lower half-plane. These oriented
semi-circles form an oriented arc with no crossings which traces out the
@xmath -tuple @xmath . ∎

###### II.2 Example.

Suppose that @xmath is an 8-tuple for some ordered set @xmath , and that
the ascending rearrangement of @xmath is @xmath

The permutation @xmath embeds @xmath in a plane since both @xmath and
@xmath are nested in @xmath , and @xmath The associated diagram can be
seen in Fig. II.2.1 .

∎

Let us record two results which will be useful later.

###### II.3 Lemma.

Let @xmath be an ordered set, and let @xmath be a positive integer. Let
@xmath and @xmath be @xmath -tuples without repetitions for @xmath such
that @xmath is nested, and @xmath . If @xmath is ascending, then @xmath
is also ascending.

###### Proof.

We argue by induction on @xmath . If @xmath , the conclusion is trivial.
Now, assume that @xmath and that the implication holds with @xmath in
place of @xmath . We see that @xmath Since @xmath is nested with @xmath
, we also see that @xmath . By the induction hypothesis, @xmath is
ascending, and hence @xmath is ascending. Hence, the result is proved. ∎

###### II.4 Lemma.

Let @xmath be an ordered set, let @xmath , and let @xmath be a @xmath
-tuple for @xmath .

Then @xmath is planar for @xmath if and only if there exists an ordered
set @xmath , and a @xmath -tuple @xmath for @xmath , without
repetitions, and an ordered-set map @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are nested for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose first that @xmath is planar for @xmath , and let @xmath be an
element of @xmath that embeds @xmath in a plane. We take @xmath to be
@xmath with the usual ordering. For each @xmath , let @xmath and let
@xmath ; thus, @xmath . All the conditions are satisfied.

Conversely, if @xmath exists, we can identify @xmath with @xmath with
the usual ordering, in a unique way. Then the map @xmath is an element
@xmath of @xmath that embeds @xmath in a plane. ∎

## Iii Planar words in @xmath

###### III.1 Definitions.

Let @xmath be the monoid generating set @xmath of @xmath . We form the
ordered set @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We remark that, for @xmath , the ordering on @xmath is reminiscent of
the ordering of the ends of @xmath in Section 7 . We emphasize that,
even if @xmath , @xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath . Consider an @xmath -tuple @xmath for @xmath , and let
@xmath ; thus @xmath is an expression for @xmath . We define the
Whitehead expansion of @xmath to be the @xmath -tuple

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and we shall express it in the format @xmath . We say that
@xmath is a planar expression for @xmath if the Whitehead expansion of
@xmath is planar for @xmath . If the unique reduced expression for
@xmath is a planar expression for @xmath , then we say that @xmath is a
planar word in @xmath . ∎

###### III.2 Examples.

(i). The word @xmath is planar, since the Whitehead expansion of the
reduced expression is @xmath and, by Example II.2 , @xmath is planar for
@xmath ; in a sense, Fig. II.2.1 reflects Fig. I.1.4 . We call Fig.
II.2.1 the Larue-Whitehead diagram of @xmath .

(ii). The word @xmath is not planar; there is only one permutation to
consider.

(iii). The word @xmath is not planar; there are four permutations to
consider.

(iv). The word @xmath is planar, while the word @xmath is not planar,
and these two words have the same Whitehead graph. ∎

###### III.3 Proposition.

Let @xmath . If there exists some planar expression for @xmath , then
@xmath the reduced expression for @xmath @xmath is planar.

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a planar expression for @xmath , as in
Definitions III.1 .

By Lemma II.4 , there exists an ordered set @xmath , and a planar @xmath
-tuple @xmath for @xmath , without repetitions, and a labelling @xmath ,
@xmath , such that the labelling respects the orderings and @xmath is
the Whitehead expansion of @xmath . Moreover, @xmath .

Suppose that the given planar expression @xmath is not reduced. We shall
find a shorter planar expression for @xmath .

There exists some @xmath such that @xmath in @xmath , and we may suppose
that we have chosen this @xmath in such a way that @xmath has the
minimum possible value. Notice that @xmath .

Clearly, @xmath , and @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It suffices to show that @xmath is planar for @xmath .

Claim. @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider any @xmath such that @xmath lies between @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath denote @xmath .

Since @xmath , we see that @xmath . Hence @xmath .

Either @xmath or @xmath in @xmath . Hence,

-   either @xmath in @xmath ,

-   or @xmath in @xmath ,

respectively.

Since @xmath is nested, and @xmath lies between @xmath and @xmath , we
see, from Lemma II.3 , that @xmath lies between @xmath and @xmath .

Since @xmath is nested with @xmath and @xmath lies between @xmath and
@xmath , we see that @xmath lies between @xmath and @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with equality holding only if @xmath . Also, @xmath , and, hence, @xmath
. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the minimality of @xmath , we see that @xmath or @xmath . This proves
the claim. ∎

Now consider the passage from @xmath to @xmath .

On the odd-to-even steps, we pass from @xmath to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we remove @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and we add only @xmath . To
see that, for all @xmath , @xmath is nested with @xmath , we note the
following:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

On the even-to-odd steps, we pass from @xmath to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we remove @xmath and @xmath , and we add nothing. Hence this
remains nested. This completes the proof. ∎

###### III.4 Proposition.

Let @xmath be a planar word in @xmath , and let @xmath .

1.  

2.  @xmath is a squarefree word in @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

4.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

For some @xmath , there exists a reduced expression @xmath for @xmath .

(i). Suppose that @xmath is not squarefree, say @xmath occurs in @xmath
, then @xmath occurs in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the number of occurrences of @xmath in @xmath .

Suppose @xmath are labelled @xmath and @xmath are such that the
even-to-odd pairing contains @xmath . The odd-to-even pairing contains
@xmath for some @xmath . Let us choose @xmath so that @xmath is as large
as possible. Then @xmath . Whatever @xmath is paired with in the
odd-to-even pairing must lie in the interval @xmath and cannot have
label @xmath since the signs alternate, so @xmath is paired with @xmath
for some @xmath . This contradicts the maximality of @xmath . Hence
@xmath . Similarly, @xmath . Thus @xmath lies in both the even-to-odd
pairings and the odd-to-even pairings. This gives a sinlge component,
which is a contradiction.

(ii). Suppose that @xmath .

Thus @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that @xmath must be nested with @xmath , and, hence @xmath must
lie in @xmath . By (i), @xmath . Since @xmath is a reduced expression,
@xmath . Hence @xmath . Let us denote this term @xmath to distinguish it
from the preceding occurrence of @xmath . @xmath is nested with @xmath .
Hence, Then @xmath . By Lemma II.3 , @xmath .

Thus @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that @xmath must be nested with @xmath , and, hence, @xmath must
lie in @xmath . Since @xmath is a reduced rexpression, @xmath . Hence
@xmath , and we denote this by @xmath . Then @xmath , and, by Lemma II.3
, @xmath .

By repeating the argument in the last paragraph, we eventually find that
@xmath .

(iii). Suppose that @xmath .

Then @xmath and by an argument similar to that in (ii), we find that
this is impossible. ∎

## Iv @xmath permutes the planar words in @xmath

###### IV.1 Proposition.

Let @xmath and let @xmath . If @xmath is a planar word in @xmath , then
@xmath is a planar word in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is any planar expression for @xmath , as in
Definitions III.1 .

In applying @xmath to @xmath , we

-   

-   replace each @xmath with @xmath ,

-   replace each @xmath with @xmath ,

-   replace each @xmath with @xmath ,

-   replace each @xmath with @xmath .

We will not perform any cancellations in the resulting sequence.

Let @xmath be a permutation which embeds @xmath in a plane. By Lemma
II.4 , there exists an ordered set @xmath , and a @xmath -tuple @xmath
without repetitions, for @xmath , such that @xmath embeds @xmath in a
plane. Moreover, there exists a labelling @xmath , @xmath , such that
the labelling respects the orderings and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the number of elements of @xmath with label @xmath ,
and let @xmath denote the number of elements of @xmath with label @xmath
. To begin, we have to add @xmath elements to @xmath , and we have to
specify the ordering on the expanded set.

Let @xmath denote the set, in ascending order, of those elements of
@xmath which have the label @xmath . Let @xmath denote the set, in
ascending order, of those elements of @xmath which have the label @xmath
. Let @xmath denote the set, in ascending order, of those elements of
@xmath which have the label @xmath . Let @xmath denote the set, in
ascending order, of those elements of @xmath which have the label @xmath
. Thus we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and no other element of @xmath lies in the interval @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to express this.

With the preceding notation, we create an interval of @xmath new
elements denoted

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We expand @xmath by inserting this interval just before @xmath , that
is, just before the interval @xmath . We now have a new ordered set
@xmath with @xmath elements.

We have to specify the new labelling @xmath . On @xmath , we change the
labels from @xmath to @xmath . On @xmath , we change the labels from
@xmath to @xmath . On @xmath , we change the labels from @xmath to
@xmath . On @xmath , we keep the same labels, @xmath . On the rest of
@xmath , we keep the same labels. We give all the elements of @xmath the
label @xmath ; we give all the elements of @xmath the label @xmath ; we
give all the elements of @xmath and @xmath the label @xmath . The
labelling clearly respects the orderings of @xmath and @xmath .

For the even-to-odd steps, it follows from Lemma II.3 that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the @xmath -tuple obtained from @xmath as follows. For
each @xmath , there exists a unique @xmath such that @xmath . If @xmath
, then it is to be expanded to @xmath . If @xmath , then it is to be
expanded to @xmath . This completes the definition of @xmath .

In passing from @xmath to @xmath , we add @xmath . In @xmath , for each
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Both of these intervals are closed under the pairing-off of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath is also nested.

In passing from @xmath to @xmath , we delete
@xmath , and add @xmath . In @xmath , for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Each of these intervals is closed under the pairing-off of @xmath .
Thus, @xmath is nested. ∎

A similar argument shows that @xmath carries planar words to planar
words.

###### IV.2 Theorem.

The group @xmath acts on the set of planar words in @xmath , and, hence,
if @xmath , then every element of @xmath is a planar word.

###### IV.3 Remark.

By combining Theorem IV.2 and Proposition III.4 , we get another proof
of Corollary 7.6 . ∎

## V The @xmath-orbits of the planar words in @xmath

In this section we rework [ 21 , Lemma 2.3.12] and in this case our
argument seems to be longer than Larue’s. The object is to show that the
number of @xmath -orbits in the set of all planar words in @xmath is
@xmath , and that @xmath is a complete set of representatives.

###### V.1 Lemma.

Let @xmath , @xmath be elements of @xmath such that @xmath , let @xmath
, and let @xmath be a planar word in @xmath .

1.  

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

3.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is straightforward to show that @xmath acts as

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

(i). Suppose that @xmath .

Since @xmath is a subword of @xmath , every letter occurring in @xmath
that belongs to @xmath belongs to a (reduced) subword of @xmath of the
form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Since, moreover, @xmath begins
with @xmath , it can be shown that it is not possible to have @xmath or
@xmath . Thus @xmath . Here, @xmath .

We factor @xmath into syllables consisting of all such subwords together
with the individual remaining letters, all of which lie in @xmath , and
all of which are mapped to single letters by @xmath .

Since @xmath occurs in @xmath , we see that @xmath .

(ii). Suppose that @xmath .

Since @xmath is a subword of @xmath , every letter occurring in @xmath
that belongs to @xmath belongs to a (reduced) subword of @xmath of the
form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Since, moreover, @xmath begins
with @xmath , it can be shown that it is not possible to have @xmath or
@xmath . Thus @xmath . Here, @xmath .

We factor @xmath into syllables consisting of all such subwords together
with the individual remaining letters, all of which lie in @xmath , and
all of which are mapped to single letters by @xmath .

Since @xmath occurs in @xmath , it is then clear that @xmath . ∎

###### V.2 Lemma.

Let @xmath , @xmath be elements of @xmath such that @xmath , let @xmath
, and let @xmath be a planar word in @xmath .

1.  

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath , and, moreover, if @xmath then @xmath .

3.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is straightforward to show that @xmath acts as

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

(i). Suppose that @xmath .

Since @xmath is a subword of @xmath , every letter occurring in @xmath
that belongs to @xmath belongs to a (reduced) subword of @xmath of the
form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Since, moreover, @xmath begins
with @xmath , it can be shown that it is not possible to have @xmath or
@xmath . Thus @xmath . Here, @xmath .

We factor @xmath into syllables consisting of all such subwords together
with the individual remaining letters, all of which lie in @xmath , and
all of which are mapped to single letters by @xmath .

It is then clear that @xmath .

Moreover, if @xmath , then @xmath , and @xmath .

(ii). Suppose that @xmath .

Since @xmath is a subword of @xmath , every letter occurring in @xmath
that belongs to @xmath belongs to a (reduced) subword of @xmath of the
form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Since, moreover, @xmath begins
with @xmath , it can be shown that it is not possible to have @xmath or
@xmath . Thus @xmath . Here, @xmath .

We factor @xmath into syllables consisting of all such subwords together
with the individual remaining letters, all of which lie in @xmath , and
all of which are mapped to single letters by @xmath .

Since @xmath occurs in @xmath , it is then clear that @xmath . ∎

###### V.3 Theorem (Larue).

The set @xmath is a complete set of representatives of the @xmath
-orbits in the set of all planar words in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a planar word in @xmath . We wish to show that there
exists some @xmath such that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the largest integer such that @xmath .

We may assume that, for all @xmath , @xmath , and if @xmath , then
@xmath .

By Lemma V.1 , for all @xmath , @xmath .

By Proposition III.4 (i), @xmath .

By the maximality of @xmath , @xmath .

By Proposition III.4 (iii), @xmath .

By Lemma V.2 , for all @xmath , @xmath .

Hence, @xmath , as desired. ∎

###### V.4 Remarks.

(i). Let @xmath be a planar word in @xmath .

Lemmas V.1 and V.2 give an effective procedure for finding @xmath first
to minimize @xmath , and then to obtain the form @xmath for some @xmath
.

(ii). Let @xmath and let @xmath be a word in @xmath .

Theorem V.3 shows that @xmath lies in the @xmath -orbit of @xmath if and
only if the cyclically-reduced form of @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath
is planar. Moreover, in this event, Lemmas V.1 and V.2 effectively
produce a @xmath such that @xmath .

(iii). There is then an algorithm which, for any @xmath , and any @xmath
-tuple @xmath for @xmath , decides if there exists some @xmath such that
@xmath , and effectively finds such a @xmath . We proceed as follows. We
first convert @xmath to @xmath if possible, and then we restrict to
@xmath .

It is interesting to compare this algorithm for @xmath with the
Whitehead algorithm for the much larger group @xmath . The information
provided by planarity is more detailed then the information carried by
the Whitehead graph used in the Whitehead algorithm. ∎

We record the following.

###### V.5 Theorem (Larue).

Let @xmath and let @xmath . Then @xmath lies in the @xmath -orbit of
@xmath if and only if the cyclically-reduced form of @xmath lies in
@xmath and @xmath is planar. ∎

Acknowledgments

The research of both authors was funded by the MEC (Spain) and the EFRD
(EU) through Projects BFM2003-06613 and MTM2006-13544.

We are grateful to Patrick Dehornoy for encouraging us to study the work
of Larue, to Bert Wiest for supplying us with photocopies of many pages
of Larue’s thesis, and to David Larue for kindly making his thesis
available online.

We thank Mladen Bestvina and Edward Formanek for many interesting
observations.