This thesis may be summarized by the questions it addresses.

What is energy in general relativity ? How can it be described in
general terms? Is there a concept of energy independent from the
spacetime asymptotic structure? Valid in any dimension and for any
solution? Are there unambiguous notions of conserved quantities in
general gauge and gravity theories?

Are the laws of black hole mechanics universal in any theory of
gravitation? Why? What can one tell about the geometry of spacetimes
with closed timelike curves? Has three dimensional gravity specific
symmetries? What can classical symmetries tell about the semi-classical
limit of quantum gravity?

In a preamble, a quick summary of the line of thought from Noetherâ€™s
theorems to modern views on conserved charges in gauge theories is
attempted. Most of the background material needed for the thesis is set
out through a small survey of the literature. Emphasis is put on the
concepts more than on the formalism, which is relegated to the
appendices.

The treatment of exact conservation laws in Lagrangian gauge theories
constitutes the main axis of the first part of the thesis. The formalism
is developed as a self-consistent theory but is inspired by earlier
works, mainly by cohomological results, covariant phase space methods
and by the Hamiltonian formalism. The thermodynamical properties of
black holes, especially the first law, are studied in a general
geometrical setting and are worked out for several black objects: black
holes, strings and rings. Also, the geometrical and thermodynamical
properties of a new family of black holes with closed timelike curves in
three dimensions are described.

The second part of the thesis is the natural generalization of the first
part to asymptotic analyses. We start with a general construction of
covariant phase spaces admitting asymptotically conserved charges. The
representation of the asymptotic symmetry algebra by a covariant Poisson
bracket among the conserved charges is then defined and is shown to
admit generically central extensions. The asymptotic structures of three
three-dimensional spacetimes are then studied in detail and the
consequences for quantum gravity in three dimensions are discussed.
