In this thesis I study the dynamics of a collapsing scalar field coupled
to Einsteinâ€™s equations. In this model, evolution of initial data leads
to one of two possible endstates: formation of a black hole or
dispersion to flat space. At the threshold between black hole formation
and dispersion the behavior of the system is characterized by so-called
critical phenomena : scaling, self-similarity and universality. These
features of critical collapse are numerically investigated from both
local and global points of view.

On the one hand, only a small region of spacetime close to the origin is
relevant for the dynamics of critical collapse. On the other hand, it is
also possible for a distant observer to analyze the radiation signal
emitted by the collapsing matter field. In the framework of
characteristic evolution , such observers can be modelled by employing
radial compactification on outgoing null cones, so that the numerical
grid extends to future null infinity. One may then extract global
properties such as the Bondi mass and the news function.

We study the threshold behavior by numerical evolution of one parameter
families of initial data. The parameter is fine-tuned to the threshold
via bisection. In the evolution of such near-critical data, the solution
approaches the self-similar critical solution for some time. We find
that the critical exponent that characterizes the discretely
self-similar solution can be extracted both locally, in the self-similar
region and globally, e.g. from the news function. In this sense,
self-similarity is observable from future null infinity.

For late times in near-critical evolutions, we see a residual mass
concentrated outside of the self-similar region and conjecture that it
originates from backscattering of outgoing radiation during the
collapse. The fate of this mass is unclear. If, in supercritical
evolutions, this mass were to fall into the black hole, the black hole
mass would be finite, no matter how fine-tuned the initial data.

For subcritical evolutions we have numerically analyzed the exponents of
power law tails and have found agreement with analytical calculations
for radiation along null infinity and along timelike lines. We argue
that for astrophysical observers the relevant falloff rate is that of
future null infinity.

We have also investigated the behavior of quasinormal modes (QNM) in
near-critical evolutions. Although the perturbation theory underlying
QNMs requires a fixed black hole background, we have found a surprising
correlation between the radiation signal with the period of the first
QNM determined by the time-dependent Bondi mass. In this context, we
have also been able to verify a stationarity criterion based on QNMs for
the Vaidya metric, which models the time-dependent Schwarzschild
background.
