## Preamble

### 1 Conservation laws and symmetries

The concept of conservation law has a long and profound history in
physics. Whatever the physical laws considered: classical mechanics,
fluid mechanics, solid state physics, as well as quantum mechanics,
quantum field theory or general relativity, whatever the constituents of
the theory and the intricate dynamical processes involved, quantities
left dynamically invariant have always been essential ingredients to
describe nature. The crowning conservation law, namely the constancy of
the total amount of energy of an isolated system, has been set up as the
first principle of thermodynamics and constitutes one of the
broadest-range physical law.

At the mathematical level, conservation laws are deeply connected with
the existence of a variational principle which admits symmetry
transformations . This crucial fact was fully acknowledged by
Emmy Noether in 1918 [ 199 ] . Her work, esteemed by F. Klein and D.
Hilbert and remarked by Einstein though hardly rewarded, provided a deep
basis for the understanding of global conservation laws in classical
mechanics and in classical field theories [ 228 , 80 ] . It also
prepared the ground to understanding the conservation laws in Einstein
gravity where the striking lack of local gravitational stress-tensor
called for further developments.

The essential ideas of linking symmetries and conservation laws can be
understood already in the classical description of a mechanical system
in the following way. Let @xmath denote the Lagrangian describing the
motion of @xmath particles of position @xmath and velocities @xmath .
For a system invariant under translations in time , the total derivative
of the Lagrangian with respect to time @xmath contains only the sum of
implicit time variations @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . When the
Lagrangian equations hold, @xmath , the time variation of the Lagrangian
becomes @xmath . The quantity @xmath , the energy of the system, is then
conserved in time.

The same line of argument can be applied for an homogeneous and
isotropic in space action principle, which leads respectively to the
conservation of impulsion and angular momentum (see for example [ 186 ]
). These arguments are applied equally to non-relativistic or
relativistic particles.

Similarly, conservation laws associated with global symmetries appear in
field theories. Let us consider the simple example of an action
principle depending at most on the first derivative of the fields @xmath
¹ ¹ 1 All basic definitions and conventions may be found in Appendix A .
. An infinitesimal transformation is characterized by a transformation
of the fields @xmath ² ² 2 In this thesis, we consider infinitesimal
variations in characteristic form, see Appendix A for details. . The
transformation is called a global symmetry if the Lagrangian is
invariant under this transformation up to a total derivative, @xmath .
Global symmetries thus form a vector space.

As a main example, in relativistic field theories, the fields are
constrained to form a representation of the Poincaré group and the
Lagrangian has to be invariant (up to boundary terms) under Poincaré
transformations. The global symmetries for translations and Lorentz
transformations read respectively as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath , @xmath are the constant parameters of the transformation
@xmath , @xmath is the Minkowski metric used to raise and lower indices
and @xmath are the matrix elements of the representation of the Lorentz
group to which the fields @xmath belong. For a quick derivation see e.g.
[ 126 ] .

Stated loosely, Noether’s first theorem states that any global symmetry
corresponds to a conserved current. Indeed, by definition, the variation
@xmath equals the sum of terms @xmath and @xmath . Using the equations
of motion, one then obtains that the current @xmath is conserved
on-shell, @xmath . Using this current, one can define the charge @xmath
on a spacelike surface @xmath which is conserved, @xmath according to
Stokes’ theorem if the spatial current vanishes at the boundary.

By way of example, associated with the translations and Lorentz
transformations  ( 1 ) is the current @xmath where the canonical
energy-momentum tensor @xmath and the tensor @xmath are obtained as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Remark that the energy @xmath associated with @xmath correctly reduces
to the mechanical expression in @xmath dimension.

In full generality, there is no bijective correspondence between global
symmetries and conserved currents. On the one hand, the current @xmath
is trivially zero in the case where the characteristic of the
transformation @xmath is a combination of the equations of motion. On
the other hand, one can associate with a given symmetry the family of
currents @xmath which are all conserved. It is nevertheless possible to
find quotient spaces where there is bijectivity. It is necessary to
first introduce the concept of gauge invariance.

A gauge theory is a Lagrangian theory such that its Euler-Lagrange
equations of motion admit non-trivial Noether identities, see Appendix B
for definitions. Equivalently, as a consequence of the second Noether
theorem, a gauge theory is a theory that admits non-trivial gauge
transformations, i.e. linear applications from the space of local
functions to the vector space of global symmetries of the Lagrangian.
Vanishing on-shell gauge transformations are defined as trivial gauge
transformations.

Gauge transformations do not change the physics. It is therefore natural
to define equivalent global symmetries as symmetries of the theory that
differ by a gauge transformation. The resulting quotient space is called
the space of non-trivial global symmetries.

On the other side, two currents @xmath and @xmath will be called
equivalent if

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath depends on the equations of motion. The complete first
Noether theorem can now be stated: There is an isomorphism between
equivalence classes of global symmetries and equivalence classes of
conserved currents (modulo constant currents in dimension @xmath ) .
This theorem can be derived using cohomological methods [ 48 , 47 ] .

As a direct application of this theorem, one may consider tensors
equivalent to the energy-momentum tensor ( 2 ) which differ by a
divergence @xmath with @xmath , and by a tensor linear in the equations
of motion and its derivatives @xmath . This freedom may be used to
construct the so-called Belinfante stress-tensor @xmath [ 65 ] which is
symmetric in its two indices and which satisfies @xmath , see
discussions in [ 36 , 126 ] .

Note also that there is a quantum counterpart to all these classical
considerations. However, we will not discuss these very interesting
issues in quantum field theory in this thesis.

### 2 Puzzles in gauge theories

In classical electromagnetism, besides the energy-momentum and the
angular momentum associated with global Poincaré symmetries there is a
conserved charge, the electric charge, associated with the existence of
a non-trivial Noether identity or, equivalently, with the existence of a
gauge freedom ³ ³ 3 See Appendix B for the background material used in
this section. . Indeed, in arbitrary curvilinear coordinates, the
equations of motion read as @xmath where the charge-current vector
@xmath has to satisfy the continuity equation @xmath because of the
Noether identity @xmath . The electric charge @xmath can be expressed as
the integral over a Cauchy surface @xmath (usually of constant time),

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

where Stokes’ theorem has been applied with @xmath the boundary of
@xmath , i.e. the @xmath sphere at spatial infinity. Here we introduced
the convenient notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the numerically invariant tensor with @xmath . Note that
any current @xmath can be reexpressed as a @xmath form @xmath . A
conserved current @xmath is equivalent to a closed form @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 In
this section we will denote the horizontal differential @xmath simply as
. .

Noether’s first theorem, however, cannot be used to describe this
conservation law. On the one hand, there is an ambiguity ( 3 ) in the
choice of the conserved current and, on the other hand, all gauge
transformations are thrown out of the quotient space of non-trivial
global symmetries. If one’s derivation is based only on the first
Noether theorem, why would one choose the conserved current, @xmath in
place of @xmath with any @xmath , e.g. @xmath ?

The problem can be cleared up by considering two Cauchy surfaces @xmath
and @xmath with boundaries @xmath and @xmath and the @xmath surface at
infinity @xmath joining @xmath and @xmath , see Fig. 1 . Stokes’ theorem
implies the equality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, for the integral of @xmath to be a conserved quantity, the
right-hand side has to vanish on-shell. This is true for @xmath because
the Noether current @xmath vanishes on-shell outside the sources but it
is not true for arbitrary @xmath . The point is that the conservation of
electric charge is a lower degree conservation law , i.e. not based on
the conservation of a @xmath form @xmath , but on the conservation of a
@xmath form @xmath with @xmath .

The proof of uniqueness of the conserved @xmath form @xmath and its
relation to the gauge freedom of the theory goes beyond standard Noether
theorems even if they show part of the answer.

General relativity also admits gauge freedom, namely diffeomorphism
invariance. Infinitesimal transformations under characteristic form
@xmath are parameterized by arbitrary vector fields @xmath . Here, a
straightforward application of the first Noether theorem fails to
provide even a proposal for a conserved quantity associated with this
gauge invariance.

More precisely, the variation of the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian is
given by @xmath with @xmath ⁵ ⁵ 5 We use in this section units such that
@xmath . and @xmath . For a diffeomorphism, one has @xmath @xmath and
@xmath . The canonical Noether current is then @xmath . By construction,
it satisfies @xmath . Using the algebraic Poincaré lemma, see Theorem 20
on page 20 , the Noether current can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some skew-symmetric @xmath . An idea is to define the charge
associated with @xmath as @xmath where @xmath is the sphere at spatial
infinity. However, this definition is completely arbitrary. Indeed,
since the Noether current is determined up to the ambiguity ( 3 ), the
Noether current @xmath could also have been chosen to be zero.

A conserved surface charge can be defined from a conserved
superpotential @xmath such that @xmath . This superpotential would have
to be different from a total divergence @xmath for the charge to be
non-trivial. The point is that the Noether theorem is mute about the
choice or, at least the existence of a special choice, for this
superpotential.

In the early relativity literature, conservation laws for
(four-dimensional) spacetimes which admit an expansion @xmath close to
infinity ⁶ ⁶ 6 Some additional conditions are required on the
time-dependence and on the behavior under parity of @xmath , see [ 208 ]
for detailed boundary conditions for asymptotically flat spacetimes at
spatial infinity. were given in terms of pseudo-tensors, i.e.
coordinate-dependent quantities @xmath which are invariant under
diffeomorphisms vanishing fast enough at infinity and which are
covariant under Poincaré transformations at infinity. A first
pseudo-tensor was found by Einstein and many others where built up
afterwards, see for example [ 18 , 236 ] for a synthesis, see also [ 76
] for a list of references. Note that quasi-local methods present a
modern point of view on pseudo-tensors [ 93 ] . This approach, which was
quite successful to describe the conserved momentum and angular momentum
of asymptotically flat spacetimes, unfortunately suffers from serious
drawbacks, e.g. the need for defining a rectangular coordinate system at
infinity, the profusion of alternative definitions for @xmath , the lack
of articulation with respect to the gauge structure of the theory, the
difficulties to generalize and link the definition to other asymptotics,
etc.

In Yang-Mills theory, similar problems as in general relativity mainly
arise because, as will be cleared later, the gauge transformations
involve the fields of the theory.

Nevertheless, a useful formula for the conserved quantity associated
with an exact Killing vector for a solution of Einstein’s equations in
vacuum was given by Komar [ 185 ] . This expression provided a
sufficient tool to unravel the thermodynamical properties of black holes
[ 45 ] . Unfortunately, this formula is only valid in symmetric
spacetimes without cosmological constant and one needs to compare it
with other definitions, e.g. [ 19 ] , in order to get the factors right.

All these puzzles called for further developments.

### 3 Results in local cohomology

A very convenient mathematical setting to deal with @xmath or @xmath
-form conservation laws or more generally @xmath -form conservation laws
( @xmath ) is the study of local cohomology in field theories. This
subject was first developed in the mathematical literature and research
was proceeded by physicists as well in the eighties and nineties [ 241 ,
242 , 238 , 244 , 10 , 9 , 79 , 48 , 47 ] . A self-contained summary of
important definitions and propositions can be found in Appendix A , see
also [ 234 ] for a pedagogical introduction to local cohomology.

Two sets of conservations laws in field theories can be distinguished:
the so-called topological conservation laws and the dynamical
conservation laws. Topological conservation laws are equivalence classes
of @xmath -forms @xmath which are identically closed @xmath modulo exact
forms @xmath , irrespectively of the field equations of the theory.
These laws reflect topological properties of the bundle of fields or of
the base manifold itself. For example, if the bundle of fields is a
vector bundle, only the base manifold can provide non-trivial cohomology
and no interesting, i.e. field-dependent, topological conservation laws
appear [ 244 , 234 ] .

A famous example of topological conservation law is the “kink number”
first obtained by Finkelstein and Misner [ 134 ] . As described in [ 233
] , the bundle of Lorentzian signature metrics over a @xmath
-dimensional manifold admits a cohomology isomorphic to the Rham
cohomology of @xmath . The only non-trivial cohomology is given by a
@xmath form, a conserved current, in the case where @xmath is even. The
kink number is then defined as the integral of this form on a @xmath
-dimensional surface. It can be shown to be an integer. Remark that in
the vielbein formulation of gravity, topological charges are due to the
constraint @xmath on the vielbein manifold. The set of topological
conserved p-forms is then larger because it also contains non-invariant
forms under local Lorentz transformations of the vielbein [ 47 ] .

Topological conservation laws mentioned here for completeness will not
be considered hereafter.

More fruitful are the dynamical conservations laws defined as the
conservation laws where the equations of motion are explicitly used. The
cohomology of closed forms on-shell @xmath modulo exact forms on-shell
@xmath is called the characteristic cohomology @xmath on the stationary
surface in form degree @xmath .

The cohomology @xmath is nothing but the cohomology of non-trivial
conserved currents which can be shown to be equal to the cohomology of
global symmetries of the theory. This is in essence the first Noether
theorem that was already described in section 1 . Note that for general
relativity, this cohomology is trivial as a consequence of the
nonexistence of non-trivial global symmetries [ 232 , 12 ] . In free
theories, this cohomology may be infinite-dimensional and can be
difficult to compute even for the Maxwell case [ 189 , 196 , 182 , 200 ,
5 ] .

For a very large class of Lagrangians including Dirac, Klein-Gordon,
Chern-Simons, Yang-Mills or general relativity theories which satisfy
appropriate regularity conditions, the cohomologies @xmath may be
studied by tools inspired from BRST methods [ 47 , 51 ] . Each element
of the cohomology @xmath can be related to a non-trivial reducibility
parameter of the theory, i.e. a parameter of a gauge transformation
vanishing on-shell such that the parameter itself is non zero on-shell.
For irreducible gauge theories, this cohomology entirely specifies the
characteristic cohomology in degree @xmath , in particular, in
Yang-Mills and Einstein theories.

For Maxwell’s theory, a reducibility parameter @xmath for the gauge
field @xmath exists,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is unique: @xmath (up to a multiplicative constant that can be
absorbed in the choice of units). The associated conserved @xmath form
is obviously the electric charge ( 4 ). For Einstein gravity or for
Yang-Mills theory with a semi-simple gauge group, no reducibility
parameter exists, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies @xmath and @xmath . Stated differently, no vector is a Killing
vector of all solutions of Einstein’s equations, even when the Killing
equation is only imposed “on-shell”. Because the reducibility equations
for the Yang-Mills case also depend on arbitrary fields, there are no
reducibility parameters either. As a consequence, there is no general
formula for a non-trivial conserved @xmath form locally constructed from
the fields in these theories.

This explains a posteriori the insurmountable difficulties people
encountered when trying to define the analogue of the energy-momentum
tensor ( 2 ) for the gravitational field. This impossibility was
celebrated in Misner, Thorne and Wheeler [ 195 ] in the quotation “
Anybody who looks for a magic formula for “local gravitational
energy-momentum” is looking for the right answer to the wrong question.
Unhappily, enormous time and effort were devoted in the past to trying
to “answer this question” before investigators realized the futility of
the enterprise ”.

The lack of local energy-momentum tensor does not prevent, however, the
definition of conserved quantities for restricted classes of spacetimes
as the spacetimes admitting a Killing vector (e.g. Komar integrals) or
the spacetimes admitting a common asymptotic structure (e.g. global
energy-momentum for asymptotically flat spacetimes) as we will explain
below.

In the case of free or interacting @xmath -form theories, the lower
degree cohomologies acquire importance because of the reducibility of
the gauge theory. In that case, the characteristic cohomologies @xmath
in form degree @xmath are generated (in the exterior product) by the
forms @xmath dual to the field strengths @xmath [ 161 ] . More details
on conservations laws in @xmath -form gauge theories will be given in
section 3 of Chapter 2 .

### 4 Windows on the literature

There is an impressive literature on conservations laws in general
relativity, see e.g. the review [ 226 ] . Several lines of research have
been followed, often with intertwining and mutual progress. Some results
such as the ADM energy-momentum [ 19 ] for asymptotically flat
spacetimes or the Abbott-Deser charges for asymptotically anti-de Sitter
spacetimes [ 1 ] are seen as bench marks that should be included within
any viable theory of conserved charges.

In the following paragraphs, the methods that are significant and
relevant for the thesis will be briefly set out. They will be organized
along the chronological order of their seminal work. Certainly, this
succinct presentation will be biased by personal preferences and
unintentional oversights.

A major progress towards the understanding of asymptotically conserved
quantities in general relativity was achieved by Arnowitt, Deser and
Misner [ 19 ] . These authors reformulated general relativity in
Hamiltonian terms and identified the canonical generator conjugated to
time displacement at spatial infinity for asymptotically flat
spacetimes. In [ 208 ] , Regge and Teitelboim provided a criteria,
namely the differentiability of the Hamiltonian, to uniquely identify
the surface terms to be added to the weakly vanishing Hamiltonian
associated with any asymptotic Poincaré transformation at spatial
infinity. Hamiltonian methods were later successfully applied to
asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes [ 159 , 158 ] . The canonical
theory of representation of the Lie algebra of asymptotic symmetries by
the possibly centrally extended Poisson bracket of the canonical
generators was done in [ 74 , 75 ] . The analysis of flat spacetimes was
refined in later works [ 63 , 225 ] in which covariance was kept
manifest and boundary conditions were weakened.

An elegant construction to investigate the asymptotic structure of
spacetimes at null infinity was developed by Penrose [ 204 ] inspired
from the work of Bondi, van der Burg and Metzner [ 69 ] . It consisted
in adding to the physical spacetime a suitable conformal boundary.
Conformal methods were also developed for spatial infinity [ 140 ] and
the quantities constructed at spatial and null infinity were related [
22 , 95 ] . A review of various constructions can be found in [ 23 ] .
An alternative definition of spatial infinity was also given in [ 26 ] .
These methods were also successful to describe conserved quantities in
anti-de Sitter spacetimes by using the electric part of the Weyl tensor
[ 24 , 30 ] .

A manifestly covariant approach was developed by Abbott and Deser [ 1 ]
by manipulating the linearized Einstein equations. The method provided
the first completely satisfactory framework to study charges in anti-de
Sitter spacetimes. A similar line of argument led to the definition of
charges in non-abelian gauge theories [ 3 ] . Recently, higher curvature
theories were investigated [ 119 , 120 , 114 , 121 ] .

A spinorial definition for energy was given in [ 198 , 141 , 142 ]
following the positive energy theorems proven in [ 217 , 249 ] .
Positivity of energy in locally asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes
was recently studied in [ 94 ] .

Covariant phase space methods, also denoted as covariant symplectic
methods, [ 107 , 108 , 25 ] provided a powerful Hamiltonian framework
embedded in a covariant formalism. The study of local symmetries [ 187 ]
in Lagrangian field theory led to significant developments in general
diffeomorphic invariant theories [ 245 , 174 , 247 ] , see also [ 175 ]
for a comparison with Euclidean methods. The representation of the Lie
algebra of asymptotic symmetries with a covariant Poisson bracket was
developed in [ 184 ] . In first order theories, a prescription depending
only on the equations of motion was given [ 178 , 218 , 179 , 180 ] in
order to define the integrated superpotential corresponding to an
arbitrary asymptotic symmetry. Fermionic charges were included in the
covariant phase space formalism recently in [ 169 ] .

Quasi-local quantities, i.e. quantities defined with respect to a
bounded region of spacetime, may be defined by employing a
Hamilton-Jacobi analysis of the action functional [ 76 , 78 ] . These
definitions are in particular very suitable to perform numerical
calculations for realistic configurations. The covariant symplectic
methods were applied also for spatially bounded regions in [ 6 , 7 ] .

Charges for flat and anti-de Sitter spacetimes have been defined
directly from the action [ 157 , 37 , 20 , 21 ] after having prescribed
the boundary terms to be added to the Lagrangian.

Finally, cohomological techniques began with the observation of Anderson
and Torre [ 13 ] that asymptotic conservation laws can be understood as
cohomology groups of the variational bicomplex pulled back to the
surface defined by the equations of motion. Conservation laws and
central extensions for asymptotically linear configurations in
irreducible Lagrangian gauge theories were investigated in [ 52 ] using
BRST techniques. Conserved charges associated with exact symmetries were
studied in [ 55 ] . A non-linear theory for exact and asymptotic
symmetries was developed in [ 61 ] .

Different methods that apply to anti-de Sitter spacetimes have been
compared in detail in [ 168 ] . See also [ 203 ] for a link between
counterterm methods and covariant phase space techniques.

### 5 The central idea: the linearized theory

The Hamiltonian framework [ 19 , 208 ] as well as covariant methods [ 1
, 245 , 13 ] directly or indirectly make use of the linearized theory
around a reference field. The linearized theory is either used as an
approximation to the full theory at the infinite distance boundary or as
the first order approximation when performing infinitesimal field
variations. This is the main theme underlying the present thesis.

In comparison to the full interacting theory, possibilities of
occurrence of conserved @xmath forms in the linearized theory are
greatly enhanced. Indeed, in that case, the characteristic cohomology
@xmath is determined by the solutions of the reducibility equations of
the linear theory which may admit non-trivial solutions if the reference
field is symmetric, see Appendix B . 3 . Moreover, the conserved surface
charges in regular gauge theories are entirely classified by this
cohomology.

For example, in Yang-Mills theory, the linearized theory around the flat
connection @xmath admits @xmath reducibility parameters where @xmath is
the number of generators of the gauge group [ 3 , 52 ] . The associated
charges, however, are not very illuminating since they vanish in
interesting cases [ 3 ] .

In Einstein gravity, the reducibility equations of the linearized theory
around a reference solution @xmath admit as only solutions the Killing
vectors of the background [ 13 , 56 ] . This completely determines the
characteristic cohomology in that case and, therefore, provides unique
expressions (up to trivialities) for the conserved @xmath forms. Also,
in higher spin fields theories, @xmath , conserved @xmath forms are in
one-to-one correspondence with dynamical Killing tensors [ 58 ] .

In the full non-linear theory, the surface charges of the linearized
theory can be re-interpreted as one-forms in field space, the
appropriate mathematical framework being the variational bicomplex
associated with a set of Euler-Lagrange equations, see Appendix A for a
summary. Two different approaches make use of these charges one-forms.

An old successful method used in the asymptotic context, e.g. [ 19 , 208
] , consists in integrating infinitesimal charge variations at infinity
to get charge differences between the background and the solutions of
interest by using boundary conditions on the fields so as to ensure
convergence, conservation and representation properties of the charges.
Besides the Hamiltonian framework, similar results have been obtained in
Lagrangian formalism, e.g. [ 52 ] where detailed criteria for the
applicability of the linearized theory at the boundary have been
studied.

Another approach, followed e.g. by Komar [ 185 ] , consists in
considering a mini-superspace of solutions admitting a set of Killing
vectors of a reference solution [ 55 ] . Finite charge differences
generalizing Komar integrals can be defined if a suitable integrability
condition hold [ 247 , 55 ] . This allows one, e.g., to derive more
generally the first law of black holes mechanics [ 57 ] .

We now turn to the formalism where these ideas will be developed in more
mathematical terms.

Part I

Conserved charges in Lagrangian gauge theories

Application to the mechanics

of black holes

## Chapter 1 Classical theory of surface charges

We develop in this chapter a “cohomological” treatment of exact
symmetries in Lagrangian gauge theories. The extension to asymptotic
analyses is done in the second part of the thesis.

We begin by reviewing the construction of Noether charges for global
symmetries and we recall how central charges appear in that context. We
then fix our description of irreducible gauge theories and recall that
Noether currents associated with gauge symmetries can be chosen to
vanish on-shell. Surface one-forms, which are @xmath -forms in base
space and one-forms in field space, are constructed next from the weakly
vanishing Noether currents. The integrals of these surface one-forms on
closed surfaces are the surface charge one-forms which constitute the
cornerstone in our description of conservation laws in gauge theories.

In order to be self-contained, some results established in [ 52 ] are
rederived, independently of BRST cohomological methods: reducibility
parameters, e.g. Killing vectors in gravitation, form a Lie algebra and
surface charge one-forms associated with reducibility parameters are
conserved and represent the Lie algebra of reducibility parameters. A
result of [ 52 ] is also recalled without proof ¹ ¹ 1 As stated in
Appendix A , we assume that the fiber bundle of fields is trivial. :
each equivalence class of, local, closed @xmath -forms modulo, local,
exact @xmath -forms is associated with a reducibility parameter and
representatives for these conserved forms are given by the surface
one-forms.

The surface charge one-forms are constructed from the Euler-Lagrange
derivatives of the Lagrangian and thus do not depend on total
divergences added to the Lagrangian. So, from the outset, our approach
is free from the troublesome ambiguities of covariant phase space
methods [ 245 , 174 , 247 ] . This property may also be understood from
the link between the surface charge one-forms and what we call the
invariant presymplectic @xmath form, distinguished from the usual
covariant phase space presymplectic @xmath -form.

In another connection, the Hamiltonian prescription [ 208 , 159 , 158 ]
to define the surface charges is shown to be equivalent to our
definition. In that sense, our formalism provides the Lagrangian
counterpart of the Hamiltonian framework.

For first order actions, our definition of surface charges reduces to
the definition of [ 178 , 218 , 179 , 180 ] which was motivated by the
Hamiltonian formalism. Because our formalism does not assume the action
to be of first order it therefore extends this proposal to Lagrangians
with higher order derivatives.

In the last section, we define the surface charges related to a family
of solutions admitting reducibility parameters by integrating the
surface charge one-forms along a path starting from a reference
solution. We explain how these charges are well-defined if integrability
conditions for the surface charge one-forms are fulfilled. These
conditions have been originally discussed for surface charge one-forms
associated with fixed vector fields in the context of diffeomorphic
invariant theories [ 247 ] . Here we point out that for a given set of
gauge fields and gauge parameters, the surface charge one-forms should
be considered as a Pfaff system and that integrability is governed by
Frobenius’ theorem. This gives the whole subject a thermodynamical
flavor, which we emphasize by our notation @xmath for the surface charge
one-forms. Eventually, we discuss some properties of the surface charges
and point out their relation to quantities defined at infinity.

In Appendix A , we give elementary definitions of jet spaces, horizontal
complex, variational bicomplex and homotopy operators. We fix notations
and conventions and recall the relevant formulae. In particular, we
prove crucial properties of the invariant presymplectic @xmath form
associated with the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion. Some properties
of classical gauge theories are summarized in Appendix B .

### 1 Global symmetries and Noether currents

In a Lagrangian field theory, the dynamics is generated from a
distinguished @xmath -form, the Lagrangian @xmath , through the
Euler-Lagrange equations of motion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

A global symmetry @xmath is a vector field under characteristic form
(see ( A2 )) satisfying the condition @xmath . The Noether current
@xmath is then defined through the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

A particular solution is @xmath . Here, the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined by equation ( A29 ) for Lagrangians depending on more than
first order derivatives. Applying @xmath to the definition of the
Noether current for @xmath and using ( A41 ) together with the facts
that @xmath is a global symmetry and that Euler Lagrange derivatives
annihilate @xmath exact @xmath forms, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath linear and homogeneous in the Euler-Lagrange derivatives of
the Lagrangian and defined in ( 3 ). Under appropriate regularity
conditions on the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion [ 160 , 51 ] ,
which we always assume to be fulfilled, two local functions are equal
on-shell @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath differ by terms that
are linear and homogeneous in and their derivatives. If the expression
in parenthesis on the l.h.s of ( 1.3 ) is @xmath exact, we get the usual
algebra of currents on-shell

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The origin of classical central charges in the context of Noether
charges associated with global symmetries are the obstructions for the
latter expression to be @xmath exact, i.e., the cohomology of @xmath in
the space of local forms of degree @xmath . This cohomology is
isomorphic to the Rham cohomology in degree @xmath of the fiber bundle
of fields (local coordinates @xmath ) over the base space @xmath (local
coordinates @xmath ), see e.g. [ 9 , 10 ] .

The case of classical Hamiltonian mechanics, @xmath , @xmath is
discussed for instance in [ 17 ] . Examples in higher dimensions can be
found in [ 111 ] .

### 2 Gauge symmetries and vanishing Noether currents

In order to describe gauge theories, one needs besides the fields @xmath
the gauge parameters @xmath . Instead of considering the gauge
parameters as additional arbitrary functions of @xmath , it is useful to
extend the jet-bundle. Because we want to consider commutation relations
involving gauge symmetries, several copies @xmath , @xmath , of the
jet-coordinates associated with gauge parameters are needed ² ² 2
Alternatively, one could make the coordinates @xmath Grassmann odd, but
we will not do so here. For expressions involving a single gauge
parameter we will often omit the index @xmath in order to simplify the
notation. . We will denote the whole set of fields as @xmath and we will
extend the variational bicomplex to this complete set, e.g. @xmath is
defined in terms of @xmath and thus also involve the @xmath . When
@xmath it is restricted to act on the fields @xmath and their
derivatives alone, we denote it by @xmath .

Let @xmath be characteristics that depend linearly and homogeneously on
the new jet-coordinates @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume that these characteristics define a generating set of gauge
symmetries of @xmath ³ ³ 3 This means that they define symmetries and
that every other symmetry @xmath that depends linearly and homogeneously
on an arbitrary gauge parameter @xmath is given by @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath , see e.g. [ 160 , 51 ] for more details. . For simplicity,
we assume the generating set in addition to be irreducible ⁴ ⁴ 4 If
@xmath , where @xmath means zero for all solutions of the Euler-Lagrange
equations of motion, then @xmath . .

Because we have assumed that @xmath provides a generating set of non
trivial gauge symmetries, the commutator algebra of the non trivial
gauge symmetries closes on-shell in the sense that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath for some skew-symmetric functions @xmath and for some
characteristic @xmath . At any solution @xmath to the Euler-Lagrange
equations of motion, the space of all gauge parameters equipped with the
bracket @xmath is a Lie algebra ⁵ ⁵ 5 Proof: By applying @xmath to ( 1.6
) and taking cyclic permutations, one gets @xmath on account of @xmath .
Irreducibility then implies the Jacobi identity

@xmath

.

For all collections of local functions @xmath and @xmath , let the
functions @xmath be defined by the following integrations by part,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the adjoint of @xmath defined by @xmath .

If @xmath , we get on account of the Noether identities @xmath that the
Noether current for a gauge symmetry can be chosen to vanish weakly,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The algebra of currents ( 1.4 ) is totally trivial for
gauge symmetries. In the simple case where the gauge transformations
depend at most on the first derivative of the gauge parameter, @xmath ,
the weakly vanishing Noether current is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

A relation similar to ( 1.7 ) holds for trivial gauge transformations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , one can use the skew-symmetry of @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Therefore, the Noether current associated with a trivial
gauge transformation can be chosen to be quadratic in the equations of
motion and its derivatives.

### 3 Surface charge one-forms and their algebra

Motivated by the cohomological results of [ 52 ] introduced in the
preamble, we define the @xmath forms ⁶ ⁶ 6 For convenience, these forms
have been defined with an overall minus sign as compared to the
definition used in [ 52 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

obtained by acting with the homotopy operator ( A29 ) on the weakly
vanishing Noether current @xmath associated with @xmath . We will also
call these forms the surface one-forms, where the denomination “surface”
refers to the horizontal degree @xmath . When the situation is not
confusing, we will omit the @xmath dependence and simply write @xmath .

For first order theories and for gauge transformations depending at most
on the first derivative of gauge parameters, the surface one-forms (
1.12 ) coincide with the proposal of [ 218 , 180 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given in ( 1.9 ).

The surface charge one-forms are intimately related to the invariant
presymplectic @xmath form @xmath discussed in more details in Appendix A
. 7 as follows

###### Lemma 1.

The surface one-forms satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Indeed, it follows from ( 1.8 ) and ( 21 ) that

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.15)
  -- -- -- --------

Combining ( 1.15 ) with equation ( A30 ), this gives the Lemma 1 .∎

We will consider one-forms @xmath that are tangent to the space of
solutions. These one-forms are to be contracted with characteristics
@xmath such that @xmath . In particular, they can be contracted with
characteristics @xmath that define symmetries, gauge or global, since
@xmath implies @xmath on account of ( A40 ) and ( A11 ). For such
one-forms, one has the on-shell relation

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.16)
  -- -- -- --------

Applying the homotopy operators @xmath defined in ( A36 ) to ( 1.16 ),
one gets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Remark that if the gauge theory satisfies the property

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.18)
  -- -- -- --------

then the relation ( 1.17 ) holds off-shell,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This condition holds for instance in the case of generators of
infinitesimal diffeomorphisms, see Chapter 2 , and in the Hamiltonian
framework, see next section.

It is easy to show that ⁷ ⁷ 7 Proof: Applying @xmath to ( 1.14 ) in
terms of @xmath , and using @xmath , we also get @xmath . Comparing with
@xmath applied to ( 1.17 ) in terms of @xmath , this implies ( 1.20 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also show in Appendix A that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the standard presymplectic @xmath -form used in
covariant phase space methods, and @xmath is a suitably defined @xmath
form. Contracting ( 1.21 ) with the gauge transformation @xmath , one
gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our expression for the surface charge one-form ( 1.17 ) thus differs
on-shell from usual covariant phase space methods by the term @xmath .

For a given closed @xmath dimensional surface @xmath , which we
typically take to be a sphere inside a hyperplane, the surface charge
one-forms are defined by integrating the surface one-forms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 1.20 ) then reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us denote by @xmath the space of solutions to the Euler-Lagrange
equations of motion. It is clear from equation ( 1.16 ) that the surface
one-form is @xmath -closed at a fixed solution @xmath , for one-forms
@xmath tangent to the space of solutions and for gauge parameters
satisfying the so-called reducibility equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of general relativity, e.g., these equations are the Killing
equations for the solution @xmath . The space @xmath of non-vanishing
gauge parameters @xmath that satisfy the reducibility equations at
@xmath are called the non-trivial reducibility parameters at @xmath . We
will also call them exact reducibility parameters in distinction with
asymptotic reducibility parameters that will be defined in the
asymptotic context in Chapter 5 . It follows from ( 1.6 ) and from the
Jacobi identity that @xmath is a Lie algebra, the Lie algebra of exact
reducibility parameters at the particular solution @xmath .

It then follows

###### Proposition 2.

The surface charge one-forms @xmath associated with reducibility
parameters only depend on the homology class of @xmath .

In particular, if @xmath is the sphere @xmath in spherical coordinates,
@xmath is @xmath and @xmath independent and, therefore, is a constant.

Any trivial gauge transformation @xmath can be associated with a @xmath
form @xmath in the same way as ( 1.12 ) with @xmath defined in ( 1.11 ).
Now, one has @xmath since the homotopy operator ( A29 ) can only
“destroy” one of the two equations of motion contained in @xmath .
Therefore, trivial gauge transformations are associated with weakly
vanishing surface one-forms.

Up to here, we have constructed conserved surface charge one-forms
starting from reducibility parameters @xmath . In fact, there is a
bijective correspondence between conserved charges and reducibility
parameters. More precisely, the following proposition was demonstrated
in [ 52 ]

###### Proposition 3.

When restricted to solutions of the equations of motion, equivalence
classes of closed, local, (n-2,1)-forms up to exact, local,
(n-2,1)-forms correspond one to one to non-trivial reducibility
parameters. Representatives for these (n-2,1)-forms are given by ( 1.12
).

This proposition provides the main justification of the definition (
1.12 ) of the surface one-forms.

The following proposition is proved in Appendix C . 1 :

###### Proposition 4.

When evaluated at a solution @xmath , for one-forms @xmath tangent to
the space of solutions and for reducibility parameters @xmath at @xmath
, the surface one-forms @xmath are covariant up to @xmath exact terms,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the Lie bracket of surface charge one-forms is defined by

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.27)
  -- -- -- --------

we thus have shown:

###### Corollary 5.

At a given solution @xmath and for one forms @xmath tangent to the space
of solutions, the Lie algebra of surface charge one-forms represents the
Lie algebra of exact reducibility parameters @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We finally consider one-forms @xmath that are tangent to the space of
reducibility parameters at @xmath . They are to be contracted with gauge
parameters @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

We recall that for @xmath a Lie algebra, the derived Lie algebra is
given by the Lie algebra of elements of @xmath that may be written as a
commutator. The derived Lie algebra is sometimes denoted as @xmath . It
is an ideal of @xmath . Definition ( 1.27 ) and Corollary 5 imply

###### Corollary 6.

For field variations @xmath preserving the reducibility identities as (
1.29 ), the surface charge one-forms vanish for elements of the derived
Lie algebra @xmath of exact reducibility parameters at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, the Lie algebra of surface charge one-forms represents
non-trivially only the abelian Lie algebra @xmath .

### 4 Hamiltonian formalism

In this section, we discuss the results obtained in the previous section
in the particular case of an action in Hamiltonian form and for the
surface @xmath being a closed surface inside the space-like hyperplane
@xmath defined at constant @xmath .

We follow closely the conventions of [ 160 ] for the Hamiltonian
formalism. The Hamiltonian action is first order in time derivatives and
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we assume that we have Darboux coordinates: @xmath and @xmath . It
follows that @xmath is the constant symplectic matrix with @xmath and
@xmath . We assume for simplicity that the constraints @xmath are first
class, irreducible and time independent. In the following we shall use a
local “Poisson” bracket with spatial Euler-Lagrange derivatives for
spatial @xmath forms @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath denotes the spatial exterior derivative, this bracket defines
a Lie bracket in the space @xmath , i.e., in the space of equivalence
classes of local functions modulo spatial divergences, see e.g. [ 49 ] .

Similarly, the Hamiltonian vector fields associated with an @xmath form
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

only depend on the class @xmath . Here @xmath is a multi-index denoting
the spatial derivatives, over which we freely sum. The combinatorial
factor needed to take the symmetry properties of the derivatives into
account is included in @xmath . If we denote @xmath and @xmath , an
irreducible generating set of gauge transformations for ( 1.31 ) is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the arbitrary gauge parameters @xmath may depend on @xmath , the
Lagrange multipliers and their derivatives as well as the canonical
variables and their spatial derivatives and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
     @xmath      (1.38)
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath . For @xmath a closed surface inside the hyperplane @xmath
defined by constant @xmath , the surface charge one-forms are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, only the @xmath components of the surface one-forms are
relevant in order to construct the surface charges one-forms at constant
time. We prove in Appendix C . 2 the following result first obtained in
the Hamiltonian approach:

###### Proposition 7.

In the context of the Hamiltonian formalism, the surface one-forms at
constant time do not depend on the Lagrange multipliers and are given by
the opposite of boundary terms that arise when converting the variation
of the constraints smeared with gauge parameters into an Euler-Lagrange
derivative contracted with the undifferentiated variation of the
canonical variables,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this link between Hamiltonian and Lagrangian frameworks, one can
then use Propositions 2 , 3 , 4 and their corollaries to study
properties of the surface terms in Hamiltonian formalism.

Note that, because of the simple way time derivatives enter into the
Hamiltonian action @xmath , the expressions ( 21 )-( 3 )-( A49 ) give
for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The last relation follows from our assumption that we are using Darboux
coordinates. As a consequence of the first relation, we then also have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which are useful in order to relate Hamiltonian and Lagrangian
frameworks.

### 5 Exact solutions and symmetries

Suppose one is given a family of exact solutions @xmath admitting (
@xmath -dependent) reducibility parameters @xmath . Let us denote by
@xmath an element of this family that we single out as the reference
solution with reducibility parameter @xmath .

The surface charge @xmath of @xmath with respect to the reference @xmath
is defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.46)
  -- -- -- --------

where integration is done along a path @xmath in the space of exact
solutions @xmath that joins @xmath to @xmath for some reducibility
parameters that vary along the path from @xmath to @xmath . Only charge
differences between solutions are defined. The normalization @xmath of
the reference solution can be chosen arbitrarily. Note that these
charges depend on @xmath only through its homology class because
equation ( 1.14 ) implies that @xmath .

The natural question to ask for the charges @xmath is whether they
depend on the path @xmath used in their definition. If there is no de
Rham cohomology in degree two in solution space, the path independence
of the charges @xmath is ensured if the following integrability
conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

are fulfilled. These conditions extend the conditions discussed in [ 247
, 180 ] to variable parameters @xmath .

For one-forms @xmath tangent to the family of solutions with
reducibility parameters @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies together with equation ( 1.14 ) that @xmath , so that the
integrability conditions also only depend on the homology class of
@xmath .

Now suppose that the solution space @xmath is entirely characterized by
@xmath parameters @xmath , @xmath . In that case, solutions @xmath and
reducibility parameters @xmath at @xmath also depend on these
parameters. Let us denote by @xmath a basis of the Lie algebra @xmath
with @xmath . For each basis element @xmath , we consider the one-forms
in parameter space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the pull-back of the vertical derivative to @xmath ,
i.e. the exterior derivative in parameter space. The integrability
conditions ( 1.47 ) are then a Pfaff system in parameter space and the
question of integrability can be addressed using Frobenius’ theorem, see
e.g. [ 220 ] :

###### Theorem 8.

(Frobenius’ theorem) Let @xmath be one-forms linearly independent at a
point @xmath . Suppose there are one-forms @xmath , @xmath , satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, in a neighborhood of @xmath there are functions @xmath and @xmath
, such that @xmath .

If the system is completely integrable, i.e. if there exists an
invertible matrix @xmath and quantities @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

then there is a change of basis in the Lie algebra of reducibility
parameters @xmath such that the integrability conditions ( 1.47 ) are
satisfied in that basis.

As a conclusion, in the absence of non-trivial topology in solution
space, the charges obtained by the resolution of ( 1.50 ) provide path
independent charges.

In the case where the action is the Hamiltonian action ( 1.31 ) and
where @xmath is the boundary of the @xmath dimensional surface @xmath ,
@xmath , one can define the functional associated with @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a direct consequence of Proposition 7 , @xmath admits well-defined
functional derivatives. This completes the link with the Hamiltonian
formalism.

The fact that the charge ( 1.46 ) depends on @xmath only through its
homology class for reducibility parameters @xmath has a nice
consequence. In the case where the surface @xmath surrounds several
sources that can be enclosed in smaller surfaces @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

In electromagnetism, this properties reduces to the Gauss law for static
electric charges. For spacetimes in Einstein gravity with vanishing
cosmological constant, the Komar formula [ 185 ] obeys a property
analogous to ( 1.52 ). Here, we showed that the property ( 1.52 ) holds
in a more general context when the charges are defined as ( 1.46 ).

Finally, let us consider the case where the surface charge is evaluated
at infinity. An interesting simplification occurs when @xmath approaches
@xmath sufficiently fast at infinity in the sense that the @xmath -form
can be reduced to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

We refer to this simplification as the asymptotically linear case
because the charge ( 1.46 ) becomes manifestly path-independent and
reduces to the integral of the one-form constructed in the linearized
theory contracted with the deviation @xmath with respect to the
background,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This simplification allows one to compare the surface charges ( 1.46 )
with definition at infinity, e.g. in general relativity [ 2 , 159 , 158
] , see section 2 of Chapter 4 . This simplification is also relevant
for particular boundary conditions, see asymptotically anti-de Sitter
and flat spacetimes in three dimensions in Chapter 6 .

## Chapter 2 Charges for gravity coupled to matter fields

This part shows several applications to gravity of the general theory
developed in the preceding chapter. We begin in section 1 by
specializing the formalism to gauge parameters which are infinitesimal
diffeomorphism in generally covariant theories of gravity. We then
discuss in detail in section 2 the important case of Einstein gravity in
Lagrangian as well as in Hamiltonian formalism. In sections 3 and 4 , we
extend the analysis to Einstein gravity coupled to matter fields
relevant in supergravity theories: scalars, @xmath -form potentials and
Maxwell fields with or without a Chern Simons term.

Many of the expressions derived in this chapter were already known in
the literature. However, the unified way in which they are derived
allows us to highlight the differences and the equivalences between
different approaches as the covariant phase space methods of [ 245 , 174
, 247 ] , the covariant methods inspired from the Hamiltonian
prescription [ 178 , 218 , 179 , 180 ] , Hamiltonian methods [ 208 , 159
, 158 ] and methods based on the linearized Einstein equations [ 1 ] .
These comparisons complete the picture given by earlier works [ 175 ,
168 , 203 ] .

### 1 Diffeomorphic invariant theories

Gravities with higher curvature terms naturally appear in effective
theories describing semi-classical aspects of quantum gravity [ 67 ] or
in string theories [ 82 , 83 , 151 ] . The minimal setting describing
these general theories of gravity is an action principle which is
invariant under diffeomorphisms.

The definition of conserved quantities for arbitrary diffeomorphic
invariant theories has been addressed in [ 245 , 174 , 77 ] using
covariant phase space methods. More recent work includes, e.g.,
definitions of energy for actions quadratic in the curvature [ 119 , 121
] .

In this section, we will derive the surface one-form associated with an
infinitesimal diffeomorphism for a diffeomorphic invariant Lagrangian
and we will study its properties. This surface one-form will differ from
the covariant phase space result [ 245 , 174 ] only by a term which
vanishes for a symmetry @xmath of the field configuration, @xmath .

Let us consider a Lagrangian @xmath depending on a metric @xmath , on
the fields @xmath and on any finite number of their derivatives which is
invariant under diffeomorphisms. The fields are collectively denoted by
@xmath . An arbitrary @xmath -form @xmath is invariant under
diffeomorphism if it satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Lie differential acting on @xmath -forms, see ( A4
)-( A5 ), and @xmath is the usual Lie derivative of the field @xmath .
The invariance of the lagrangian @xmath -form @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The variation formula ( A34 ) in terms of @xmath reads as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Results in the equivariant variational bicomplexes, see Theorem 5.3 of [
10 ] and [ 11 ] implies that a choice for @xmath invariant under
diffeomorphisms can be made by suitably constructing the horizonal
homotopy operator. We refer the reader to [ 174 ] for such an explicit
construction.

###### Surface one-form

Using ( 1.8 ), the term @xmath can be expressed as @xmath where @xmath
is the weakly vanishing Noether current which is linear in @xmath . We
get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Acting on the latter expression with the contracting homotopy @xmath ,
the weakly vanishing current @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a representative for the Noether charge @xmath form [
245 , 174 ] . The pre-symplectic form @xmath reads here

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using then ( A31 ), we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Replacing the expression between parenthesis using ( 2.5 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, since we have @xmath and @xmath , the property ( 1.18 ) hold and we
can use equations ( 1.19 ) and ( 1.22 ) to write the charge one-form
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, using ( 2.8 ), the surface one-form @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note the relation ( A21 ) useful to express ( 2.10 ) in coordinates. Our
definition of surface one-form differs from the covariant phase space
methods [ 174 , 175 ] by the supplementary term @xmath . This
supplementary term vanishes when @xmath is a symmetry of the field
configuration @xmath , @xmath .

###### Properties of the surface one-form

By construction, the form ( 2.10 ) is independent on the addition of
boundary terms to the Lagrangian, which is not the case for the
expression obtained with covariant phase space methods. Remark that
these boundary terms should be diffeomorphic invariant in order that the
derivation of the previous paragraph be valid.

This property can be explicitly checked by noting that for a boundary
term @xmath in the Lagrangian, one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

as implied by equations ( A30 )-( A33 ) and ( A49 ).

Proposition 2 implies that the surface charge one-forms @xmath
associated with reducibility parameters @xmath of a solution @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath , only depend on the homology class of @xmath .

Additional properties of the surface charge one-forms can be found in
Corollaries 5 and 6 . For vectors @xmath that are left invariant by the
variation @xmath , the integrability condition reduces to the simple
condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

after having used ( A26 ) and ( A51 ). The first term in ( 2.13 )
vanishes for vector fields @xmath tangent to the surface @xmath . For a
reducibility parameter @xmath of @xmath , the second term in the latter
expression vanishes and the integrability condition can be written
equivalently as @xmath , coinciding with [ 174 , 247 ] .

### 2 General relativity

An introduction to the problem of defining conserved quantities in
general relativity was done in the preamble and we refer the reader to
this chapter for detailed discussions and references.

Here, we will first specialize the results obtained in section 1 to
Einstein gravity. Our expression for the surface one-form will be shown
to agree with the one found in [ 1 ] in the context of anti-de Sitter
backgrounds. We will then apply the general method described in Chapter
1 to gravity in first order Hamiltonian formalism and we will recover
the surface terms obtained by Hamiltonian methods [ 19 , 208 , 159 , 158
] . Finally, we will compare both approaches by reducing canonically the
covariant expression for the surface one-form using ADM variables. The
two expressions in ADM variables will be shown to differ by terms that
vanish for exact reducibility parameters (i.e., here, Killing vectors).

#### 2.1 Lagrangian formalism

Pure Einstein gravity with cosmological constant @xmath is described by
the Einstein-Hilbert action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

A generating set of gauge transformations is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Reducibility parameters at @xmath are thus given by Killing vectors of
@xmath . The weakly vanishing Noether current ( 1.8 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that from ( A40 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is convenient to define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The tensor density @xmath called the supermetric [ 123 ] has the
symmetries of the Riemann tensor. The tensor density @xmath is symmetric
in the pair of indices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and the total
symmetrization of any three indices is zero. The symmetries of these
tensors are thus summarized by the Young tableaux

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.21)
  -- -- -- --------

The explicit expression that one obtains for @xmath using ( A29 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, more explicitly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where indices are lowered and raised with the metric @xmath and its
inverse and where we introduced the notation @xmath and @xmath .

This expression can be shown to coincide with the one derived by Abbott
and Deser [ 2 ] in the context of asymptotically anti-de Sitter
spacetimes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It can also be written as ( 2.10 ) where the first and second term are
expressed in the form derived with covariant phase space methods [ 174 ,
247 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, expression ( 2.27 ) is called the Komar term. The supplementary
term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

vanishes for exact Killing vectors of @xmath , but not necessarily for
asymptotic ones. In the case where @xmath may vary, it is convenient to
write ( 2.10 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the extended vertical differential is defined in ( A27 ) and where
we omit the irrelevant exact horizonal differential. The fundamental
relation ( 1.14 ) reads in this case as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the invariant symplectic form @xmath and the weakly vanishing form
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The property ( 1.18 ) is satisfied. The integrability conditions for the
surface one-forms are given by ( 2.13 ).

The covariant phase space expression [ 174 ] reads as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.33)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and differs from ( 2.23 ) by the term ( 2.29 ) vanishing for exact
Killing vectors. As a consequence of ( 1.22 ) and ( 1.18 ), we also have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Remark that the expressions ( 2.33 ) and ( 2.34 ) lack in the beautiful
symmetry properties of expressions ( 2.22 ) and ( 2.32 ) where the
tensor @xmath obeys ( 2.21 ). This provides an additional aesthetic
argument in favor of definition ( 1.12 ).

#### 2.2 General relativity in ADM form

The surface terms that should be added to the Hamiltonian generator of
surface deformations in Einstein gravity are well-known [ 208 , 159 ,
158 ] . Although these surface terms were derived for deformations in
the asymptotic region, they can be used for infinitesimal surface
deformations inside the bulk. According to Proposition 7 , the surface
terms obtained by varying the constraints smeared by the surface
deformation generators @xmath are given by the @xmath component of the
@xmath -form @xmath for Einstein gravity written in ADM variables. These
components are the only ones relevant in order to compute the
infinitesimal charges @xmath ( 1.23 ) associated with surface
deformations @xmath on the surface @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This section is devoted to check that the surface terms
obtained by our method indeed reproduce the Hamiltonian surface terms.

The action for pure gravity in ADM variables @xmath in @xmath dimensions
is the straightforward generalization of the four dimensional case [ 19
] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

It has the Hamiltonian form ( 1.31 ) with variables @xmath as Lagrange
multipliers. The constraints @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

An arbitrary variation with gauge parameter @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For arbitrary functions @xmath vanishing sufficiently fast at infinity,
the Poisson brackets of the constraints are explicitly given by [ 229 ,
230 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

The variation of the Lagrange multipliers is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Surface charges

The weakly vanishing Noether current @xmath is obtained by integration
by parts,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Explicitly,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.44)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note that the factors explicitly depending on the dimension @xmath in (
2.38 )-( 2.39 ) do not contribute to the current because they do not
involve derivatives of the parameters @xmath . The time-dependent terms
in ( 2.44 ) make up the term @xmath in ( C12 ). Therefore, introducing
the inverse De Witt supermetric [ 123 ] as in ( 2.19 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we can straightforwardly write the expression ( C18 ) for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This indeed reproduces the Regge-Teitelboim expression [
208 ] as well as the expression used in anti-de Sitter backgrounds [ 159
, 158 ] .

#### 2.3 Canonical reduction in Einstein gravity

In the last section, we showed that the Regge-Teitelboim expression (
2.46 ) is the @xmath component of the surface one-form associated with
the Lagrangian ( 2.36 ). In section 2.1 , we also showed that the
Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian supplemented or not with boundary terms
leads to the surface one-form ( 2.22 )-( 2.23 )-( 2.24 ) that will be
referred to as the Abbott-Deser expression. Since both computations use
different homotopy formulas, one in terms of the covariant metric @xmath
and the other in terms of the ADM variables @xmath the Regge-Teitelboim
expression ( 2.46 ) and the @xmath components of the Abbott-Deser
expression ( 2.23 ) might differ.

However, general results on the BRST cohomology [ 46 ] ensure the
invariance of the cohomology of reducibility parameters modulo trivial
ones in the transition from Lagrangian to Hamiltonian formalisms.
Proposition 3 on page 3 then guarantees the equivalence between the
surface one-forms of both formalisms up to boundary terms when the
equations of motion hold and when the reducibility equations hold. The
Regge-Teitelboim and the Abbott-Deser expressions may thus only differ
by boundary terms, by terms proportional to the equations of motion and
their derivatives and finally by terms proportional to the reducibility
equations and their derivatives. These terms are computed hereafter.

We distinguish the indices @xmath , @xmath in the coordinate basis and
@xmath , @xmath in the Hamiltonian basis. In what follows, @xmath denote
the spatial metric @xmath . Tensors are transformed under the change of
basis according to the following matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The connection one-form @xmath becomes in the new frame the connection
one-form @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

After a long but straightforward computation, one gets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The gauge transformation @xmath reads as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, comparing the latter expression with ( 2.38 ) and using the
equations of motion @xmath , one can identify on-shell the Hamiltonian
surface deformation @xmath with the Lagrangian infinitesimal
diffeomorphism generators, @xmath .

Using @xmath , one can write the infinitesimal charge @xmath ( 1.23 )
associated with @xmath and adapted to the surface @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.53)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and developing @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath , one can after some
algebra relate the @xmath forms ( 2.24 ) and ( 2.46 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.54)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For exact Killing vectors, one recovers the result of the reduction
performed in [ 13 ] . The Regge-Teitelboim ( 2.46 ) and the Iyer-Wald (
2.33 ) expressions are related by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.55)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Besides a total divergence, the right-hand side of ( 2.54 ) ( 2.55 )
contains terms proportional to @xmath . Therefore, we showed that the
one-forms obtained by integration of ( 2.46 ), ( 2.24 ) and ( 2.33 ) all
agree on-shell for exact Killing vectors, as expected. However, in the
asymptotic context, for vectors @xmath which are not Killing vectors,
these expressions might be different.

### 3 Gravity coupled to a @xmath-form potential and a scalar

A great motivation to study classical conservation laws for gravity
coupled to @xmath -forms with @xmath and to scalar fields is the natural
occurrence of such theories in string theory and in alternative theories
of gravity.

A particular topic where such conservation laws are of interest is the
thermodynamics of black rings that will be studied in Chapter 4 . The
original black ring solution [ 131 ] is a black hole solution to vacuum
Einstein gravity in five dimensions admitting a non-trivial horizon
topology. Once five-dimensional gravity is coupled to a @xmath -form
potential, black rings may acquire a dipole charge [ 132 ] .

Hamiltonian methods were developed in order to cover conservation laws
when @xmath -form potential are present [ 224 , 102 ] . Covariant phase
space methods have also been applied [ 209 , 210 ] . The main aim of
this section is to improve the covariant analysis [ 209 , 210 ] by
rederiving the conserved charges using covariant cohomological methods [
52 , 55 ] in a notation taking care of form factors. The conservations
laws for gravity coupled to a scalar field have been written in [ 53 ]
and will also be included here for completeness. The material developed
in this section was published in [ 101 ] .

In what follows, we consider the action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dilaton and @xmath is the field strength of a @xmath
-form @xmath , @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Here, all forms are written with bold
letters, @xmath . . The fields of the theory are collectively denoted by
@xmath . We will set @xmath for convenience.

#### 3.1 Conservation laws

In Minkowski spacetime @xmath , @xmath and for a trivial bundle @xmath ,
all conservation laws are classified by the characteristic cohomology of
@xmath -form gauge theories [ 161 ] . These laws are generated in the
exterior product by the forms @xmath dual to the field strength ² ² 2
When magnetic charges are allowed, there are additional conserved
quantities as @xmath . However, the field strength @xmath cannot be
written as the derivative of a potential @xmath and the action principle
has to be modified. This case will not be treated below. . More
precisely, for odd @xmath , one can construct the conserved @xmath -form
@xmath . For even @xmath , factors @xmath mutually commute and one may
construct the conserved forms @xmath @xmath for any integer @xmath such
that @xmath .

When gravity and the scalar field are present, the charges

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

still enumerate the non-trivial conservation laws [ 47 , 161 ] ³ ³ 3 The
conservations laws that we consider here are called dynamical because
they explicitly involve the equations of motion. There exists also
specific topological conservation laws, see e.g. [ 233 ] . , see also
discussions in the Preamble, especially in section 3 .

In order to investigate the first law of thermodynamics, where
variations around a solution are involved, we now extend the analysis to
the linearized theory.

In linearized gravity, only @xmath -form conservation laws are allowed [
48 , 56 ] . The classification of non-trivial conserved @xmath -forms
was described in [ 52 ] and is straightforward to specialize in our
case. The equivalence classes of conserved @xmath -forms of the
linearized theory for the variables @xmath around a fixed reference
solution @xmath are in correspondence with equivalence classes of gauge
parameters @xmath satisfying the reducibility equations @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4
This correspondence is one-to-one for gauge parameters that may depend
on the linearized fields @xmath and that satisfy @xmath , i.e. zero for
solutions @xmath of the linearized equations of motion. However, it has
been proven in [ 56 ] that this @xmath -dependence is not relevant in
the case of Einstein gravity. Such a dependence will not be considered
in this section anymore. , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the next section, we will compute the @xmath -form @xmath associated
with gauge parameters @xmath . For parameters satisfying the
reducibility equations ( 2.59 ), the infinitesimal charge ( 1.23 )
between solutions @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

will then only depend on the homology class of @xmath .

#### 3.2 Conserved surface one-forms

Following the lines of Chapter 1 , one can construct the weakly
vanishing Noether currents associated with the couple @xmath by
integrating by parts the expression @xmath and using the Noether
identities. We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the stress tensors are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The conserved @xmath form @xmath can be obtained as a result of a
contracting homotopy @xmath acting on the current @xmath , see ( 1.12 ).
Using the property ( A30 ) of the homotopy operators ⁵ ⁵ 5 In [ 101 ] ,
the @xmath -form @xmath was computed with @xmath Grassmann even. Some
sign factors have thus to be adapted with respect to [ 101 ] . ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

one has

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.65)
  -- -- -- --------

The form @xmath is closed whenever @xmath satisfies the equations of
motion, @xmath the linearized equations of motion and @xmath the system
( 2.59 ).

Let us now split the current into different contributions, @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath being the remaining expression. Since the homotopy @xmath is
linear in its argument, the conserved @xmath form can be decomposed as
@xmath .

The gravitational contribution @xmath which depends only on the metric
and its deviations was given in section 2 . This contribution can be
written in a form notation as ⁶ ⁶ 6 We recall that @xmath is defined
by ( A24 ) and thus acts on the fields and not on the gauge parameters.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is the Komar @xmath -form and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.70)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The scalar contribution is easily found to be @xmath [ 53 ] with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now compute the contribution @xmath from the @xmath -form. After
some algebra, one can rewrite the current @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the property ( 2.64 ), the @xmath -form @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.75)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the exact term @xmath is trivial and can be dropped. The last term
can then be computed easily since it admits only first derivatives of
the gauge potential. The homotopy thus reduces in that case to @xmath .
We eventually get

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.76)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.78)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which has a very similar structure as the gravitational field
contribution ( 2.68 ). For exact reducibility parameters ( 2.59 ), the
term involving @xmath will be zero. The form ( 2.74 ) will be referred
to as a Komar term, in analogy with the gravitational Komar term ( 2.69
).

###### Properties of the surface one-form.

Let us suppose that @xmath are exact reducibility parameters. For @xmath
, the form ( 2.76 ) reduces to well-known expressions for
Einstein-Maxwell theory, see e.g. [ 136 ] . For @xmath arbitrary,
expression ( 2.76 ) and the one derived in [ 209 , 210 ] have the same
structure but differ from form factors. More precisely, both expressions
agree when the right-hand side of equation (10) of [ 209 ] and equation
(4) of [ 210 ] are multiplied by @xmath .

As a consistency check, note that the form ( 2.76 ) satisfies the
equality on-shell @xmath when ( 2.59 ) holds. The charge difference (
2.60 ) between two configurations differing by a gauge transformation
@xmath , is thus zero on-shell.

Besides generalized Killing vectors @xmath which are also symmetries of
the gauge field and of the scalar @xmath , there may be charges
associated with non-trivial gauge parameters @xmath . For @xmath , in
electromagnetism, @xmath is such a parameter and the associated charge
is the electric charge ( 2.57 ). For @xmath , non-exact forms @xmath may
exist if the topology of the manifold is non-trivial. The charges with a
non-trivial closed form @xmath which does not vary along solutions is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath surface enclosing the non-trivial cycle @xmath
dual to the form @xmath . It is simply the integral of ( 2.57 ) over the
non-trivial cycle. The charges ( 2.79 ) are thus the generalization for
@xmath -forms of electric charges.

The properties of the form ( 2.76 ) under transformations of the
potential @xmath are worth mentioning. The transformation @xmath
preserves the reducibility equations ( 2.59 ) if @xmath . In that case,
@xmath can be written as the sum of an exact form and an harmonic form
that we denote as @xmath with @xmath not varying along solutions, @xmath
and @xmath constant. In Einstein-Maxwell theory, one has @xmath and
@xmath . Under the transformation @xmath , the form ( 2.76 ) changes
according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining the charge associated to @xmath as ( 2.79 ), one sees that the
infinitesimal charge ( 2.60 ) varies on-shell as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a consequence, a transformation @xmath admitting a non-vanishing
function @xmath is not a proper gauge transformation because such a
transformation does not leave the conserved charges of the solution
invariant.

### 4 Einstein-Maxwell with Chern-Simons term

Einstein-Maxwell theory for which a Chern-Simons term is present can
appear in general in the bosonic part of odd dimensional supergravities
[ 106 ] . This section provides the necessary tools to define the
conserved quantities in these theories for general backgrounds. In
section 3 of Chapter 4 , we will use these tools to study some
particular solutions in five dimensions. A previous derivation of
conserved quantities using Komar integrals was done in [ 138 ] (see also
section 3 of Chapter 3 for comments on Komar integrals).

In odd space-time dimensions @xmath , the Einstein-Maxwell Lagrangian
with Chern-Simons term and cosmological constant reads

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (2.82)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

The bosonic part of @xmath minimal supergravity corresponds to @xmath .
The fields of the theory are collectively denoted by @xmath . Consider
any fixed background solution @xmath . Following section 3 , the
equivalence classes of conserved @xmath -forms of the linearized theory
for the variables @xmath can be shown to be in one-to-one correspondence
with equivalence classes of field dependent gauge parameters @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

on-shell, i.e., when evaluated for solutions of the linearized theory.
Conserved @xmath forms are considered equivalent if they differ on-shell
from the exterior derivative of an @xmath form, while field dependent
gauge parameters are equivalent, if they agree on-shell. If @xmath and
under reasonable assumptions on the background @xmath , the equivalence
classes of solutions to the first equation of ( 2.83 ) are classified by
the field independent Killing vectors @xmath of the background @xmath [
13 ] . The second equation then impose a further constraint on these
Killing vectors. It is straightforward to show that the system ( 2.83 )
admits only one more equivalence class of solutions characterized by
@xmath , associated with the electric charge.

The weakly vanishing Noether currents are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath form @xmath is defined through ( 1.12 ).

For the parameters @xmath , one can write @xmath . Here, @xmath is the
gravitational contribution computed in ( 2.22 ) and whose convenient
equivalent form is given in ( 2.30 ) with ( 2.27 ),( 2.28 ) and ( 2.29
). @xmath is the electromagnetic contribution computed in ( 2.76 ) with
@xmath and @xmath . More precisely, the Komar term ( 2.74 ) and the
term ( 2.77 ) reduce in this case to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.85)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the factors @xmath have been restored. The Chern-Simons term
contributes as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the @xmath form associated with the parameter @xmath , we get, up to
a @xmath exact term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given in ( 2.74 ) and @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 3 Geometric derivation of black hole mechanics

In 3+1 dimensions, stationary axisymmetric black holes are entirely
characterized by their mass and their angular momentum. This is part of
the uniqueness theorems , see [ 167 ] for a review. In higher
dimensions, the situation changes. First, the black hole may rotate in
different perpendicular planes. In 3+1 dimensions, the rotation group
@xmath has only one Casimir invariant, but in @xmath dimensions, it has
@xmath Casimirs. Therefore, one expects that, as a general rule, a black
hole will have @xmath conserved angular momenta. This is what happens in
the higher dimensional Reissner-Nordstrøm and Kerr black holes [ 197 ,
145 ] .

More dramatically, higher dimensions allow for more exotic horizon
topologies than the sphere. For example, black ring solutions were
recently found [ 131 ] in five dimensions with horizon topology @xmath .
The initial idea of the uniqueness theorems, namely that stationary
axisymmetric black holes are entirely characterized by a few number of
charges at infinity , is thus challenged in higher dimensions, see e.g.
[ 66 , 170 ] for two contradictory points of view.

The laws of black hole mechanics were originally found for
asymptotically flat black holes with spherical topology in @xmath
dimensions surrounded by a perfect fluid and possibly coupled to an
electromagnetic field [ 45 , 90 ] . Time passing, these laws have been
found to hold in far more general cases.

Many derivations of the first law for higher dimensional black holes
explicitly assumed spherical topology or uniqueness results which are
not generally true, see discussion and references in [ 102 ] . Moreover,
Komar integrals were used in asymptotically flat spacetimes but are not
suitable e.g. in asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes.

Bypassing these limitations, the first law of black hole mechanics was
demonstrated for arbitrary perturbations around a stationary black hole
with bifurcation Killing horizon in any diffeomorphism invariant theory
of gravity [ 174 ] . Also, this law has been shown to hold when gravity
is coupled to Maxwell or Yang-Mills fields as a consequence of
conservation laws and of geometric properties of the horizon [ 224 , 137
] .

Sections 1 and 2 are a brief review of the second and zeroth laws of
black hole mechanics. These laws will formally come out of the geometric
properties of event and Killing horizons, respectively. These sections
are mainly based on previous reviews on the thermodynamics of black
holes [ 91 , 92 , 235 , 246 ] and on a lecture given at the second
edition of the Modave Summer School in Mathematical Physics [ 99 ] .

In section 3 , will be presented an unified geometric derivation of the
first law for Einstein gravity coupled to @xmath -form fields and to a
scalar in @xmath dimensions. This derivation will be independent on the
asymptotic structure of the gravitational field and on the topology of
the Killing horizon. Moreover, a generalized Smarr formula will be
proven in general relativity in any dimension.

Remark that the zero and first law of black hole mechanics may also be
generalized to black holes in non-stationary spacetimes. This was done
very recently in the framework of “isolated horizons” [ 32 , 33 ] .
However, in this thesis, we limit the discussion to the original notion
of Killing horizon. Note also that we will not cover at all in this
thesis the quasi-local approach to the first law [ 76 ] .

### 1 Event horizons

A black hole usually refers to a part of spacetime from which no future
directed timelike or null line can escape to arbitrarily large distance
in the outer asymptotic region. A white hole or white fountain is the
time reversed concept which is assumed not to be physically relevant and
will not be treated.

More precisely, if we denote by @xmath the future asymptotic region of a
spacetime @xmath , e.g. null infinity for asymptotically flat spacetimes
and timelike infinity for asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes, the
black hole region @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the chronological past. The region @xmath is what
is usually referred to as the domain of outer communication , it is the
set of points for which it is possible to construct a future directed
timelike line to arbitrary large distance in the outer region.

The event horizon @xmath of a black hole is then the boundary of @xmath
. Let us denote @xmath the causal past of a set of points @xmath and
@xmath the topological closure of @xmath . We have @xmath . The (future)
event horizon of @xmath can then equivalently be defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the boundary of the closure of the causal past of @xmath . See Fig.
3.1 for an example. The event horizon is a concept defined with respect
to the entire causal structure of @xmath .

The event horizons are null hypersurfaces with peculiar properties. The
development of their properties will allow us to sketch the proof of the
area theorem [ 154 ] which is concerned with the dynamical evolution of
sections of the event horizon at successive times. The area theorem is
also called the second law of black hole mechanics because it
demonstrates that, under reasonable conditions, the area of the event
horizon always increases as does the entropy in classical thermodynamics
[ 64 ] .

#### 1.1 Null hypersurfaces

Let @xmath be a smooth function and consider the @xmath dimensional null
hypersurface @xmath , which we denote by @xmath . This surface will be
the black hole horizon in the subsequent sections. It is a null
hypersurface, i.e. such that its normal @xmath is null,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vectors @xmath tangent to @xmath obey @xmath by definition. Since
@xmath is null, @xmath itself is a tangent vector, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some null curve @xmath inside @xmath . One can then prove that
@xmath are null geodesics ¹ ¹ 1 Proof: Let @xmath . We have

@xmath @xmath @xmath (3.5) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Now, as @xmath is null on the horizon, any tangent vector @xmath to
@xmath satisfy @xmath . Therefore, @xmath and the right-hand side of (
3.5 ) is proportional to @xmath on the horizon.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath measures the extent to which the parameterization is not
affine. If we denote by @xmath the normal to @xmath which corresponds to
an affine parameterization @xmath and @xmath for some function @xmath ,
then @xmath .

According to the Frobenius’ theorem, a vector field @xmath is
hypersurface orthogonal if and only if it satisfies @xmath , see e.g. [
243 ] . Therefore, the vector @xmath satisfies the irrotationality
condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

A congruence is a family of curves such that precisely one curve of the
family passes through each point. In particular, any smooth vector field
defines a congruence. Indeed, a vector field defines at each point a
direction which can be uniquely “integrated” along a curve starting from
an arbitrary point.

Since @xmath is also defined outside @xmath , the normal @xmath defines
a congruence only null when restricted to @xmath . In order to study
this congruence outside @xmath , it is useful to define a transverse
null vector @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The normalization @xmath is chosen so that if we consider @xmath to be
tangent to an outgoing radial null geodesic, then @xmath is tangent to
an ingoing one, see Fig. 3.2 . The normalization conditions ( 3.8 )
(imposed everywhere, @xmath ) do not fix @xmath uniquely. Let us choose
arbitrarily one such @xmath . The extent to which the family of
hypersurfaces @xmath are not null is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vectors @xmath orthogonal to both @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

span a @xmath dimensional spacelike subspace of @xmath . The metric can
be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive definite metric with @xmath . The tensor
@xmath provides a projector onto the @xmath spacelike tangent space to
@xmath .

For future convenience, we also consider the hypersurface orthogonal
null congruence @xmath with affine parameter @xmath that is proportional
to @xmath on @xmath ² ² 2 We shall reserve the notation @xmath for
vectors coinciding with @xmath on the horizon but which are not null
outside the horizon. ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector field @xmath extends @xmath outside the horizon while keeping
the null property.

#### 1.2 The Raychaudhuri equation

In this section, we shall closely follow the reference [ 92 ] . We set
out part of the material needed to prove the area law.

Firstly, let us decompose the tensor @xmath into the tensorial products
of @xmath , @xmath and spacelike vectors @xmath tangent to @xmath , ³ ³
3 Proof: Let us first decompose @xmath as

@xmath (3.13)

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are spacelike tangents to
@xmath . Contracting with @xmath and using ( 3.6 ), we find @xmath ,
@xmath . Contracting with @xmath , we find @xmath . Contracting with
@xmath , we find finally @xmath thanks to ( 3.3 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the orthogonal projection @xmath can itself be decomposed in
symmetric and antisymmetric parts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Frobenius irrotationality condition ( 3.7 ) is equivalent to @xmath
⁴ ⁴ 4 Proof: We have

@xmath (3.16)

As @xmath is defined as a projection with @xmath , the equivalence is
shown. . The tensor @xmath is interpreted as the expansion rate tensor
of the congruence while its trace @xmath is the divergence of the
congruence. Any smooth @xmath dimensional area element evolves according
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The shear rate is the trace free part of the strain rate tensor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining the scalar @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was defined in ( 3.9 ). Note also that the divergence of
the vector field has three contributions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the contraction of the Ricci identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

implies the following identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for any vector field @xmath . The formulae ( 3.19 )-( 3.20 ) have
their equivalent for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the right hand side is expressed in terms of expansion rate @xmath
and shear rate @xmath with respect to the affine parameter @xmath . The
identity ( 3.22 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dot indicates a derivation along the generator. It is the
final form of the Raychaudhuri equation for hypersurface orthogonal null
geodesic congruences in any dimension.

#### 1.3 Properties of event horizons

As already mentioned, the main characteristic of event horizons is them
being null hypersurfaces. In the early seventies, Penrose and Hawking
further investigated the generic properties of past boundaries whose
event horizons are particular representatives. We shall only enumerate
these properties below and refer the reader to the references [ 155 ,
235 ] for explicit proofs. These properties are crucial in order to
prove the area theorem.

1.  Achronicity property. No two points of the horizon can be connected
    by a timelike curve.

2.  The null geodesic generators of @xmath may have past end-points in
    the sense that the continuation of the geodesic further into the
    past is no longer in @xmath .

3.  The generators of @xmath have no future end-points, i.e. no
    generator may leave the horizon.

The second property hold for example for collapsing stars where the past
continuation of all generators leave the horizon at the time the horizon
was formed. As a consequence of properties 2 and 3, null geodesics may
enter @xmath but not leave it.

#### 1.4 The area theorem

The area theorem was initially demonstrated by Hawking [ 154 ] . We
shall follow closely the reviews by Carter [ 92 ] and Townsend [ 235 ] .
The theorem reads as follows.

###### Theorem 9 (Area law).

If

-    Einstein’s equations hold with a matter stress-tensor satisfying
    the null energy condition, @xmath , for all null @xmath ,

-    The spacetime is “strongly asymptotically predictable”

then the surface area @xmath of the event horizon can never decrease
with time.

The theorem was originally stated in @xmath dimensions but it is
actually valid in any dimension @xmath .

In order to understand the second requirement, let us recall some
definitions. The future domain of dependence @xmath of an hypersurface
@xmath is the set of points @xmath in the manifold for which every
causal curve through @xmath that has no past end-point intersects @xmath
. The significance of @xmath is that the behavior of solutions of
hyperbolic PDE’s outside @xmath is not determined by initial data on
@xmath . If no causal curves have past end-points, then the behavior of
solutions inside @xmath is entirely determined in terms of data on
@xmath . The past domain of dependence @xmath is defined similarly.

A Cauchy surface is a spacelike hypersurface which every non-spacelike
curve intersects exactly once. It has as domain of dependence @xmath the
manifold itself. If an open set @xmath admits a Cauchy surface then the
Cauchy problem for any PDE with initial data on @xmath is well-defined.
This is also equivalent to say that @xmath is globally hyperbolic.

The requirement (ii) means that there should be a globally hyperbolic
submanifold of spacetime containing both the exterior spacetime and the
horizon. It is equivalent to say there is a family of Cauchy
hypersurfaces @xmath , such that @xmath is inside the domain of
dependence of @xmath if @xmath .

Now, the boundary of the black hole is the past event horizon @xmath .
It is a null hypersurface with generator @xmath (that is proportional to
@xmath on @xmath ). We can choose to parameterize the Cauchy surfaces
@xmath using the affine parameter @xmath of the null geodesic generator
@xmath .

The area of the horizon @xmath is then the area of the intersection of
@xmath with @xmath . We have to prove that @xmath if @xmath .

Sketch of the proof:
The Raychaudhuri equation for the null generator @xmath reads as ( 3.24
). Therefore, wherever the energy condition @xmath holds, the null
generator will evolve subject to the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

except on possible singular points as caustics. It follows that if
@xmath becomes negative at any point @xmath on the horizon (i.e. if
there is a convergence) then the null generator can continue in the
horizon for at most a finite affine distance before reaching a point
@xmath at which @xmath , i.e. a point of infinite convergence
representing a caustic beyond which the generators intersect.

Now, from the third property of event horizons above, the generators
cannot leave the horizon. Therefore at least two generators cross at
@xmath inside @xmath and, following Hawking and Ellis (Prop 4.5.12 of [
155 ] ), they may be deformed to a timelike curve, see figure 3.3 . This
is however impossible because of the achronicity property of event
horizons. Therefore, in order to avoid the contradiction, the point
@xmath cannot exist and @xmath cannot be negative.

Since (at points where the horizon is not smooth) new null generators
may begin but old ones cannot end, equation ( 3.17 ) implies that the
total area @xmath cannot decrease with increasing @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This completes the proof.

In particular, if two black holes with area @xmath and @xmath merge then
the area @xmath of the combined black hole have to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The area @xmath do not change if @xmath on the entire horizon @xmath .
The black hole is then stationary.

Note that this derivation implicitly assume regularity properties of the
horizon (as piecewise @xmath ) which may not be true for generic black
holes. Recently these gaps in the derivation have been totally filled in
[ 97 ] , see discussion in [ 246 ] .

### 2 Equilibrium states

#### 2.1 Killing horizons

In any stationary and asymptotically flat spacetime with a black hole,
the event horizon is a Killing horizon [ 155 ] . This theorem firstly
proven by Hawking [ 154 ] is called the rigidity theorem. It provides an
essential link between event horizons and Killing horizons. ⁵ ⁵ 5 The
theorem further assumes the geometry is analytic around the horizon.
Actually, there exist a counter-example to the rigidity theorem as
stated in Hawking and Ellis [ 155 ] but under additional assumptions
such as global hyperbolicity and simple connectedness of the spacetime,
the result is valid [ 96 ] . See also [ 135 ] for a relaxation of the
analyticity hypotheses.

A Killing horizon is a null hypersurface whose normal @xmath is a
Killing vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This additional property will allow us to explore many characteristics
of black holes.

The parameter @xmath which we now call the surface gravity of @xmath is
defined in ( 3.6 ). In asymptotically flat spacetimes, the normalization
of @xmath is fixed by requiring @xmath at infinity (similarly, we impose
@xmath in asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes).

For Killing horizons, the expansion rate @xmath , so @xmath . Moreover,
from ( 3.20 ) and ( 3.28 ), we deduce @xmath . Equation ( 3.19 ) then
provides an alternative definition for the surface gravity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contracting ( 3.6 ) with the transverse null vector @xmath or using the
definition ( 3.9 ), one has also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Raychaudhuri equation ( 3.24 ) also states in this case that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

because @xmath is proportional to @xmath on the horizon.

From the decomposition ( 3.14 ), the irrotationality condition ( 3.7 )
and the Killing property @xmath , it can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the covector @xmath can be fixed uniquely by the normalization
@xmath . Using ( 3.30 ), the last equation can be decomposed in terms of
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath satisfy @xmath . In particular, it shows that for any
spacelike tangent vectors @xmath , @xmath to @xmath , one has @xmath .

#### 2.2 Zero law

We are now able to show that the surface gravity @xmath is constant on
the horizon under appropriate conditions. More precisely,

###### Theorem 10 (Zero law).

[ 45 ] If

-    The spacetime @xmath admits a Killing vector @xmath which is the
    generator of a Killing horizon @xmath ,

-    Einstein’s equations hold with matter satisfying the dominant
    energy condition, i.e. @xmath is a non-spacelike vector for all
    @xmath ,

then the surface gravity @xmath of the Killing horizon is constant over
@xmath .

Using the aforementioned properties of null hypersurfaces and Killing
horizons, together with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is valid for Killing vectors, one obtains (see [ 92 ] for a proof)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for all spacelike tangent vectors @xmath . Now, from the dominant energy
condition, @xmath is not spacelike. However, the Raychaudhuri equation
implies ( 3.31 ). Therefore, @xmath must be zero or proportional to
@xmath and @xmath .

This theorem has an extension when gravity is coupled to
electromagnetism. If the Killing vector field @xmath is also a symmetry
of the electromagnetic field up to a gauge transformation, @xmath , it
can also be proven that the electric potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

is constant on the horizon. See the discussion before ( 3.57 ) for a
proof in the case of @xmath -form potentials, @xmath .

Note that the zeroth law can be derived from different assumptions. As
an example, constancy of surface gravity holds for any black hole which
is static or stationary-axisymmetric with the @xmath reflection isometry
(without assuming Einstein’s equations) [ 91 , 205 ] .

### 3 First law and Smarr formula

The geometric derivation of the Smarr relation and of the first law of
thermodynamics for four-dimensional asymptotically flat black holes is
usually based on Komar integrals [ 45 , 90 ] . Komar integrals are
extremely useful since they allow one to easily express the conserved
quantities defined at infinity to properties associated with the horizon
of the black hole. However, they do not provide a complete and
systematic approach to conserved quantities.

Indeed, in order to give the correct definitions of energy and angular
momentum, the coefficients of the Komar integrals must be fixed by
comparison with the ADM expressions [ 18 , 19 ] , see e.g. discussions
in [ 174 , 235 ] . Moreover, although this approach can be extended to
higher dimensional asymptotically flat black holes [ 197 , 138 ] , it
generally becomes ambiguous for rotating asymptotically anti-de Sitter
black holes [ 190 , 143 ] . Komar integrals are also not applicable to
more exotic black holes as the ones immersed in Gödel spacetimes [ 146 ,
43 ] .

The aim of this section is to rederive the first law and the Smarr
formula using the Lagrangian charges defined in the preceding part of
the thesis, as sketched in [ 55 ] , without using uniqueness results or
assuming spherical horizon topology.

We will first derive the first law and the Smarr formula for Einstein
gravity and we will then extend the analysis to gravity coupled to a
@xmath -form potential and to a scalar field. A proof of the first law
for an arbitrary theory of gravity and for non-stationary perturbations
will not be developed here. For that analysis, we refer the reader to
covariant phase space methods [ 245 , 174 ] .

Following section 5 of Chapter 1 , suppose that we have a family of
solutions @xmath with exact Killing vectors @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,
containing stationary and axisymmetric black holes with connected
Killing horizon. The generator of a Killing horizon is then a
combination of the Killing vectors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the angular velocities at the horizon. In what follows,
we will only consider one-forms @xmath contracted with stationary field
variations @xmath , i.e. satisfying ( 1.29 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.1 The first law for Einstein gravity

The differences of energy and angular momenta between two configurations
@xmath and @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the relative sign difference between the definitions of @xmath and
@xmath traces its origin to the Lorentz signature of the metric [ 174 ]
. We assume that the energy and angular momenta ( 3.40 ) are integrable
in @xmath , i.e. we require that the condition ( 1.47 ) or more
precisely ( 2.13 ) are satisfied for the Killing vectors @xmath and
@xmath , for @xmath and for one-forms @xmath tangent to the family of
solutions @xmath .

Assuming that the de Rham cohomology in the solution space @xmath
vanishes in (vertical) form degree two, the integrability condition
ensures that the charge one-forms ( 1.46 ) are independent on the path
@xmath connecting @xmath to @xmath . The energy and angular momenta are
then obtained by integration of ( 3.40 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equilibrium state version ⁶ ⁶ 6 There also exists a physical process
version, where an infinitesimal amount of matter is send through the
horizon from infinity. of the first law for the simple case of pure
Einstein gravity can now be stated as [ 45 , 174 , 176 ]

###### Theorem 11 (First law).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two slightly different stationary black hole
solutions of Einstein’s equations with Killing horizon. The difference
of energy @xmath , angular momenta @xmath and area @xmath of the black
hole are related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us start with Proposition 2 stating the equality of the charge
associated with @xmath at a spacelike section @xmath of the horizon and
at infinity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 3.40 ), the left-hand side of ( 3.43 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 2.30 ), the right-hand side of ( 3.43 ) may be rewritten as ⁷ ⁷
7 The minus sign in front of @xmath comes from the fact that @xmath is
Grassman odd and that we use the Grassman even @xmath in place of @xmath
.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integrands are given in ( 2.27 )-( 2.28 ).

On the horizon, the integration measure for @xmath -forms is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the “angular” measure on @xmath and @xmath was defined
in ( 3.8 ). Using the properties of Killing horizons described in
section 2 , the Komar integral on the horizon can easily be computed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the area of the horizon. Now, it turns out that the
local geometry around Killing horizons implies the following property

###### Proposition 12.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The computation which is straightforward but lengthly is explicitly done
in Appendix C . 3 without assuming specific coordinates as in the
original derivation [ 45 ] and in some later derivations [ 91 , 245 ] .
It would be interesting to find a generalization of this proof for
non-stationary perturbations as well.

Using proposition 12 , the right-hand side of ( 3.43 ) is finally given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

as it should and the first law is proven.∎

We can see in this derivation that the first law is a geometrical law in
the sense that it relates the geometry of Killing horizons to the
geometric measure of energy and angular momenta. Note that the
derivation was done in arbitrary dimensions, without hypotheses on the
topology of the horizon and for arbitrary stationary variations. The
first law also applies in particular for extremal black holes by taking
@xmath .

Finally remark that the first part of the derivation, especially
equation ( 3.44 ), is identical for any theory of gravity, with
appropriate definition of energy and angular momenta ( 3.40 ). On the
other hand, the surface terms evaluated on the horizon ( 3.45 ) will be
modified for other theories.

#### 3.2 The Smarr formula for Einstein gravity

Let us now derive a formula relating the energy and angular momenta of a
black hole with Killing horizon to quantities defined at the horizon. A
general derivation can be found in [ 57 ] .

Let us choose a path @xmath , @xmath in @xmath interpolating between the
background @xmath and a black hole @xmath . It is not assumed that there
is a horizon defined for all metrics along the path.

Now, the conserved quantity associated with the Killing generator @xmath
of the target black hole solution @xmath ( 3.38 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

by linearity of @xmath in @xmath . Because this quantity may be computed
on any surface, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

after having used ( 3.45 ). Here, @xmath is the black hole horizon and
@xmath is any surface that may be deformed to the surface @xmath at
infinity. The Komar integral @xmath evaluated on the horizon is given
by ( 3.47 ). We thus get

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.52)
  -- -- -- --------

The claim is that this relation gives the generalized Smarr formula,
which becomes the thermodynamical Euler relation, with the standard
identifications of temperature as @xmath and entropy as @xmath . This
formula will be applied to Kerr-anti de Sitter black holes and to their
flat limit in Chapter 4 .

A generalization of the Smarr formula for Einstein gravity coupled to a
Maxwell field with Chern-Simons term will be given in section 3 of
Chapter 4 .

#### 3.3 First law for gravity coupled to a @xmath-form potential and a
dilaton

The first law of black hole mechanics was initially developed taking
into account dust as well as electromagnetic fields [ 45 ] . Also, the
first law with Yang-Mills fields were studied, e.g., in [ 224 , 137 ] .

Hamiltonian [ 102 ] , quasilocal [ 34 ] as well as covariant phase space
methods [ 209 , 210 ] have investigated the role of @xmath -form charges
in the first law. The aim of this section published in [ 101 ] is to
continue the analysis started in section 3 of Chapter 2 by deriving the
first law using our methods in a notation taking care of form factors.
The first law will be proven for gauge potentials that may be irregular
on the bifurcation surface, which is necessary in order to cover e.g.
the thermodynamics of black rings [ 132 ] . In that respect, the
covariant analysis of [ 209 , 210 ] will be improved.

We will use the observation [ 137 ] that a consistent thermodynamics can
be done on the future event horizon with diverging potentials if,
nevertheless, the potential is regular when pulled-back on the future
horizon. Our resulting expression for the first law constitutes a
generalization of [ 137 ] for @xmath -form potentials (also coupled to a
scalar field). We will then show in section 4 of Chapter 4 that the
potential for the black rings [ 132 ] admits a regular pull-back on the
future event horizon and can thus be treated by this method. Note that
our analysis covers only electric-type charges and not magnetic charges
where the potential is necessarily singular on the future event horizon.

We assume as in the previous section that the fields @xmath and @xmath
are stationary black hole solutions with Killing horizon @xmath . The
variation of energy @xmath and angular momenta @xmath are defined as the
charges associated with the Killing vectors @xmath and @xmath . We
assume that @xmath is a solution of ( 2.59 ) with @xmath . We also
require that @xmath is a symmetry of the perturbed black hole @xmath .

The first law is then a consequence of the equality ⁸ ⁸ 8 The first law
can be straightforwardly generalized to reducibility parameters
satisfying @xmath with @xmath . This simply amounts to add a
contribution at infinity and at the horizon.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath -sphere at infinity. Using the linearity of
@xmath with respect to @xmath , the left-hand side is simply given by
@xmath . Splitting the right-hand side, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We showed in the last section that geometric properties of the Killing
horizon allow one to express the gravitational contribution into the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 2.72 ), the scalar contribution can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes thanks to the reducibility equations ( 2.59 ), assuming
the regularity of the scalar field on the horizon.

The contribution of the @xmath -form can be computed using the arguments
of [ 138 , 102 ] . The Raychaudhuri equation gives @xmath on the
horizon. It follows by Einstein’s equations and by the identity @xmath
that @xmath has vanishing norm on the horizon. But as @xmath , @xmath is
tangent to the horizon. @xmath has thus the form @xmath by antisymmetry
of @xmath and its pullback to the horizon vanishes. The equation @xmath
can be written as @xmath . Therefore, the pull-back of @xmath on the
horizon is a closed form.

For @xmath , @xmath is simply the scalar electric potential at the
horizon ( 3.37 ). When @xmath , the quantity @xmath pulled-back on the
horizon is the sum of an exact form @xmath and an harmonic form @xmath .
If the horizon has non-trivial @xmath cycles @xmath , one can define the
harmonic forms dual to @xmath by duality between homology and cohomology
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The harmonic form @xmath is then a sum of terms @xmath with @xmath
constant over the non-trivial cycles.

The contribution from the potential contains three terms ( 2.76 ). The
Komar term ( 2.74 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the exact form @xmath do not contribute on-shell. We recognize on
the right-hand side the conserved form written in ( 2.79 ). Let us
denote by @xmath the integral @xmath .

Using ( 3.46 ), the contribution @xmath reads as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term of ( 3.59 ) nicely combines with the second term of (
2.76 ) into @xmath because @xmath is constant as a consequence of the
hypotheses on the variation. In the second term of ( 3.59 ), one can
replace @xmath by its pull-back @xmath on the future horizon. Indeed,
decomposing @xmath , one sees that the term involving @xmath do not
contribute because of the antisymmetry of @xmath . Therefore, the second
term in ( 3.59 ) will vanish if @xmath is regular and if the pull-back
@xmath on the future horizon is regular.

Finally, the contribution from the potential on the horizon reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

as it should to give the first law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 4 Black hole solutions and their thermodynamics

General relativity provides a very elegant classical description of the
gravitational interaction. Remarkably, this theory predicts the
existence of black holes which satisfy laws analogous to the laws of
thermodynamics. In this chapter, we will try to get further insights in
the properties of black holes by finding new solutions to gravity
coupled to matter fields and by investigating their thermodynamical
properties.

In the first section, we will construct new Gödel-type black hole and
particle solutions to Einstein-Maxwell theory in 2+1 dimensions with a
negative cosmological constant and a Chern-Simons term. These black
holes can be seen as B(H)TZ black holes [ 39 , 38 ] immersed into a
Gödel background. We will show that a particular solution is related to
the original Gödel universe. The solutions will also be analyzed from
the point of view of identifications. On-shell, the electromagnetic
stress-energy tensor will be seen to effectively replace the
cosmological constant by minus the square of the topological mass and
produce the stress-energy of a pressure-free perfect fluid. Finally, the
tools developed in the preceding chapters will be used to compute the
conserved charges and work out the thermodynamics.

In section 2 , we will turn to higher dimensional Kerr-anti-de Sitter
black holes. The conserved charges will be obtained by our methods and a
generalized Smarr relation which is valid both in flat and in anti-de
Sitter backgrounds will be derived. It will be also shown that the
charges for higher dimensional Kerr-adS black holes can be correctly
computed from the standard Hamiltonian or Lagrangian surface integrals
at infinity.

The definition of conserved quantities for Gödel black holes was an open
problem in 2004 [ 146 , 183 ] mainly because the naive application of
traditional approaches fails. In section 3 , the mass, angular momenta
and charge of the Gödel-type rotating black hole solution to five
dimensional minimal supergravity [ 139 , 146 ] will be computed, thereby
providing a definition of charges in these unconventional spacetimes.
Moreover, a generalized Smarr formula will be derived and the first law
of thermodynamics will be verified.

We conclude in sections 4 and 5 with applications of our formalism to
black rings and with the definition of energy in plane-waves geometries.

### 1 Three-dimensional Gödel black holes

Exact solutions of higher dimensional gravity and supergravity theories
play a key role in the development of string theory. Recently, a
Gödel-like exact solution of five-dimensional minimal supergravity
having the maximum number of supersymmetries has been constructed [ 139
] . As its four-dimensional predecessor, discovered by Gödel in 1949 [
149 ] , this solution possesses a large number of isometries. It can be
lifted to higher dimensions and has recently been extensively studied as
a background for string and M-theory, see e.g. [ 70 , 152 ] .

The Gödel-like five-dimensional solution found in [ 139 ] is supported
by an Abelian gauge field. This gauge field has an additional
Chern-Simons interaction and produces the stress-energy tensor of a
pressureless perfect fluid. Since a Chern-Simons term can also be added
in three dimensions, it is a natural question to ask whether a Gödel
like solution exists in three-dimensional gravity coupled to a
Maxwell-Chern-Simons field.

Actually, there is a stronger motivation to look for this kind of
solutions of three-dimensional gravity. The reason is that the original
four-dimensional Gödel spacetime is already effectively three
dimensional, see e.g. [ 155 ] . In fact, the metric has as direct
product structure @xmath where @xmath satisfies a purely
three-dimensional Einstein equation.

The goal of this section, published as an article in [ 43 ] with
M. Banados, G. Barnich and M. Gomberoff, is twofold. On the one hand we
will show that the three-dimensional factor @xmath of the Gödel
spacetime and its generalizations [ 206 ] are exact solutions of the
three-dimensional Einstein-Maxwell-Chern-Simon theory described by the
action,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The stress-energy tensor of the perfect fluid will be fully generated by
the gauge field @xmath , in complete analogy with the five-dimensional
results reported in [ 139 ] .

Our second goal deals with Gödel particles and black holes. Within the
five-dimensional supergravity theory, rotating black hole solutions on
the Gödel background have been investigated in [ 165 , 146 , 72 , 147 ,
62 , 183 , 148 , 59 , 109 ] . It is then natural to ask whether the
three-dimensional Gödel spacetime @xmath can be generalized to include
horizons. This is indeed the case and a general solution will be
displayed.

The conserved charges - mass, angular momentum and electric charge -
will be computed for these solutions and the first law for the
three-dimensional black holes, adapted to an observer at rest with
respect to the electromagnetic fluid will be derived. We then show how
to adapt this first law in order to compare with the one for adS black
holes in the absence of the electromagnetic fluid.

In parallel to this work, three-dimensional black hole solutions with
naked closed time-like curves have also been obtained from exact
marginal deformations of the @xmath WZW model [ 122 ] . Gödel black hole
solutions can thus be promoted to exact string theory backgrounds.
During the writing of this thesis, the @xmath supersymmetric extension
of the action ( 4.1 ) has been constructed in [ 44 ] . It turns out that
the three-dimensional Gödel solution preserves one half of the
supersymmetries.

#### 1.1 Introduction

Let us now briefly discuss the general structure of the stress-energy
tensor of Maxwell-Chern-Simons theory. The original Gödel geometry is a
solution of the Einstein equations in the presence of a pressureless
fluid with energy density @xmath and a negative cosmological constant
@xmath such that @xmath . Equivalently, it can be viewed as a
homogeneous spacetime filled with a stiff fluid, that is, @xmath and
vanishing cosmological constant.

In (2+1)-spacetime dimensions, an electromagnetic field can be the
source of such a fluid. To see this it is convenient to write the
stress-energy tensor in terms of the dual field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In any region where the field @xmath is timelike, the electromagnetic
field behaves as a stiff fluid with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If Gödel’s geometry is going to be a solution of the Einstein-Maxwell
system, then @xmath must be a constant. Moreover in comoving
coordinates, in which @xmath , @xmath must be a constant vector pointing
along the time coordinate. One can easily see that such a solution does
not exist. In fact, the Maxwell equations for this solution,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

imply in these coordinates that @xmath which cannot be achieved for
Gödel. If the electromagnetic field acquires a topological mass @xmath ,
however, Maxwell’s equations ( 4.4 ) will be modified by the addition of
the term @xmath . In that case, the timelike, constant, electromagnetic
field is, as we will see below, a solution of the coupled
Einstein-Maxwell-Chern-Simons system, and the geometry is precisely that
of Gödel.

#### 1.2 Topologically massive gravito-electrodynamics

We start by reviewing the main properties, relevant to our discussion,
of the four-dimensional Gödel spacetimes [ 149 , 206 , 211 ] . These
metrics have a direct product structure @xmath with three-dimensional
factor given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The original solution discovered by Gödel corresponds to @xmath .
Furthermore, it was pointed out in [ 206 ] that the property of
homogeneity and the causal structure of the Gödel solution also hold for
@xmath and @xmath independent, provided that @xmath , the limiting case
@xmath corresponding to anti-de Sitter space.

The three-dimensional metric ( 4.5 ) has 4 independent Killing vectors,
two obvious ones, @xmath and @xmath , and two additional ones,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

which span the algebra @xmath . Finally, the metric ( 4.5 ) satisfies
the three dimensional Einstein equations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all values of @xmath , and we see that @xmath plays the role of a
negative cosmological constant.

Note that a solution @xmath to Einstein’s equations in @xmath dimensions
can be lifted to a solution in @xmath dimensions through the addition of
a flat direction @xmath if the additional components of the
stress-energy tensor are chosen as @xmath and @xmath . For the solutions
( 4.5 ), @xmath and vanishes, as it should, for the original Gödel
solution.

Our first goal is to prove that ( 4.5 ) can be regarded as an exact
solution to the equations of motion following from ( 4.1 ).

To this end, we need to supplement ( 4.5 ) with a suitable gauge field
which will provide the stress-energy tensor (right hand side of ( 4.8
)). Consider a spherically symmetric gauge field in the gauge @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting this ansatz for the gauge field into the equations of motion
associated to the action ( 4.1 ), and assuming that the metric takes the
form ( 4.5 ), one indeed finds a solution for @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover, the two parameters @xmath entering in ( 4.5 ) become related
to the coupling constants @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With this parameterization, the Gödel sector is determined by @xmath ,
with @xmath corresponding to anti-de Sitter space. For future
convenience, we shall write the solution in terms of a new radial
coordinate @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly, the metric and gauge field are given by,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.12)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From now on, we always write @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and
@xmath using ( 4.10 ). The general solution for @xmath involves the
addition of arbitrary constant terms along @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.13
). At this stage, we choose the constant in @xmath to be zero. We will
come back to this issue when we discuss black hole solutions below. A
constant term in @xmath is not allowed, however, if one requires @xmath
to be regular everywhere. Indeed, near @xmath , the spacelike surfaces
of ( 4.12 ) are @xmath in polar coordinates, the radial coordinate
@xmath in ( 4.12 ) being the square root of a standard radial coordinate
over @xmath , and thus @xmath must vanish at @xmath because the 1-form
@xmath is not well defined there.

The gauge field ( 4.13 ) is also invariant under the isometries of ( 4.5
), up to suitable gauge transformations: for each Killing vector @xmath
there exists a function @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this sense, the Killing vectors @xmath of ( 4.5 ) are lifted to gauge
parameters @xmath that leave the full gravity plus gauge field solution
invariant. The generalized Gödel metric ( 4.12 ) together with the gauge
field ( 4.13 ) define a background for the action ( 4.1 ) with 4
linearly independent symmetries of this type. We shall now use these
symmetries in order to find new solutions describing particles and black
holes.

#### 1.3 Gödel particles: @xmath

We have proven in the previous section that the Gödel metric can be
regarded as an exact solution to action ( 4.1 ). The associated gauge
field ( 4.13 ) is however real only in the range @xmath . We consider in
this section the case @xmath and introduce particle-like objects on the
background ( 4.12 ) by means of spacetime identifications.

##### Gödel Cosmons

Identifications in three-dimensional gravity were first introduced by
Deser, Jackiw and t’Hooft [ 117 , 118 ] and the resulting objects called
“cosmons”. In the presence of a topologically massive electromagnetic
field, cosmons living in a Gödel background may also be constructed
along these lines.

Take the metric ( 4.12 ) and make the following identification along the
Killing vectors @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are real constants. If @xmath this procedure will turn the
spatial plane into a cone. The cosmon lives in the tip of this cone, and
its mass is related to @xmath and @xmath (see below). The time-helical
structure given by @xmath will provide angular momentum.

To analyze the resulting geometry it is convenient to pass to a
different set of coordinates,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the above identification amounts to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, the new time @xmath flows ahead smoothly, that is, it does not
jump after encircling the particle. Inserting these coordinates into (
4.12 ), and erasing the primes, we find the new metric

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (4.17)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

For fixed @xmath and @xmath , the new constants @xmath and @xmath are
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

These constants will be shown to be related to the mass and angular
momentum respectively.

Since under ( 4.15 ) @xmath scales with @xmath while @xmath with @xmath
we see that the @xmath -dependent part of gauge field ( 4.13 ) is
invariant under ( 4.15 ). However, the manifold now has a non-trivial
cycle, and it is not regular at the point @xmath invariant under the
action of the Killing vector whose orbits are used for identifications.
Explicitly, @xmath which corresponds to @xmath before the shift of
@xmath in ( 4.15 ). This means that one can now add a constant piece to
@xmath . The new gauge field becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant @xmath will be identified below as the electric charge of
the particle sitting at @xmath .

The metrics ( 4.17 ) only admit the 2 Killing vectors @xmath and @xmath
. Indeed, the other candidates @xmath and @xmath do not survive as they
do not commute with the Killing vector along which the identifications
are made [ 40 ] .

So far we have only used the Killing vectors @xmath and @xmath of ( 4.5
) to make identifications. Besides these Killing vectors, the metric (
4.5 ) has two other isometries defined by the vectors ( 4.6 ) and ( 4.7
), and one may consider identifications along them. We shall not explore
this possibility in this paper.

##### Horizons, Singularities and Time Machines

Distinguished places of the geometry ( 4.17 ) may appear on those points
where either @xmath or @xmath vanishes. The vanishing of @xmath
indicates that @xmath changes sign and hence closed timelike curves
(CTC) appear. On the other hand, the vanishing of @xmath indicates the
presence of horizons, as can readily be seen by writting ( 4.17 ) in ADM
form.

The function @xmath in ( 4.17 ) is an inverted parabola, and, it will
have two zeros, say @xmath and @xmath whenever

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We must require this condition to be fulfilled in order to have a
“normal” region where @xmath is spacelike. The boundary of the normal
region are two spacelike surfaces, the velocity of light surfaces (VLS)
at @xmath and @xmath (assume @xmath ). These surfaces are perfectly
regular as long as @xmath there, which is indeed the case for the metric
( 4.17 ), when @xmath .

On the other hand, it is direct to see from ( 4.17 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is positive in the normal region, there are no horizons
there and @xmath is positive in that region. This means that, if any,
both zeros of @xmath are on the same side of the normal region. The
sides in which no zero of @xmath are present are analog to the Gödel
time machine, an unbounded region, free of singularities, where @xmath
is timelike. If @xmath , the roots of @xmath are smaller than the roots
of @xmath . Without loss of generality, we can restrict ourselves to
this case because the solutions parametrized by @xmath are related to
those with @xmath by the change of coordinates @xmath , @xmath .

The condition for “would be horizons” is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

As depicted in Fig. 4.1, once one reaches the largest root @xmath of
@xmath , the manifold comes to an end. Indeed, the signature of the
metric changes as one passes @xmath . This can be seen by putting the
metric in ADM form (see ( 4.50 ) below). Note that in this case, given
@xmath , there is a unique @xmath satisfying ( 4.18 )-( 4.19 ).

Using then @xmath , with @xmath the smallest root of @xmath and @xmath ,
one finds near @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that the spacetime has a naked singularity at @xmath , which
is the analog of the one found in the spinning cosmon of [ 117 , 118 ] .

Alternatively, as proposed originally in [ 109 ] for the case where the
would be horizon is inside the time machine, one can periodically
identify time @xmath with period @xmath . This leads to having CTC’s
lying everywhere, including the normal region.

#### 1.4 Gödel black holes

##### The @xmath sector

We have shown in Sec. 1.2 that the metric ( 4.5 ) can be embedded as an
exact solution to the equations of motion derived from ( 4.1 ). The
necessary gauge field, given in ( 4.13 ) is, however, real only in the
range @xmath . As we mentioned in Sec. 1.2 , the gauge field ( 4.13 )
represents the most general static spherically symmetric solution, given
the metric ( 4.5 ) (or, in the new radial coordinate, ( 4.12 )). This
means that if we want to find a real gauge field in the range @xmath we
need to start with a different metric. The goal of this section is to
explore the other sector, @xmath , where black holes will be
constructed.

Starting from the metric ( 4.12 ) and gauge field ( 4.13 ) it is easy to
construct a new exact solution which will be real in the range @xmath .
Consider the following (complex) coordinate changes ¹ ¹ 1 An equivalent
way to do this transformation without introducing the imaginary unit is
by the following sequence of coordinate transformations (and analytic
continuations) acting on ( 4.12 ): @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and the
same for @xmath . acting on ( 4.12 ) and ( 4.13 ): @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . The new metric and gauge field read,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.25)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Several comments are in order here. First of all, the intermediate step
of making some coordinates complex is only a way to find a new solution.
From now on, all coordinates @xmath are defined real, and, in that
sense, the fields ( 4.25 ) and ( 4.26 ) provide a new exact solution to
the action ( 4.1 ) which is real in the range @xmath .

Second, in the original metric ( 4.12 ), the coordinate @xmath was
constrained by the geometry to have the range @xmath . This is no longer
the case in the metric ( 4.25 ). The 2-dimensional sub-manifold
described by the coordinates @xmath does not have the geometry of @xmath
near @xmath anymore; the coordinate @xmath is thus not constrained to be
compact, and in principle it should have the full range

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The reason that @xmath in ( 4.25 ) is not constrained by the geometry is
that the @xmath component of the metric ( 4.25 ) changes sign as we
approach @xmath . This is an indication of the presence of a horizon,
although this surface is not yet compact.

Finally, it is worth mentioning that the metrics ( 4.25 ) and ( 4.12 )
are real and are related by a coordinate transformation, so that all
local invariants involving the metric alone have the same values.
However, as solutions to the Einstein-Maxwell equations, they are
inequivalent. Indeed, the diffeomorphism and gauge invariant quantity
@xmath changes sign when going from ( 4.12 )-( 4.13 ) to ( 4.25 )-( 4.26
). This is different from the pure anti-de Sitter case where particles
and black holes are obtained by identifications performed on the same
background.

##### The Gödel black hole

Let us go back to ( 4.25 ) and note that the function @xmath vanishes at
@xmath . In order to make the @xmath surface a regular, finite area,
horizon we shall use the Killing vector @xmath of ( 4.25 ) to identify
points along the @xmath coordinate. In this case, @xmath has a
non-compact orbit and identifications along it does not produce a
conical singularity, but a “cylinder”. More generically, we may proceed
in analogy with the cosmon case and identify along a combination of both
@xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that the resulting geometry will also carry angular momentum. We
again pass to a different set of coordinates,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

so that the new angular coordinate @xmath is identified in @xmath , and
the time @xmath flows ahead smoothly.

The new metric reads (after erasing the primes),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As for the particles analyzed in the previous section, for given @xmath
, we define new constants @xmath and @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, these constants will be related below to the mass and the angular
momentum and without loss of generality, we can limit ourselves to the
case @xmath .

In the new coordinates, the electromagnetic potential takes the form
@xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant @xmath is arbitrary because, once again, the nontrivial
topology allows the addition of an arbitrary constant in @xmath . It is
worth stressing that if @xmath was not compact, then @xmath and @xmath
would be trivial constants. It also follows that the Killing vectors of
( 4.25 ) have the same form as those of ( 4.12 ), but with the
trigonometric functions @xmath and @xmath replaced by hyperbolic ones.
Again, these vectors do not survive after the identifications.

##### Horizons, Singularities and Time Machines

We now proceed to analyze the metric in the same way we did in the
preceding section. Again we have a condition for having a normal region,
which, in this case reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath and @xmath now behave as in Fig. 4.2 .

Note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore horizons may only exist in the normal region of positive
@xmath . Note, however, that for horizons to exist we must require

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

If this requirement is fulfilled, we get two horizons inside the normal
region, @xmath and @xmath , which coincide in the extremal case. The
whole normal region is in fact an ergoregion because @xmath is spacelike
everywhere. Again, for given @xmath , one can then find a unique
solution @xmath satisfying ( 4.32 )-( 4.33 ).

Following Carter [ 91 ] , the metric and the gauge field can be made
regular at both horizons by a combined coordinate and gauge
transformation. Indeed, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the black hole metric can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The analog of ingoing Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates are the angle
@xmath and the time @xmath defined by @xmath , @xmath , giving the
regular metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

With @xmath given by ( 4.34 ), the @xmath dependent gauge transformation
@xmath , where @xmath gives the regular potential @xmath whose norm
@xmath is zero.

Outgoing Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates are defined by @xmath ,
@xmath . The metric then takes also the form ( 4.39 ) with @xmath and
@xmath replaced by @xmath and @xmath and the potential can be
regularized by @xmath .

The null generators of the horizons are @xmath . The associated
ignorable coordinates which are constant on these null generators are
then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Kruskal type coordinates @xmath are obtained by defining

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In these coordinates, the metric is manifestly regular at the
bifurcation surfaces,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.43)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath given implicitly by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Kruskal coordinates, the gauge field ( 4.34 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.45)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The potential can be regularized at @xmath by the transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the original coordinates, however, the parameters of these
transformations explicitly involve the angle @xmath , @xmath and, as
explicitly shown below, they change the electric charge. In order to
avoid this, one can add a constant piece proportional to @xmath , so
that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the original coordinates, the gauge parameter is now a linear
function of @xmath alone,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

According to the definition given below, such a transformation does not
change the charges.

In the published paper [ 43 ] , a naive Carter-Penrose diagram for these
black holes was drawn. This diagram, however, is premature in view of
the two following issues that have still to be addressed: namely, the
clarification of the global topology of these spacetimes, and the
existence of a conformal completion. These considerations are left for
further work.

#### 1.5 Vacuum solutions @xmath

In the case @xmath the gauge field vanishes and the Gödel metric ( 4.12
) reduces to the three-dimensional anti-de Sitter space (to see this, do
the coordinate transformations @xmath and @xmath ). This means that the
identifications in this case yield the usual three-dimensional black
holes, and conical singularities.

#### 1.6 The general solution

##### Reduced equations of motion

We have seen in previous sections that the Gödel metrics ( 4.5 ) and (
4.25 ), as well as the corresponding quotient spaces describing
particles and black holes, can be regarded as exact solutions to the
action ( 4.1 ).

We have distinguished three cases according to the values of the
dimensionless quantity @xmath . Our purpose in this section is to write
a general solution which will be valid for all values of @xmath . We
shall now construct the solution by looking directly at the equations of
motion. It is useful to write a general spherically symmetric static
ansatz in the form [ 98 , 14 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are functions of @xmath only. This ansatz can also be
written in the “ADM form”,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This confirms that the function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

controls the existence of horizons. Note that for all @xmath , the
determinant of this metric is @xmath For the gauge field, we use the
radial gauge @xmath , and assume that @xmath and @xmath depend only on
the radial coordinate,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this parametrization, Einstein’s equations take the remarkably simple
form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where primes denote radial derivatives. Maxwell’s equations reduce to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before we write the solution to these equations, we make some general
remarks on the structure of the stress-energy tensor associated to
topologically massive electrodynamics. As we pointed out in the
introduction, we will seek for solutions with a constant electromagnetic
field @xmath . Hence, we will only consider potentials @xmath which are
linear in @xmath . In this case, Eqs. ( 4.54 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now multiply the first by @xmath and the second by @xmath , then we
subtract them to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the last step we have used Eq. ( 4.55 ). This implies that, if @xmath
then @xmath . By properly manipulating Eqs. ( 4.55 ) we see that this
result is also valid if @xmath but @xmath , and therefore is it true as
long as the electromagnetic field does not vanish. Now we insert this in
the last equation in ( 4.53 ), and obtain,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.56)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This equation tells us that when the topological mass @xmath is greater
(smaller) than the negative cosmological constant @xmath , the theory
only supports timelike (spacelike) constants fields. Therefore, for the
generalized Gödel spacetimes ( 4.5 ), we will need a topological mass
@xmath . In the other region, the constant electromagnetic field will
describe a tachyonic perfect fluid. Anyway, as we will see below, it is
this region in which black hole solutions are going to exist.

##### The solution

By direct computation one can check that equations ( 4.53 )-( 4.54 ) are
satisfied by the field

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are integration constants with
a physical interpretation as they will be identified with mass, angular
momentum and electric charge below. The arbitrary constant @xmath on the
other hand will be shown to be pure gauge. For later convenience, it is
however useful to keep it along and not restrict ourselves to a
particular gauge at this stage. This will be discussed in details Sec.
1.7 .

In the sector @xmath , the solution is real only for @xmath negative.
These are the Gödel particles, i.e., the conical singularities,
discussed in Sec. 1.3 . The metric ( 4.17 ) is recovered when @xmath and
the change of variables @xmath , @xmath is performed. For the special
values @xmath and @xmath , which correspond to the trivial
identification @xmath , @xmath in Sec. 1.3 , the conical singularities
disappear and we are left with the Gödel universes ( 4.12 ), used for
the identifications producing the cosmons.

When @xmath , @xmath has to be positive. The black hole metrics ( 4.31 )
of Sec. 1.4 are recovered when @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . For @xmath
and @xmath , they reduce to the solution ( 4.25 ) from which the black
holes have been obtained from non-trivial identifications.

By construction, the electromagnetic stress-energy tensor for the
solutions ( 4.57 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the unit tangent vector of the fluid is @xmath . For @xmath , the
effect of the electromagnetic field can be taken into account by
replacing the original cosmological constant @xmath by the effective
cosmological constant @xmath and introducing a pressure-free perfect,
ordinary or tachyonic, fluid with energy density @xmath . From this
point of view, the Chern-Simons coupling transmutes into a cosmological
constant . For @xmath , the fluid flows along timelike curves while for
@xmath , the fluid is tachyonic.

When @xmath , the fluid disappears, the stress-energy tensor vanishes
and the solution is real for @xmath . The metric  ( 4.57 ) reduces to
the BTZ metric [ 39 ] , as can be explicitly seen by transforming to the
standard frame that is non-rotating at infinity with respect to anti-de
Sitter space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

As will be explained in more details below, in the rotating frame that
we have used, the energy and angular momentum are @xmath and @xmath
respectively, while they become @xmath and @xmath in the standard
non-rotating frame.

Regular black holes have the range (see Fig. 4.4 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the solution still possess a topological charge @xmath . It
has been discussed in more details in [ 14 ] .

When @xmath , the limit @xmath can be taken smoothly in the coordinates
@xmath , @xmath in which the solution becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

#### 1.7 Conserved charges

##### Angular momentum, electric charge and energies

The charge differences between a given solution @xmath and an
infinitesimally close one @xmath were computed in section 4 of Chapter 2
.

Particularizing to three dimensions and contracting the vertical
one-forms @xmath with variations @xmath satisfying the reducibility
equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

the (1,1)-forms @xmath can be simplified as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

with ² ² 2 The minus sign of in front of @xmath as compared to ( 2.10 )
comes from the fact that @xmath is Grassmann even ( @xmath ) while
@xmath is Grassmann odd ( @xmath ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is the Komar 1-form and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The electromagnetic contribution is ³ ³ 3 The same remark as the
preceding footnote applies to the term @xmath as compared to ( 2.76 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Chern-Simons term contributes as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

For generic metrics and gauge fields of the form ( 4.57 ), the general
solution @xmath of ( 4.64 ) is a linear combination of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . These basis elements are associated to infinitesimal
charges as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the contribution proportional to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
originate from the Chern-Simons term through ( 4.71 ). The conserved
charges associated with @xmath , @xmath are thus manifestly integrable.
We choose to associate the angular momentum to @xmath so that its value
be algebraically independent of @xmath . If one takes as basis element
@xmath instead of @xmath , one gets a third integrable conserved charge
equal to @xmath .

The integrated charges computed with respect to the background @xmath
and associated to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the mass, the angular
momentum and the total electric charge respectively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that even though the metric and gauge fields in ( 4.57 ) become
singular at the background @xmath , we can see from the form ( 4.63 )
that this is just a coordinate singularity.

The parameter @xmath is pure gauge because the variation @xmath is not
present in the infinitesimal charges ( 1.7 ). Note however that @xmath
appears explicitly in the definition of the mass by associating it with
the basis element @xmath . It is only in the gauge @xmath , that the
mass is associated with the time-like Killing vector @xmath . This
definition ensures in particular that the mass of the black hole does
not depend on the gauge transformations ( 4.48 ) needed to regularize
the potential on the bifurcation surfaces.

In order to compare with standard adS black holes, one has to compute
the mass in the frame ( 4.61 ) instead of using the rest frame for the
fluid. The conserved charge @xmath associated with @xmath is now given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

which coincides with the conventional definition of the mass for the BTZ
black holes.

##### Horizon and first law - General derivation

When it exists, the outer horizon @xmath is located at @xmath , the
largest positive root of @xmath . In the following, a subscript @xmath
on a function means that it is evaluated at @xmath . The generator of
the horizon is given by @xmath , where the angular velocity @xmath of
the horizon has the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the sign of @xmath . The first law can be derived
by starting from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.76)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first term on the right-hand side was computed in section 3 of
Chapter 3 with as final result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the total electric potential is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

The surface gravity is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the proper area by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the choice of signs in the definition of electric charge and
angular momentum were made so that the first laws appear in the
conventional form ( 4.77 ).

##### Horizon and first law - Explicit values and discussion

We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to explicitly verify the first law ( 4.77 ), we start by
showing that @xmath . We need to verify that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the explicit expressions for the components of @xmath , this
equation reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account @xmath together with @xmath , this equality can then
easily be checked using @xmath , @xmath , implying @xmath . Since @xmath
, the first law reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be explicitly checked using ( 4.82 ).

In particular, the first law ( 4.77 ) can be evaluated in the gauge
where the potential is regular on the horizon @xmath . Because the two
forms ( 4.31 ) and ( 4.57 ) of the black hole solution are related by
the change of coordinates @xmath , @xmath , the gauge ( 4.48 ) now
corresponds to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

This amounts to the choice @xmath in ( 4.57 ). It follows that @xmath
and that the vector associated to @xmath is proportional to @xmath on
the horizon.

The first law adapted to the energy @xmath is obtained by changing
@xmath to @xmath in ( 4.77 ). This form of the first law reduces to the
standard form for 3 dimensional adS black holes (with or without
topological charge) when @xmath .

Finally, we note that the first law ( 4.77 ) applies both to the outer
event horizon of a black hole in the normal region and to the horizon at
@xmath of a cosmon, when time is identified with real period @xmath .

### 2 Kerr-anti-de Sitter black holes

The general Kerr-anti-de Sitter metrics in arbitrary spacetime
dimensions @xmath were found recently in [ 145 ] , generalizing the
results of Myers and Perry [ 197 ] to non-vanishing cosmological
constant.

As has been emphasized in [ 143 ] , not even in four dimensions do all
authors obtain the same expression for the energy of Kerr-adS black
holes. Much worse, some of these expressions are in disagreement with
the first law. In [ 143 ] , Gibbons et al. computed the energy of such
black holes indirectly by integrating the first law. In [ 115 ] , the
mass and energy have been computed directly by using the BKL
superpotentials [ 181 ] . In a completed version of their paper, Gibbons
et al. then have also computed the energy directly by using the
Ashtekar-Magnon-Das definition [ 24 , 30 ] .

In this section, published in [ 57 ] , we compute the conserved charges
- mass and angular momenta - for the Kerr-adS black holes by using the
surface integrals developed in the preceding chapters and we find
agreement with the results of [ 143 , 115 ] . We also show explicitly
that, in this case, the surface integrals integrated along a path of
solutions reduce to the standard Lagrangian [ 2 ] or Hamiltonian [ 159 ,
158 ] surface integrals at infinity.

Finally, we give a detailed and geometric derivation of the generalized
Smarr relation for the higher dimensional Kerr-adS black holes, in the
continuation of section 3.2 of Chapter 3 . The derivation can also be
applied straightforwardly to asymptotically flat black holes in the
limit of vanishing cosmological constant.

#### 2.1 Description of the solutions

The general Kerr anti-de Sitter metrics in @xmath dimensions ⁴ ⁴ 4 In
this section we shall use the notations of [ 143 ] except the spacetime
dimension denoted by @xmath and the indices @xmath , which run from 1 to
@xmath , while @xmath run from 1 to @xmath . When @xmath , @xmath . We
also use @xmath where @xmath were obtained in [ 145 , 144 ] . They have
@xmath independent rotation parameters @xmath in @xmath orthogonal
2-planes. Gibbons et al. start from the @xmath dimensional anti-de
Sitter metric in static coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . They then consider the change of variables to
Boyer-Linquist spheroidal coordinates @xmath . These coordinates depend
on @xmath arbitrary parameters @xmath and are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for later convenience, we have renamed the variables @xmath as
@xmath already at this stage. The anti-de Sitter metric then becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.90)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the coordinates @xmath , the Kerr-adS solutions @xmath , depending on
@xmath parameters @xmath , are related to the AdS metric @xmath as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

as can be directly verified by comparing with equation (4.2) of [ 143 ]
. In these coordinates, defining the metric deviations @xmath through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

and using @xmath , @xmath , it is straightforward to see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , while all other components of @xmath vanish.

The Killing vectors of the Kerr metric are given in coordinates @xmath
and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2 Mass and angular momenta

###### Surface charges

The @xmath -forms for general relativity were computed in section 2 of
Chapter 2 . For exact Killing vectors @xmath of the metric @xmath and
for variations @xmath contracted with @xmath , one can simplify the
expression ( 2.10 ) with ( 2.27 ), ( 2.28 ) and ( 2.29 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

The conserved charges for the family of solutions ( 4.92 ) are then
obtained as outlined in section 5 of Chapter 1 . Let @xmath with @xmath
denote a one parameter family of solutions to Einstein’s equations
interpolating between the anti-de Sitter background @xmath and the
Kerr-adS solution @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath can be obtained by
replacing @xmath by @xmath in ( 4.92 ). Let @xmath be a Killing vector
field for this family ⁵ ⁵ 5 We consider only vectors @xmath that do not
vary along the path @xmath . , @xmath , and @xmath be the tangent vector
to @xmath in solution space. The charge associated with @xmath is then
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

and depend only on the homology class of @xmath . We will check below
that the charge associated with the Killing vectors ( 4.95 ) are
integrable. Because the space of parameters of the solutions ( 4.92 )
has trivial topology, it will imply that the charges ( 4.97 ) do not
depend on the particular path chosen. More explicitly, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total energy of spacetime is defined to be @xmath , while the total
angular momenta are @xmath . Because the charges @xmath only depend on
the homology class of @xmath , one can evaluate them on the sphere at
infinity @xmath in order to allow their comparison with the usual
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian surface charges at infinity [ 2 , 159 , 158 ]
.

###### Useful integrals

Let us define the spheroid @xmath in coordinates @xmath by @xmath ,
@xmath . Using @xmath given explicitly in equation (A.9) of [ 143 ] and
expressing @xmath as a function of the remaining @xmath , @xmath , it is
straightforward to show that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the volume of the unit @xmath sphere, given explicitly
for instance in (4.9) of [ 143 ] .

Similarly,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This identity has been verified using Mathematica up to @xmath . We
suppose it holds for higher @xmath .

###### Angular momenta

Because @xmath is tangent to @xmath , the charge ( 4.98 ) reduces to the
standard expression for the angular momenta in terms of Komar integrals:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and is path independent. Explicitly, one gets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.103)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here, the Komar integral evaluated for the background does not
contribute because @xmath . The result agrees with the one given in [
143 ] .

###### Mass

In order to compute the mass, we evaluate ( 4.98 ) with @xmath on @xmath
. We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               
                       @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Let decompose the metric as @xmath . The asymptotic behavior ( 4.94 ) of
@xmath implies that @xmath . Hence, in the expansion of the inverse
metric @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

only the first two terms will contribute to integral ( 4.104 ), since
the following terms fall off faster and keeping only the first two terms
will give finite contributions, as we will show. Injecting this
expansion into ( 4.104 ), one gets terms that are at most quadratic in
@xmath . The terms of order @xmath will cancel, while the terms
quadratic in @xmath can directly be shown not to contribute. Hence, only
terms linear in @xmath will contribute to ( 4.104 ) with the result

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (4.106)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The integral @xmath defined in ( 4.99 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath (and indices are lowered and raised with @xmath and its
inverse). Note that the equality @xmath implies @xmath . From the
definition of the metric ( 4.92 ), one can see that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the adS metric and @xmath is defined in ( 4.93 ). Now,
as the leading terms in expression ( 4.108 ) give finite contributions
to the integral ( 4.107 ), as we will show below, the sub-leading terms
@xmath will not contribute. Expanding @xmath as in ( 4.105 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the indices are raised with @xmath and where @xmath indicates that
the sub-leading terms in equation ( 4.108 ) have been dropped. Again, we
will show below that the first two terms of ( 4.109 ) give finite
contributions to the integral ( 4.107 ). As the following terms in (
4.109 ) fall off faster, we can safely ignore them in the computation.
If we now expand the expressions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the
integrand @xmath in terms of @xmath and of @xmath , we obtain after some
work that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where all the dependence in @xmath appear only in the vanishing term
@xmath . As a consequence, the integral ( 4.107 ) does not depend on the
path.

Explicitly, one shows after some computations that @xmath reduces to
@xmath . Therefore, @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.111)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Finally, the energy is obtained by summing the two contributions @xmath
and @xmath , which gives explicitly

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in agreement with [ 143 , 115 ] .

###### Comparison with alternative surface charges

Actually, in ( 4.110 ) and because @xmath , we showed that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath because all terms of which are of order @xmath or higher in
an expansion according to @xmath of @xmath vanish when one approaches
the boundary at infinity. Hence, we have shown that at @xmath , the mass
can be computed using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and where the @xmath -form is given in ( 4.96 ). Moreover,
as shown in ( 4.102 ), the same relation ( 4.114 ) hold for @xmath
replaced by the Killing vectors @xmath .

Now, because of the equivalence of expression ( 4.96 ) with ( 2.24 )
proven in section 2.1 of Chapter 2 , the conserved charge ( 4.114 ) for
@xmath is exactly the Abbott-Deser surface charge [ 2 ] associated with
the Killing vector @xmath of the anti-de Sitter background @xmath .

Moreover, using the results of section 2.3 of Chapter 2 , one can write
the conserved charge ( 4.114 ) related to the Killing vector @xmath ,
@xmath of the background in the hamiltonian form derived in [ 159 , 158
] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.115)
     @xmath      (4.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath . In this expression, @xmath , @xmath denotes the
spatial background three metric, which is used, together with its
inverse @xmath to lower and raise indices, @xmath is the associated
covariant derivative, @xmath are the conjugate momenta, @xmath , with
@xmath and @xmath , with @xmath the lapse function.

Finally, the charge derived in [ 181 ] is defined on the sphere at
infinity @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.117)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This expression coincides to first order in @xmath with @xmath where the
one-form @xmath is given in ( 4.96 ) as can easily be seen by using
@xmath . Hence, the BKL expression gives the same results as the charge
@xmath because the boundary conditions are such that the terms quadratic
and higher in @xmath vanish asymptotically.

#### 2.3 Generalized Smarr relation

The Smarr relation is given in general relativity by the expression (
3.52 ). Let us now evaluate the terms on its right-hand side.

The integral @xmath evaluated on the surface @xmath , where the horizon
radius @xmath is the largest root of @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this integral vanishes in Minkowski space @xmath .

In Kerr-adS spacetimes, the Komar integrand @xmath of a Killing vector
@xmath is not closed. Indeed, using the equations of motion @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.120)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.121)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Because @xmath , we have @xmath . It then follows from the definition of
@xmath ( 4.99 ) and from the identity @xmath that @xmath . We thus can
move the integral on the horizon back out to infinity,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first term on the right hand side has already been computed in (
4.111 ), while the second term vanishes because @xmath does not vary
along the path and is tangent to @xmath .

We can now write the Smarr formula ( 3.52 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.123)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

in complete agreement with the results obtained by Euclidean methods in
[ 143 ] .

In the limit @xmath , we recover the Smarr formula for Kerr black holes
in flat backgrounds since then @xmath , @xmath . Combining ( 4.111 )
with ( 4.112 ) then gives @xmath . Injected into ( 3.52 ), we finally
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.124)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first law for these black holes holds as a consequence of Theorem 11
on page 11 .

### 3 Gödel black holes in supergravity

Black hole solutions in supergravity theories have attracted a lot of
interest recently for two main reasons. On the one hand, higher
dimensional supersymmetric theories play a prominent role in the effort
of unifying gravity with the three microscopic forces and on the other
hand, black hole solutions are preferred laboratories to study effects
of quantum gravity.

Among the supersymmetric solutions of five dimensional minimal
supergravity [ 139 ] , a maximally supersymmetric analogue of the Gödel
universe [ 149 ] has been found. This solution can be lifted to 10 or 11
dimensions (see also [ 237 ] ) and has been intensively studied as a
background for string and M-theory, see e.g. [ 70 , 152 ] .

Black holes in Gödel-type backgrounds have been proposed in [ 165 , 146
, 166 , 72 , 62 ] . Usually, given new black hole solutions, the
conserved charges are among the first properties to be studied, see e.g.
[ 197 , 138 , 143 ] . Indeed, they are needed in order to check whether
these solutions satisfy the same remarkable laws of thermodynamics as
their four dimensional cousins [ 45 , 90 ] .

The computation of the mass, angular momenta and electric charge of the
Gödel black holes was an open problem in 2004, mentioned explicitly in [
146 ] with partial results obtained in [ 183 ] because the naive
application of traditional approaches fails. The aim of the computation
below, published as a paper in [ 59 ] , is to solve this problem for the
five dimensional spinning Gödel-type black hole [ 146 ] and to derive
both the generalized Smarr formula and the first law.

In what follows, we consider the bosonic part of minimal supergravity in
@xmath dimensions described by the Lagrangian ( 2.82 ) with @xmath and
@xmath .

The Gödel-type solution [ 237 , 139 ] to the field equations is given by

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath            (4.125)
                          @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath            
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ---------

where the Euler angles @xmath belong to the intervals @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and where @xmath . It is the reference solution with respect to
which we will measure the charges of the black hole solutions of [ 146 ]
that we are interested in. These latter solutions can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.126)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

They reduce to the Schwarzschild-Gödel black hole when @xmath , whereas
the five dimensional Kerr black hole with equal rotation parameters is
recovered when @xmath .

The @xmath -forms constructed from the Lagrangian ( 2.82 ) were
described in section 4 of Chapter 2 .

Consider a path @xmath in solution space joining the solution @xmath to
the background @xmath . Whenever two @xmath dimensional closed
hypersurfaces @xmath and @xmath can be chosen as the only boundaries of
an @xmath dimensional hypersurface @xmath , the charges defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are reducibility parameters ( 2.83 ) do not depend on the
hypersurfaces @xmath or @xmath used for their evaluation. Furthermore,
the integrability conditions satisfied by @xmath , as shown in the
computations below, and the absence of topological obstructions imply
that these charges do not depend on the path, but only on the initial
and the final solutions.

We choose to integrate over the surface @xmath defined by @xmath , while
the path @xmath interpolating between the background Gödel-type universe
@xmath and the black hole @xmath is obtained by substituting @xmath by
@xmath in ( 4.126 ), with @xmath . Because @xmath for all @xmath , the
mass

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

of the black hole comes from the gravitational part ( 2.10 ) only

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.129)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Unlike the five dimensional Kerr black hole [ 197 , 138 ] , the mass of
which is recovered for @xmath , we also see that the rotation parameter
@xmath brings a new contribution to the mass with respect to the
Schwarzschild-Gödel black hole.

Note that the integral over the path is really needed here in order to
obtain meaningful results, because the naive application of the
Abbott-Deser ( 2.24 ), Iyer-Wald ( 2.10 ) or Regge-Teitelboim ( 2.46 )
expressions evaluated on @xmath gives as a result

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, as pointed out in [ 183 ] , diverges for large @xmath . A correct
application consists in using these expressions to compare the masses of
infinitesimally close black holes, i.e., black holes with @xmath as
compared to black holes @xmath with @xmath . Indeed, @xmath , with
@xmath given by the r.h.s of ( 4.129 ), which is finite and @xmath
independent as it should since @xmath . Finite mass differences can then
be obtained by adding up the infinitesimal results. This procedure is
for instance also needed if one wishes to compute in this way the masses
of the conical deficit solutions [ 116 ] in asymptotically flat 2+1
dimensional gravity.

Because our computation of the mass does not depend on the radius @xmath
at which one computes, one can consider, if one so wishes, that one
computes inside the velocity of light surface. Similarly, if one uses
this method to compute the mass of de Sitter black holes, one can
compute inside the cosmological horizon, and problems of interpretation,
due to the fact that the Killing vector becomes space-like, are avoided.

The expression for the angular momentum

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.132)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Using ( 2.27 ) and ( 2.85 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.133)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

while the angular momenta for the other 3 rotational Killing vectors [
146 ] vanish.

The electric charge picks up a contribution from the Chern-Simons term
and is explicitly given by ( 2.88 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, it vanishes for the Schwarzschild-Gödel black hole.

###### Generalized Smarr formula and first law.

Consider a stationary black hole with Killing horizon determined by
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the time-like Killing vector, @xmath the
angular velocities of the horizon and @xmath the axial Killing vectors
and let @xmath , @xmath . As discussed in section 3.2 of Chapter 3 , the
definition of @xmath and the charges imply

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a @xmath dimensional surface on the horizon. Because
@xmath , the r.h.s becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.136)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now, @xmath , where @xmath is the surface gravity and @xmath the area of
the horizon, while @xmath , where @xmath is the co-rotating electric
potential, which is constant on the horizon [ 90 , 138 ] . We thus get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.137)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which generalizes ( 3.52 ).

In order to apply this formula in the case of the black hole ( 4.126 ),
we have to compute the remaining quantities. The radius @xmath and the
angular velocities @xmath and @xmath are solutions of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Defining for convenience @xmath and @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The electric potential is given by @xmath . The area and surface gravity
of the horizon are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the Gödel-Schwarzschild black hole, we recover the results of [ 146
, 183 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.140)
     @xmath      (4.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

together with the explicit expressions for all the other quantities, one
can verify that the generalized Smarr formula ( 4.137 ) reduces indeed
to an identity.

We can also compare with the generalized Smarr formula derived for
asymptotically flat black holes in five-dimensional supergravity [ 138 ]
: for the Gödel type black hole ( 4.126 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The right hand side, which vanishes when @xmath , describes the breaking
of the Smarr formula for asymptotically flat black holes due to the
presence of the additional dimensionful parameter @xmath . This is
somewhat reminiscent to what happens for Kerr-adS black holes [ 143 ] ,
see equation ( 4.123 ). In the latter case, different values of the
cosmological constant @xmath describe different theories because @xmath
appears explicitly in the action. Even though this is not the case for
@xmath , we have also taken @xmath here as a parameter specifying the
background because all charges have been computed with respect to the
Gödel background.

As for Kerr-adS black holes, the spinning Gödel black hole satisfies a
standard form of the first law. Indeed, using the explicit expressions
for the quantities involved, one can now explicitly check that the first
law

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

holds. As pointed out in [ 143 ] , the validity of the first law
provides a strong support for our definitions of total energy and
angular momentum. Furthermore, in the limit of vanishing @xmath , we
recover the usual expressions for 5 dimensional asymptotically flat
black holes.

###### Discussion.

In the case of the non-rotating Gödel black hole, @xmath , the
parameterization @xmath , @xmath suggested by the analysis of [ 147 ]
allows to write a non anomalously broken Smarr formula of the form
@xmath , where @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath unchanged. With @xmath
being the energy and @xmath the fixed parameter characterizing the Gödel
background, the first law is however not satisfied.

A way out, in the case @xmath , is to consider the Killing vector

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is a particular example of a variable reducibility parameter (
@xmath ).

The associated energy is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first law now holds and in addition, with @xmath defined with
respect to @xmath , so does the non anomalously broken Smarr formula
@xmath . Furthermore, it turns out that the prefactor acts as an
integrating factor and the first law is verified for variations of both
@xmath and @xmath .

### 4 Application to black rings

Let us consider the black ring with dipole charge described in [ 132 ] .
This black ring is a solution to the action ( 2.56 ) in five dimensions
for a two-form @xmath . The solution admits three independent
parameters: the mass, the angular momentum and a dipole charge @xmath
where @xmath is a two-sphere section of the black ring whose topology is
@xmath .

The thermodynamics of this solution was worked out in the original paper
[ 132 ] . As shown in [ 102 ] , the computations of [ 224 , 174 ] are
not directly applicable to these black rings. The role of dipole charges
in the formalism of Sudarsky and Wald [ 224 ] was elucidated in [ 102 ]
.

The metric, the scalar field and the gauge potential are written in
equations (3.2)-(3.3)-(3.4) of [ 102 ] . There, the gauge potential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

was shown to be singular on the bifurcation surface in order to avoid a
delta function in the field strength on the black ring axis. Here, we
point out that this singularity in the potential does not prevent from
studying thermodynamics on the future event horizon along the lines of
section 3.3 of Chapter 3 since the pull-back of the potential is regular
there.

Indeed, following [ 133 ] , one can introduce ingoing
Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates near the horizon of the black ring as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.146)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.147)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The metric is regular in these coordinates and the gauge potential can
be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some @xmath . The pull-back of the gauge potential to the future
horizon @xmath is explicitly regular because @xmath is finite and @xmath
and @xmath are good coordinates.

The first law for black rings may then be seen as a consequence of (
3.61 ).

### 5 Application to black strings in plane waves

Conservations laws have been defined in asymptotically flat and anti-de
Sitter backgrounds, see e.g. the seminal works [ 19 , 208 , 2 ] . A
natural question, raised in [ 147 , 171 , 153 ] , is how mass can be
defined in asymptotic plane wave geometries.

We show in this section that the conserved charges defined in Chapter 1
can be used in this context and lead to the correct first law. More
precisely, we show that the integration of the @xmath -form @xmath along
a path @xmath in solution space [ 247 , 55 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

provides a natural definition of mass, satisfying the first law of
thermodynamics.

The action of the NS-NS sector of bosonic supergravity in @xmath
-dimensions in string frame reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

when all fields in the @xmath compactified dimensions vanish. In
Einstein frame, @xmath , @xmath , the action can be written as ( 2.56 )
with @xmath and @xmath .

Neutral black string in the @xmath -dimensional maximally symmetric
plane wave background @xmath , with @xmath , are given by [ 147 , 171 ,
153 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.150)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The black strings have horizon area per unit length given by @xmath
where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the area of the @xmath sphere. Choosing the normalization of the
horizon generator as @xmath , the surface gravity is given by @xmath .

Using the @xmath -forms defined above, the charge difference associated
with @xmath between two infinitesimally close black string solutions
@xmath , @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which reproduces the expectations of [ 147 , 171 , 153 ] . This quantity
is integrable and allows one to define @xmath where the normalization of
the background has been set to zero. It is easy to check that the first
law is satisfied.

Note that one freely can choose a different normalization for the
generator @xmath . In that case, the surface gravity changes according
to @xmath , the charge associated to @xmath becomes @xmath and the first
law is also satisfied. However, @xmath cannot be a function of @xmath .
Otherwise, the charge @xmath would not be defined.

Part II

Asymptotically conserved charges and their algebra

Analyses in

three-dimensional gravity

## Chapter 5 Classical theory of asymptotic charges

In this chapter, we first provide general conditions in order to define
a phase space of fields and gauge transformations for manifolds
admitting a particular closed surface @xmath in an asymptotic region.
Asymptotic symmetries at @xmath are defined as the quotient space of
gauge transformations by gauge transformations admitting vanishing
charges, i.e. proper gauge transformations. We prove that that
asymptotic symmetries form a Lie subalgebra of the Lie algebra of gauge
transformations. We then show that the representation of this algebra by
a covariant Poisson bracket among the associated conserved charges can
be centrally extended. The representation theorem that we obtain is the
Lagrangian analogue of the theorem proven in Hamiltonian formalism [ 74
, 75 ] . It was obtained in covariant phase space methods as well [ 184
] . We also discuss the consequences of the existence of a variational
principle admitting @xmath as a boundary. Finally, we describe two
algorithms allowing one to construct consistent phase spaces and gauge
transformations. Applications for diffeomorphic invariant theories and
Einstein gravity are mentioned. We refer the reader to [ 61 ] for a
synthesis.

### 1 Phase space of fields and gauge parameters

Let us start our asymptotic analysis with a particular fixed closed
surface of a @xmath -dimensional manifold which we take for definiteness
to be the limit @xmath of the sphere @xmath for @xmath constant and
@xmath going to infinity. Here, @xmath is the intersection of the
hyperplane @xmath defined by constant @xmath and the (usually timelike
or null) hyperplane @xmath defined by constant @xmath . Note that all
considerations below only concern the region of the manifold close to
@xmath .

We now define a space of allowable field configurations @xmath and for
each @xmath a space of allowable gauge parameters @xmath such that
@xmath are gauge transformations. The intersection of the configuration
space @xmath with the stationary surface @xmath (where the equations of
motion hold) will be denoted as @xmath . The space @xmath is the set of
asymptotic solutions that fulfils the required boundary conditions.

Besides standard smoothness properties we impose the following
requirements on the fields @xmath , the tangent one-forms @xmath to
@xmath and the gauge parameters @xmath :

-   Finiteness of the surface charges,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    This condition compels any surface charge ( 1.23 ) for @xmath to be
    finite in the limit @xmath . It may be understood equivalently as
    the independence of the surface charges on smooth deformations of
    @xmath on the hyperplane @xmath in the asymptotic region @xmath .

-   Integrability of the surface charges,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    These conditions guarantee that the surface charges ( 1.46 ) are
    independent on the path @xmath given that no global obstruction in
    @xmath occurs, which is also asked. The second condition expresses
    that @xmath is irrelevant to satisfy the integrability condition.
    The last condition will be used to prove Proposition 13 .

-   Conservation in time of the surface charges for solutions @xmath and
    tangent one-forms @xmath to @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where the equality follows from ( 1.14 ) and from Stokes’ theorem.

-   Closure of the form @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    These quite technical assumptions are used to prove Proposition 13
    and to prove that the asymptotic symmetries form an algebra. There
    are two motivations for them. On the one hand, these conditions are
    satisfied for exact reducibility parameters, @xmath . On the other
    hand, it is argued in section 4 that @xmath is a consequence of the
    existence of a variational principle with boundary @xmath .

-   By consistency, the gauge transformations should transform fields
    @xmath into other allowable configurations,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    It implies that all the other relations are valid for @xmath
    contracted with @xmath .

For diffeomorphisms, the integrability condition ( 5.2 ) and the
condition on the closure of @xmath ( 5.4 ) become

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath      @xmath            (5.7)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------

as a consequence of ( 2.13 ) and ( A51 ). As a consequence of ( 1.19 ),
if @xmath are allowable gauge transformations, the first equation of (
5.7 ) implies together with ( 5.5 ) finiteness and conservation of the
charges ( 5.1 ), ( 5.3 ).

Note that the additional condition ( 5.4 ) is automatically fulfilled in
the Hamiltonian formalism in Darboux coordinates because of ( 1.43 ).

### 2 Asymptotic symmetry algebra

The set of allowable gauge parameters, @xmath , satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath tangent to @xmath will be called proper gauge parameters
of the field @xmath . The associated transformations @xmath will be
called proper gauge transformations. On the contrary, gauge parameters
(resp. transformations) related to non-identically vanishing surface
charges will be called improper gauge parameters (resp.
transformations). Improper gauge transformations send field
configurations into inequivalent field configurations because they
change their conserved charges, as will be cleared in section 3 .

Using the properties ( 5.2 ), ( 5.4 ) and ( 5.5 ) of the phase space,
one can prove the following proposition, see Appendix C . 4 .,

###### Proposition 13.

For any field @xmath , one-form @xmath tangent to @xmath at @xmath and
for allowable gauge parameters @xmath , the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds.

The gauge parameters at a solution @xmath , @xmath , may then be
characterized by the following corollary

###### Corollary 14.

The space of allowable gauge parameters @xmath at @xmath form a Lie
algebra.

The proof of Corollary 14 goes as follows. Applying @xmath with @xmath
to ( 5.9 ) and using ( 5.1 ), ( 5.3 ) and ( 5.5 ), we get that @xmath
corresponds to finite and conserved charges for fields belonging to
@xmath and for one-forms tangent to @xmath . As a consequence of ( 5.2 )
we have @xmath . Applying @xmath to ( 5.9 ), the integrability
conditions ( 5.2 ) for @xmath are fulfilled. Using @xmath , ( 1.6 ) and
( A26 ), it is easy to check that ( 5.4 ) and ( 5.5 ) are satisfied for
@xmath as well in @xmath .∎

Note that this derivation shows the consistency of our definition of
phase space. Proposition 13 also trivially involves the corollary

###### Corollary 15.

The proper gauge transformations at @xmath form an ideal @xmath of
@xmath .

The quotient space @xmath is therefore a Lie algebra which we call the
asymptotic symmetry algebra @xmath at @xmath . The asymptotic symmetry
algebra at @xmath consists in equivalence classes of improper gauge
transformations at @xmath modulo proper gauge transformations.

The exact reducibility parameters @xmath which are associated with
(off-shell) finite and integrable surface one-forms are allowable gauge
parameters, i.e. @xmath . If, for any reducibility parameter @xmath the
phase space contains at least one solution @xmath and a tangent one-form
@xmath such that @xmath , the space @xmath will hold in representatives
of the exact reducibility parameters @xmath .

If the gauge theory satisfies ( 1.18 ) and if the algebra of gauge
parameters closes off-shell, i.e. if ( 1.6 ) hold with @xmath , then the
proof carried out in Appendix C . 4 can be repeated off-shell and the
following corollary occurs

###### Corollary 16.

If condition ( 1.18 ) hold and if the bracket of gauge parameters closes
off-shell, the proper gauge transformations at @xmath form an ideal
@xmath of @xmath . The space of asymptotic symmetries @xmath at any
@xmath then forms a Lie algebra.

### 3 Representation by a Poisson bracket

Let us turn to the representation of the Lie algebra of asymptotic
symmetries by a possibly centrally extended Poisson bracket defined on
the associated charges. In this section we derive the Lagrangian
analogue of the theorem of canonical representation of the Lie algebra
of asymptotic symmetries proven in Hamiltonian formalism in [ 74 , 75 ]
. The alternative analysis achieved in covariant phase space methods [
184 ] is also compared with our results.

Let us define the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying consecutively @xmath and @xmath to ( 5.2 ), the integrability
conditions imply

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using ( 5.9 ) on the two terms on the r.h.s. and the antisymmetry ( 1.20
), we get

###### Corollary 17.

@xmath defines a Chevalley-Eilenberg 2-cocycle on the Lie algebra @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The surface charges @xmath of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with respect to
the reference @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integration is done along a path @xmath in @xmath joining
@xmath to @xmath . We have assumed that there are no global obstruction
in @xmath for the integrability conditions ( 5.2 ) to guarantee that the
surface charges @xmath are independent on the path @xmath . Note that if
asymptotic linearity holds ( 1.53 ), the charges ( 5.13 ) simplify as (
1.54 ).

We denote @xmath the charge related to @xmath . The covariant Poisson
bracket of these surface charges is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This covariant Poisson bracket coincides on solutions @xmath with @xmath
.

For an arbitrary path @xmath , the definition ( 5.10 ) leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where Proposition 13 has been used in the last line. Using ( 5.14 ) and
denoting as @xmath the charge associated with @xmath , the equality (
5.16 ) implies

###### Theorem 18.

In @xmath , the charge algebra between a fixed reference solution @xmath
and a final solution @xmath is determined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the central charge @xmath is a two-cocycle on the Lie algebra of
asymptotic symmetries @xmath .

The central extension is trivial if it can be reabsorbed in the
normalization of the charges. On the contrary, a central charge @xmath
is non-trivial if it cannot be written as a linear function of the
bracket @xmath only. Observe that the central charge involving an exact
reducibility parameter of the reference field automatically vanishes.
Also, for a semi-simple algebra @xmath , the property @xmath guarantees
that the central charge can be absorbed by a suitable normalization of
the background. The property @xmath implies that this completely fixes
the normalization.

As a consequence of the theorem together with Corollary 15 , the proper
gauge transformations are characterized by

###### Corollary 19.

Any proper gauge transformation @xmath acts trivially on the charges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

once we assume that the normalizations associated with the proper gauge
transformations all vanish.

###### Note on general relativity

For Einstein gravity, the explicit formula for the central charge
follows from ( 2.23 ) and is given by ¹ ¹ 1 This expression differs from
the one given in [ 52 ] by an overall sign because we have changed the
sign convention for the charges and also by the fact that we use here
the Misner-Thorne-Wheeler convention for the Riemann tensor.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.19)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note that this expression vanishes if either @xmath or @xmath is a
Killing vector of @xmath . The last term is due to the contribution from
( 2.29 ) and again vanishes for exact Killing vectors of @xmath but not
necessarily for asymptotic ones.

The application of covariant phase space methods [ 174 ] leads to the
surface charges ( 2.33 ) and then to a central charge @xmath equal to
@xmath ( 5.19 ) where the last term is dropped [ 184 , 219 ] . See also
[ 184 , 219 ] for a discussion on the deficiencies of the expressions
derived in [ 87 , 88 , 128 ] in the context of asymptotic symmetries
close to horizons. Following the reasoning of Chapters 1 and 5 , it can
be shown that Corollary 17 and the Theorem 18 also hold for the surface
charges ( 2.33 ) and the associated central charge @xmath , see also [
184 ] . In that case, the hypothesis ( 5.4 ) is not required to prove
these propositions. However, as explained in section 2.1 of Chapter 2
these surface charges depend on boundary terms that may be added to the
Lagrangian, which is not the case with our definitions.

### 4 Existence of a variational principle

In this section we study conditions for the existence of a variational
principle for spacetimes @xmath containing as a boundary @xmath , which
is the limit of the null or timelike hyperplane @xmath for @xmath . We
will follow closely the references [ 175 , 180 ] . We then analyze how
@xmath is a consequence of these conditions.

The boundary term @xmath obtained by varying the action, see ( A31 ),
may not vanish and may thus prevent the action from being extremal for
arbitrary variations. Let us define a subset @xmath of the phase space
@xmath where a @xmath -form @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any field of @xmath and any tangent vector @xmath to @xmath is
defined on @xmath . Adding the boundary term @xmath to the action will
then provide a correct variational problem in @xmath . Here, the label
@xmath refers to the additional constraints imposed on @xmath in order
to define the restricted phase space @xmath . If one can find a @xmath
-form @xmath such that ( 5.20 ) hold for all variations tangent to
@xmath , the entire phase space admits a variational principle and no
constraint @xmath is needed.

The boundary term @xmath may be constructed if one can find furthermore
a @xmath -form @xmath defined on @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any variation @xmath tangent to the phase space @xmath . Note that
there is the following ambiguity in the definition of @xmath and @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath -form @xmath vanishing at @xmath . The relation ( 5.21 )
implies that the symplectic form @xmath ( A48 ) obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath form ( A49 ) is obtained as a result of the horizontal
homotopy @xmath applied to @xmath . If the boundary conditions are such
that this homotopy can be equally applied to @xmath ² ² 2 In the very
similar computation of [ 180 ] , such an argument was proven for a
particular set of boundary conditions. Unfortunately, we do not know a
proof for general boundary conditions. , one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to the equality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all tangent vector to @xmath . Note that this latter equation is
independent on boundary terms added to the Lagrangian, as shown in ( A56
). For first order theories, this condition reads as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a conclusion, the existence of a variational principle on @xmath
leads under the aforementioned hypotheses to the equality ( 5.25 ) for
all tangent vectors to @xmath , which implies ( 5.4 ) because of the
condition ( 5.5 ). The proof, however, is incomplete and one should
still answer the following questions: (i) which extent conditions ( 5.21
) are necessary for the variational problem to be well-defined, (ii)
under which precise boundary conditions the argument before ( 5.24 ) is
valid. These considerations are left for further work.

###### Integrated charge for diffeomorphisms.

In the case of diffeomorphism invariant theories, one can work out the
consequences of assuming the existence of a covariant @xmath -form
@xmath and a covariant @xmath -form @xmath ( 5.21 ). The charge
one-form ( 2.10 ) associated with infinitesimal diffeomorphisms reduces
to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.27)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

and is independent on the ambiguity ( 5.22 ) for covariant @xmath . The
second term in the latter expression does not explicitly satisfy the
integrability condition ( 5.2 ). However, in the integrable case, one
can try to find a covariant @xmath form @xmath defined at the boundary
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

When there exists forms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath satisfying ( 5.21 ),
( 5.28 ), the phase space @xmath will be called strongly integrable .
The charge one-form @xmath will then be the exact variation of the
charge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is also independent on the ambiguity ( 5.22 ) for covariant @xmath
. Remark that the last term vanishes for exact symmetries. The surface
charge ( 5.13 ) then equals to @xmath . It provides an integrated
formula for the surface charge in the phase space @xmath . Remark that
while the surface charge ( 5.13 ) is finite for asymptotic Killing
vectors, the expression ( 5.29 ) may be infinite. It is therefore
unappropriate to interpret @xmath as the natural normalization of the
background @xmath .

###### Note about general relativity.

In the Palatini formulation of Einstein gravity in four dimensions, a
variational principle for asymptotically flat spacetimes was defined [
31 ] . In the metric formalism, it is well-known that the
Einstein-Hilbert action supplemented by the Gibbons-Hawking term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

does not provide a satisfactory variational principle for asymptotically
flat spacetimes because ( 5.20 ) is not satisfied with @xmath . However,
this variational principle is well-defined when Dirichlet boundary
conditions @xmath are laid down on the induced metric at @xmath . For
recent progress in obtaining boundary forms @xmath , @xmath solving (
5.21 ) for general asymptotically flat spacetimes, see the proposals of
[ 191 , 192 ] . For the construction of a variational principle for
anti-de Sitter spacetimes, see for example [ 203 , 201 ] .

### 5 Algorithms

We discussed in the previous section the general conditions one can
impose on the fields and on the gauge parameters in order to obtain a
well-defined theory of asymptotic charges. However, we have not yet
discussed how to fullfil these conditions and actually find the
asymptotic form of the allowable fields and gauge parameters. This is
the aim of this section. We will discuss two algorithms that allow one
to define a phase space @xmath and spaces of gauge parameters @xmath .

#### 5.1 Starting from particular solutions

One can start by constructing a small phase space @xmath containing
solutions of interest with, in particular, a background solution @xmath
admitting a non-trivial set of exact reducibility parameters @xmath .
One then imposes that the asymptotic symmetry algebra @xmath contains as
a subalgebra @xmath for all fields @xmath . Acting on the phase space
@xmath with the exact reducibility parameters, one then generates a set
of fields @xmath that are then constrained to admit finite, integrable
and conserved charges. The algebra of gauge transformations that leaves
invariant this phase space and that admits non-identically vanishing
charges is then defined as the asymptotic symmetry algebra, which
includes the exact reducibility algebra @xmath .

The hereby presented method was successfully used in the context of
asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes in general relativity [ 159 ,
158 ] . In three dimensions, the asymptotic symmetry algebra was found
to be the conformal algebra containing two copies of the Virasoro
algebra, see section 1 of Chapter 6 .

A great advantage of this method is the simplicity of the argument and
the rapidity of the computation. However, allowable configurations not
generated by the exact reducibility parameters may exist, see e.g.
section 1 of Chapter 6 , and asymptotic symmetries explicitly depending
on @xmath may also be relevant, see e.g. Gödel spacetimes in section 3
of Chapter 6 .

It is therefore of interest to find alternative points of departure for
defining @xmath and @xmath in order to check the generality of the
boundary conditions and of the asymptotic symmetries. An alternative
method, applied in Chapter 6 , goes as follows.

#### 5.2 Starting from the reducibility equations

One considers a particular background solution @xmath to the
Euler-Lagrange equations of motion. The idea is to define the Lie
algebra @xmath of allowable gauge transformations at @xmath before
defining the space of asymptotic fields. One then constructs fields
@xmath admitting an isomorphic Lie algebra of gauge transformations.
Eventually, one restricts the phase space so that all conditions
described in section 1 hold.

###### (A) Determination of the algebra @xmath.

We proceed in three steps. First, (A1) the reducibility equations are
solved to leading order at the background @xmath . Next, (A2) one
requires the expression ( 5.10 ) to be a finite constant and (A3) one
finally imposes that the Lie bracket of two such parameters also fulfils
the latter conditions.

The first condition is an adaptation of the exact symmetry equations (
1.25 ) in the asymptotic context. Likewise, in pure gravity, asymptotic
Killing vectors can be defined as vectors fields obeying the Killing
equations to “as good an approximation as possible” as one approaches
the boundary [ 243 ] . The second condition expresses finiteness ( 5.1 )
and conservation ( 5.3 ) of the one-forms evaluated on the background in
the particular case where @xmath is @xmath . In fact, this condition
expresses the only constraints on finiteness and conservation that one
can impose at this stage. The third condition simply ensures that the
gauge parameters form a Lie algebra.

More precisely, we first expand the gauge parameters @xmath in @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some undetermined @xmath , typically of the form @xmath , with
@xmath allowed to be @xmath and with @xmath not identically vanishing.
If @xmath denote the gauge transformations at @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath depend on the still undetermined @xmath . One then solves

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the slowest decreasing @xmath or, in other words, the highest order
in @xmath . In general, the slowest decreasing @xmath are not uniquely
defined and some choice may be necessary. This choice can and should be
done in such a way that all exact reducibility parameters at @xmath are
also gauge parameters. The first step of the procedure thus determines
the fall-offs @xmath , and restricts the form of the leading order
components @xmath of the gauge parameters at @xmath .

Further constraints are then set by equations ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.3 )
evaluated on the background @xmath and for @xmath contracted with @xmath
. For the algebra of gauge parameters to be well-defined, i.e. @xmath
for all @xmath , @xmath , one has in general to specify subleading
terms,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

These subleading terms will as a general law functionally depend on the
leading functions @xmath but additional functions independent of @xmath
may also appear.

###### (B) First determination of @xmath and @xmath.

The other aspect in defining the asymptotic structure is the definition
of the boundary conditions on the fields. We start the construction of
@xmath by imposing that the algorithm described in (A) applied on @xmath
in place of @xmath leads to the same constraints on the gauge
parameters. As a result of this construction, we will have an
isomorphism @xmath .

More precisely, we define the following three steps. First, for gauge
parameters of the form ( 5.31 ) with @xmath and @xmath arbitrary, we
select fields @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath determined at @xmath and such that the only solutions @xmath
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

be given by the solutions @xmath determined in the previous paragraph.

Now, if one starts the procedure of the previous paragraph with any of
the @xmath ’s just found, one might find fall-offs @xmath which decrease
more slowly than those determined at @xmath . Let us therefore, as a
second step, select the fields which lead exactly to the same fall-offs
@xmath as initially obtained. Since these fields also satisfy ( 5.34 )-(
5.35 ), they lead to the previously obtained solutions ( 5.31 ).

As a third step, one imposes equations ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.3 ) evaluated on
@xmath and for @xmath contracted with @xmath . Finally, as the
constraints on the Lie algebra do not depend on @xmath , they are
imposed in the same way for @xmath and we have constructed the phase
space @xmath such that @xmath .

###### (C) Restrictions on @xmath and @xmath.

As final step, we impose all conditions ( 5.5 ), ( 5.1 ), ( 5.2 ), ( 5.3
) and ( 5.4 ) on both @xmath and @xmath . We choose to implement these
constraints in such a way as to keep all elements of @xmath that are
associated with non-identically vanishing charges. We choose to restrict
the subleading terms in @xmath that lead to vanishing charges ( 5.8 )
prior to restrictions on the fields.

For a solution @xmath , the asymptotic symmetry algebra is obtained as
the quotient @xmath of gauge transformations at @xmath by the ideal
@xmath of proper gauge transformations.

###### Discussion.

A distinctive feature of this algorithm is that it does not require
exact solutions of the equations of motion (except the starting point
@xmath ) in order to construct the phase space. An other one is that
starting from any field @xmath , one will recover exactly the same phase
space @xmath in the end. It is not necessary to start the procedure with
a highly symmetric background @xmath since the exact reducibility
equations are never used.

This approach however has a major shortcoming which is the
non-geometrical nature of the first condition (A1). This condition may
depend on the way to approach the boundary, i.e. on the coordinates near
the boundary. Moreover, condition (A1) is not necessary to define the
phase space which is truly defined by the conditions of section 1 .
Nevertheless, in practice, the method is very powerful. We will show in
Chapter 6 how the algorithm allows to study asymptotically anti-de
Sitter spacetimes, asymptotically flat spacetimes at null infinity and
Gödel spacetimes. It is noteworthy that all these asymptotic structures
in general relativity may be handled by this unifying method.

## Chapter 6 Asymptotic analyses in three dimensional gravity

A successful approach to certain aspects of quantum gravity has been the
study of lower-dimensional gravity, see e.g. [ 86 ] for a review.
Three-dimensional gravity was first classically analyzed in the eighties
by Deser, Jackiw and ’t Hooft [ 116 , 118 ] . In the nineties, a black
hole solution, the so-called B(H)TZ black hole, was found in gravity
with negative cosmological constant [ 39 , 38 ] . It was therefore
understood that three-dimensional gravity may be used as a simpler
setting to investigate intricate issues such as black hole entropy, see
e.g. the reviews [ 89 , 85 , 42 ] .

In particular, Strominger’s derivation of BTZ black hole entropy exactly
reproduces the geometrical Bekenstein-Hawking entropy [ 221 ] . This
semi-classical computation essentially relies on two earlier works: one
by Brown and Henneaux [ 75 ] , who showed that the canonical realization
of asymptotic symmetries of @xmath is represented by two Virasoro
algebras with non-vanishing central charge, and another by Cardy et al.
[ 68 , 84 ] who derived the so-called Cardy formula which allows to
count in the semi-classical limit the asymptotic density of states of a
conformal field theory, even if the full details of the theory are not
known. It turns out that application of the Cardy formula with the
anti-de Sitter central charge yields the expected number of states of
the BTZ black hole even if a precise description of the microscopic
states of these black holes is still missing so far [ 89 ] .

In this chapter, we will try to broader the scope of Strominger’s
reasoning by a deeper analysis of the asymptotic structure of
three-dimensional spacetimes.

First, we re-analyze asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes along the
lines of the algorithm developed in section 5.2 of Chapter 5 . The
charge algebra consisting in two copies of the Virasoro algebra will be
recovered but more general metrics than in [ 75 ] will be found. The
link with the Chern Simons formalism will be shown.

Second, we will derive the symmetry algebra of asymptotically flat
spacetimes at null infinity. In three dimensions, this algebra is the
semi-direct sum of the infinitesimal diffeomorphisms on the circle with
an abelian ideal of supertranslations. The associated charge algebra
will be shown to admit a non trivial classical central extension of
Virasoro type closely related to that of the anti-de Sitter case.

We will finally consider Einstein-Maxwell theory with Chern-Simons term
in (2+1) dimensions. We will define an asymptotic symmetry algebra for
the Gödel spacetimes discussed in section 1 of Chapter 4 which will turn
out to be the semi-direct sum of the diffeomorphisms on the circle with
two loop algebras. A class of fields admitting this asymptotic symmetry
algebra and leading to well-defined conserved charges will be found. The
covariant Poisson bracket of the conserved charges will then be shown to
be centrally extended to the semi-direct sum of a Virasoro algebra and
two affine algebras. The subsequent analysis of three-dimensional Gödel
black holes indicates that the Virasoro central charge is negative.

All analytical expressions relevant for Einstein gravity can be found in
section 2 of Chapter 2 . The expressions for the charges specialized to
three dimensions were also stated in section 1.7 of Chapter 4 .

### 1 Asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes

The anti-de Sitter asymptotic symmetry groups in 3, 4 and @xmath
dimensions were extensively studied in [ 75 , 159 , 158 , 54 ] . For
dimensions @xmath , non-trivial asymptotic Killing vectors are in
one-to-one correspondence with the exact Killing vectors of the anti-de
Sitter metric and the asymptotic symmetry algebra is @xmath . In three
dimensions, the exact algebra is enhanced in the asymptotic context to
the infinite-dimensional conformal algebra containing two copies of the
Virasoro algebra. This fact is relevant in the context of the @xmath
correspondence [ 4 ] and was used to give a microscopical derivation of
the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy for black holes with near horizon
geometry that is locally @xmath [ 221 ] . The analysis of the asymptotic
charge algebra was subsequently performed in the context of
asymptotically de Sitter spacetimes at timelike infinity [ 223 ] with
results very similar to those of the anti-de Sitter case.

In what follows, the algorithm developed in section 5.2 of Chapter 5 is
applied to derive the asymptotic algebra and the space of asymptotic
fields in the three-dimensional case. As a result, the conformal algebra
will be recovered but more general metrics than developed in [ 75 ] will
be found. Our boundary conditions will also be expressed in the Chern
Simons formalism.

#### 1.1 Phase space, diffeomorphisms and asymptotic symmetry algebra.

In global coordinates, the background three dimensional anti-de Sitter
metric is written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the boundary is located at @xmath . The first step (A1) of the
algorithm described in section 5.2 of Chapter 5 leads easily to the
vectors [ 54 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . As step (A2), the central charge ( 5.19 ) is
found to be finite for all vectors of the form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The central charge then becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the covariant analogue of [ 75 ] found in [ 231 , 52 ] . The
step (A3) is trivial because the algebra of these vectors is
well-defined. Therefore, the general form of admissible infinitesimal
diffeomorphisms @xmath is given by ( 6.3 ).

The space of asymptotic metrics is firstly defined by condition (B). The
largest class of metrics satisfying these conditions is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are constants. The gauge transformations @xmath
are defined as ( 6.3 ).

Let us turn to step (C). We first impose that the surface charges be
finite off-shell. Boundary conditions compatible with the equations of
motion @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and with the adS background are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The gauge transformations ( 6.3 ) are tangent to the phase space
determined by ( 6.6 ) if one further restricts the subleadings of the
gauge transformations as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the final form of the gauge transformations @xmath . With the
boundary conditions ( 6.6 ), the charge one-forms are also integrable
off-shell. The surface charges ( 5.13 ) can then be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the first terms on the r.h.s would be obtained by a naive
calculation from the linear analysis and the last term is a non-linear
contribution. The surface charge is given on-shell by the expression

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have @xmath for all @xmath except @xmath . Incidently, these values
correspond to the normalization of the anti-de Sitter background
obtained by supersymmetry arguments [ 104 ] and which are relevant for
the microscopic explanation of the entropy of BTZ black holes [ 222 ] .

The conservation in time of these charges follows from @xmath . The
phase space ( 6.6 ) also satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies ( 5.4 ). As can be seen in ( 6.10 ), proper coordinate
transformations or proper diffeomorphisms @xmath consist in all
infinitesimal gauge transformations @xmath admitting vanishing functions
@xmath and @xmath . The asymptotic Killing vectors are defined by the
quotient @xmath . The asymptotic Killing vectors are generated by the
two sets @xmath and @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

They define two independent Witt algebras ¹ ¹ 1 The two sets of
generators correspond to @xmath in [ 222 ] where the normalization
factor @xmath should be added to obtain the correct normalization of the
Witt algebra.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to Theorem 18 , the two copies of the Witt algebra are
represented at the level of conserved charges by two copies of the
Virasoro algebra with central charge @xmath as can be checked by
plugging ( 6.12 ) into ( 6.4 ).

#### 1.2 Link with previous boundary conditions and with the
Chern-Simons formulation

The fall-off conditions defining asymptotically adS metrics were found
in [ 75 ] by acting on the conic geometry representing a spinning
particle in adS with the exact anti-de Sitter symmetry group as
described in section 5.1 of Chapter 5 . The result was given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we found that the anti-de Sitter phase space can be rather defined
by ( 6.6 ) where boundary conditions are less restrictive. The metric (
6.14 ) can be obtained via a gauge fixing of the coordinates close to
the boundary by using the proper gauge transformations generated by
@xmath . The infinitesimal diffeomorphisms leaving the metric ( 6.14 )
invariant are then given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With the fall-off conditions ( 6.14 ), the non-linear terms in ( 6.8 )
do not appear. In fact, with the boundary conditions ( 6.14 ), the
surface one-forms become asymptotically linear in the sense of ( 1.53 )
and the surface charges indeed reduce to expression ( 1.54 ) which is
linear in the metric deviation @xmath .

Remark that non-linear terms in the charges were also shown to occur in
the context of gravity coupled to scalar fields [ 162 , 163 ] .

Three-dimensional gravity with negative cosmological constant can be
reformulated as a Chern-Simons theory with gauge group @xmath . The
boundary conditions ( 6.6 ) can be translated in terms of the
connections @xmath and @xmath ² ² 2 The connections @xmath and @xmath
are related to the triad @xmath and spin connection @xmath through
@xmath , @xmath with @xmath . We use @xmath and the generators of @xmath
are given by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

According to [ 105 ] , the boundary conditions imposing that the
lightlike components @xmath of @xmath and @xmath of @xmath are set to
zero imply that the Chern-Simons theory reduces asymptotically to the
@xmath non-chiral Wess-Zumino-Witten model. We also have that @xmath and
@xmath are independent of @xmath and @xmath at leading order in @xmath
but contrary to the boundary conditions imposed in [ 74 , 105 ] , the
components @xmath and @xmath are not vanishing at infinity. In fact,
this is due entirely to the slower fall-off conditions on @xmath and
@xmath . These boundary conditions probably allow for a boundary theory
more general than the Liouville theory on a flat background.

Using the Fefferman-Graham-Lee theorems, the boundary conditions of [
105 ] were already improved in [ 212 , 213 ] . The resulting boundary
theory was found to be Liouville theory on a two-dimensional curved
background. Although we have not compared in detail our results with
theirs, we expect that our boundary conditions are mainly a
reformulation of the conditions derived in [ 212 , 213 ] ³ ³ 3 We thank
M. Banados for his judicious comments. .

### 2 Asymptotically flat spacetimes at null infinity

For asymptotically flat-spacetimes, the appropriate boundary from a
conformal point of view is null infinity [ 251 ] . The asymptotic
symmetry algebra has been derived a long time ago in four dimensions [
69 , 215 , 214 ] and more recently by conformal methods [ 204 ] also in
three dimensions [ 28 ] .

The purpose of this section is to complete the picture for classical
central charges in three dimensions. We begin by computing the symmetry
algebra @xmath of asymptotically flat spacetimes at null infinity in
@xmath dimensions, i.e., the @xmath -dimensional analog of the four
dimensional Bondi-Metzner-Sachs algebra, by solving the Killing
equations to leading order according to the procedure outlined in
section 5.2 of Chapter 5 .

In four dimensions, we make the obvious observation that the asymptotic
symmetry algebra can be larger than the one originally discussed in [
214 ] if the conformal transformations of the @xmath -sphere are not
required to be globally well-defined. In three dimensions, we recover
the known results [ 28 ] : @xmath is the semi-direct sum of the
infinitesimal diffeomorphisms on the circle with the abelian ideal of
supertranslations.

In three dimensions, we then derive the space of allowed metrics by
following the algorithm presented in section 5.2 of Chapter 5 , namely
by requiring (i) that @xmath be the symmetry algebra for all allowed
metrics, (ii) that the asymptotic symmetries leave the space of allowed
metrics invariant, (iii) that the associated charges be finite,
integrable and conserved on-shell. As a new result, the associated
Poisson algebra of charges is shown to be centrally extended. A non
trivial central charge of Virasoro type with value @xmath appears
between the Poisson brackets of the charges of the two summands. To
conclude our analysis we point out that the centrally extended
asymptotic charge algebras in flat and anti-de Sitter spacetimes are
related in the same way than their exact counterparts [ 250 ] .

Most of the material here was published in [ 60 ] but, here, the
assumption of asymptotic linearity ( 1.53 ) is relaxed and more general
boundary conditions are computed. Related recent work on holography in
asymptotically flat spacetimes can be found for example in [ 112 , 16 ,
15 , 110 , 34 , 191 , 35 ] . We stress, however, that none of these
references mentioned the central extension occurring in the
representation of the @xmath algebra.

#### 2.1 The @xmath algebra

Introducing the retarded time @xmath , the luminosity distance @xmath
and angles @xmath on the @xmath sphere by @xmath , @xmath , for @xmath ,
and @xmath , the Minkowski metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath for @xmath . The (future) null boundary is defined
by @xmath with @xmath held fixed.

We require infinitesimal diffeomorphisms to satisfy the Killing equation
to leading order. They have the form @xmath for some fall-offs @xmath to
be determined. Here, round brackets around a single index mean that the
summation convention is suspended. For such vectors, @xmath . Solving
the Killing equation to leading order means finding the highest orders
@xmath in @xmath such that equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

admits non-vanishing @xmath as solutions. After a straightforward
computation (summarized in Appendix C . 6 ), one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function on the @xmath sphere, and @xmath
are the components of the conformal Killing vectors on the @xmath
sphere. These vectors form a sub-algebra of the Lie algebra of vector
fields and the bracket induced by the Lie bracket @xmath is determined
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It follows that the gauge transformations with @xmath form an ideal in
the algebra of infinitesimal diffeomorphisms. As will be justified in
the following section, these transformations can be considered as proper
gauge transformations. The quotient algebra is defined to be the algebra
of asymptotic Killing vectors @xmath . It is the semi-direct sum of the
conformal Killing vectors @xmath of Euclidean @xmath dimensional space
with an abelian ideal of so-called infinitesimal supertranslations. Note
that the exact Killing vectors of @xmath , @xmath give rise to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and belong to @xmath , so that @xmath is a subalgebra of @xmath .

In order to make contact with conformal methods, we just note that if
@xmath is the metric induced at the boundary @xmath constant,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can easily verify that @xmath is isomorphic to the Lie algebra of
conformal Killing vectors of the boundary metric ( 6.26 ), in the limit
@xmath .

For @xmath , the asymptotic algebra contains the infinitesimal
supertranslations parameterized by @xmath and the @xmath dimensional
conformal algebra of Euclidean space @xmath in @xmath dimensions,
isomorphic to the Lorentz algebra in @xmath dimensions.

In four dimensions, the conformal algebra of the two-sphere is
infinite-dimensional and contains the Lorentz algebra @xmath as a
subalgebra. It would of course be interesting to analyze whether central
extensions arise in the charge algebra representation of @xmath , but we
will not do so here. Note that in the original discussion [ 214 ] , the
transformations were required to be well-defined on the @xmath -sphere
and @xmath was restricted to the semi-direct sum of @xmath with the
infinitesimal supertranslations. In this case, there are no non trivial
central extensions, see e.g. [ 194 ] .

In three dimensions, the conformal Killing equation on the circle
imposes no restrictions on the function @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is
characterized by @xmath arbitrary functions @xmath on the circle. These
functions can be Fourier analyzed by defining @xmath and @xmath . In
terms of these generators, the commutation relations of @xmath become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the 6 dimensional Poincaré algebra @xmath of 3
dimensional Minkowski spacetime is enhanced to the semi-direct sum of
the infinitesimal diffeomorphisms on the circle with the infinitesimal
supertranslations.

#### 2.2 Charge algebra representation of @xmath

In order to determine the Poisson algebra representation of @xmath we
need to specify the boundary conditions on the metric @xmath and also
the more precise form of the subleading terms in the infinitesimal
diffeomorphisms.

If we want the infinitesimal diffeomorphism algebra to be the same for
all allowed metrics, we need to require that solving the Killing
equation to leading order for @xmath in place of @xmath will lead to the
@xmath given in ( 6.22 ). We will also need @xmath so that the
transformation @xmath leaves the space of allowed metrics invariant.
These conditions are satisfied for metrics of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and infinitesimal diffeomorphisms defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function. In addition, the charges are
finite and integrable off-shell if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This latter condition is left invariant under the action of the
infinitesimal diffeomorphisms and is thus consistent with the
preservation of the phase space under gauge transformations ( 5.5 ).

With the boundary conditions ( 6.28 )-( 6.30 ), one can check that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

hold. As a consequence, the charges are conserved on-shell ( 5.3 ), the
condition ( 5.4 ) hold and the surface one-forms ( 2.22 ) agree with the
ones found in covariant phase space methods ( 2.33 ). Finally, the phase
space of asymptotic metrics @xmath and the algebra of infinitesimal
diffeomorphism @xmath are given by ( 6.28 ), ( 6.30 ) and ( 6.29 ).

These boundary conditions contain for example the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which describes a spinning particle in Minkowski spacetime [ 116 ] . The
space of allowed metrics also contains the dimensional reduction of the
Einstein-Rosen waves from four to three dimensions [ 29 ] , for which
the metric at infinity in a suitable coordinate system is given by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , the others coefficients zero. The boundary
conditions ( 6.28 ) are larger than the one used in [ 27 , 193 ] except
for the @xmath coefficient which is allowed to fall-off as @xmath in
their work.

The surface charges ( 5.13 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We have @xmath for all @xmath except @xmath .

From ( 2.2 ), it is clear that the infinitesimal diffeomorphisms ( 6.29
) admitting @xmath are proper gauge transformations, according to
definition ( 5.8 ). The algebra of asymptotic Killing vectors in thus
correctly given by @xmath , as assumed in section 2.1 .

We can also see from ( 2.2 ) that if we impose the additional condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the phase space, which is compatible with the solutions of interest
expressed in ( 6.32 ) and the paragraph below ( 6.32 ) and with ( 5.5 ),
the surface charge @xmath then equals to @xmath . The surface charge
@xmath thus become linear in the metric deviation @xmath , which is the
simplification encountered in ( 1.53 ). This case was considered in [ 60
] .

The expression ( 2.2 ) allows us to compute the central extension of the
Poisson algebra representation of @xmath by first deriving @xmath and
then replacing @xmath by @xmath with @xmath given in ( 6.29 ). The
result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Let us choose the normalization @xmath for all @xmath except @xmath that
we leave unspecified. In terms of the generators @xmath , we get the
centrally extended algebra

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It can easily be shown to be non-trivial in the sense that it cannot be
absorbed into a redefinition of the generators. Only the commutators of
generators involving either @xmath or @xmath corresponding to the exact
Killing vectors of the Poincaré algebra @xmath are free of central
extensions.

The algebra ( 6.37 ) has many features in common with the anti-de Sitter
case: it has the same number of generators, and a Virasoro type central
charge. In fact, these algebras are related in the same way than their
exact counterparts [ 250 ] : if one introduces the negative cosmological
constant @xmath and considers

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the @xmath algebra ( 6.27 ) corresponds to the case @xmath . For finite
@xmath , the charges @xmath corresponding to the generators @xmath form
two copies of the Virasoro algebra,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the central charge for the anti-de Sitter case, and
@xmath .

In the classical theory of charges developed in this thesis, only charge
differences can be computed. The normalization of the background are
thus left totally arbitrary. One can however invoke additional arguments
in order to fix these normalizations.

Supersymmetry arguments [ 104 ] and results on the microscopic origin of
the entropy of the BTZ black hole [ 221 ] suggest to define the
normalization of the anti-de Sitter spacetime as @xmath . On the one
hand, following the link between ( 6.39 ) and ( 6.37 ), one can be given
in to temptation to define the vacuum energy of @xmath Minkowski
spacetime also as @xmath by a continuity argument. On the other hand,
covariant counterterm methods [ 193 ] propose the different
normalization @xmath . This issue deserves further attention but needs
tools that go beyond the scope of this thesis.

### 3 Asymptotically Gödel spacetimes

A surprising feature of Einstein’s general relativity is the fact that
this theory exhibits closed time-like curves. Such pathological
spacetimes include the Gödel universe [ 149 ] , the Gott time-machine [
150 ] and the region behind the inner horizon of Kerr black holes. Since
the presence of closed time-like curves signals a strong breakdown of
causality, Hawking advocated through his chronology protection
conjecture that ultraviolet processes should prevent such geometries
from forming [ 156 ] .

The implications of this proposition have been addressed in the context
of string theory in a series of works (see e.g. [ 130 , 172 , 177 ] ,
and also [ 103 ] for an extensive list of references). Also,
higher-dimensional highly supersymmetric Gödel-like solutions were found
in supergravity [ 139 , 152 ] , indicating that supersymmetry is not
sufficient to discard these causally pathological solutions. Moreover, a
particular issue in the dual description of gravity theories by gauge
theories is the conjecture linking closed time-like curves on the
gravity side and non-unitarity on the gauge theory side [ 164 , 81 ] .
It was indeed shown [ 164 ] in the context of BMPV black holes [ 73 ]
that the regime of parameters in which there exists naked closed
timelike curves is also the regime in which unitarity is violated in the
dual CFT. Also, half BPS excitations in @xmath in IIB sugra can be
mapped to fermions configurations [ 188 ] . Causality violation is shown
to be related to Pauli exclusion principle in the dual theory [ 81 ] .

In this section, we will work out some properties of the Gödel black
holes derived in section 1 of Chapter 4 through the representation of
their asymptotic symmetries. The theory of interest here will be
(2+1)-dimensional Einstein-Maxwell-Chern-Simons theory, which can be
viewed as a lower-dimensional toy-model for the bosonic part of @xmath
supergravity since the field content and the couplings of both theories
are similar. As a main result, published in [ 100 ] , we will show that
the asymptotic symmetry algebra contains a Virasoro algebra with
negative central charge when the generators are chosen to be bounded
from below for the black hole solutions. It indicates that the
representations of the asymptotic symmetry algebra are non-unitary, in
accordance with the works [ 164 , 81 ] .

Our analysis will present analogies with the one performed in @xmath
space since there is a close relationship between @xmath and @xmath
Gödel space. Indeed, the latter can be seen as a squashed @xmath space,
where the original isometry group is broken from @xmath to @xmath , as
pointed out in [ 211 ] . In the context of string theory, the @xmath
Gödel metric was shown to be part of the target space of an exact
two-dimensional CFT, obtained as an asymmetric marginal deformation of
the @xmath WZW model [ 172 ] . In this case, the effect of the
deformation amounts to break the original @xmath symmetry of the model
down to @xmath . As we will show, a similar pattern will appear at the
level of asymptotic symmetries.

After having briefly recalled in section 3.1 our general setup, we will
compute in section 3.2 the asymptotic symmetry algebra of Gödel spaces.
We then define, in section 3.3 , a class of field configurations, which
we will refer to as asymptotically Gödel space-times in three
dimensions, encompassing the previously mentioned black hole solutions.
In section 3.4 , we represent the algebra of charges by covariant
Poisson brackets and show that the asymptotic symmetry algebra admits
central extensions. We conclude by discussing some of the results.

#### 3.1 General setup

Let us start with the Einstein-Maxwell-Chern Simons theory in @xmath
dimensions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gauge parameters of the theory @xmath , where @xmath generates
infinitesimal diffeomorphisms and @xmath is the parameter of @xmath
gauge transformations are endowed with the Lie algebra structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath is the Lie bracket and @xmath . We will denote for
compactness the fields as @xmath and the gauge parameters as @xmath .
For a given field @xmath , the gauge parameters @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the on-shell equality, will be called the exact symmetry
parameters of @xmath . Parameters @xmath are called trivial symmetry
parameters.

The charge one-form for this theory for exact symmetry parameters was
constructed in section 4 of Chapter 2 and was rewritten in section 1.7
of Chapter 4 . In the asymptotic case, the charge one-form may be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by ( 4.65 ). The supplementary term may be deduced
from expressions ( 2.68 ) and ( 2.76 ) ⁴ ⁴ 4 In [ 100 ] , there is a
minor sign mistake in (2.5) that does not affect the computation further
on. We recall that we use the mostly plus signature. . It is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.45)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and vanishes for exact symmetries. The central charge ( 5.10 ) can be
expressed here as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a solution we use as background.

One can define an algebra @xmath of asymptotic symmetries @xmath and
then a phase space @xmath by following the algorithm presented in
section 5.2 of Chapter 5 . In summary, the asymptotic algebra is defined
by the three conditions:

-   The leading order of the expressions @xmath and @xmath close to the
    boundary @xmath has to vanish.

-   The expression @xmath should be a finite constant.

-   The Lie bracket of two such parameters should also satisfy the two
    previous conditions.

#### 3.2 Gödel asymptotic symmetry algebra

It was shown in section 1 of Chapter 4 that the equations of motion
derived from ( 6.41 ) admit the solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath , this solution is the
@xmath part of the two parameter generalization [ 207 ] of the Gödel
spacetime [ 149 ] where the stress-energy tensor of the perfect fluid
supporting the metric is generated by the gauge field. For @xmath , the
solution will be called the tachyonic Gödel spacetime because the
perfect fluid supporting the metric is tachyonic. We will use this
solution as background in the two sectors of the theory @xmath .

For @xmath , the Gödel solution ( 3.2 ) admits 5 non-trivial exact
symmetries @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The four Killing vectors form a @xmath algebra. In the case @xmath ,
only the two first vectors are Killing vectors.

Let us now compute the asymptotic symmetries of this background solution
@xmath . They are of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for some fall-offs @xmath , @xmath and functions @xmath , @xmath to be
determined. For such parameters, one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath depend on the explicit form of the parameters (
6.49 ). Equations ( 6.50 ) are satisfied to the leading order in @xmath
when one imposes @xmath and @xmath . If one solves these equations with
the highest order in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , one gets the unique
solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions. We now require the
central extension ( 6.46 ) to be a finite constant. The term diverging
in @xmath in ( 6.46 ) vanishes if we impose @xmath . The central
extension is then constant by requiring

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting expression for ( 6.46 ) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.53)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The asymptotic parameters just found form a subalgebra @xmath of the
bracket ( 6.42 ). The asymptotic parameters which are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

will be considered as trivial because (i) they form an ideal of the
algebra @xmath , (ii) for any @xmath of the form ( 6.54 ) and @xmath ,
the associated central charge @xmath vanishes. An additional
justification will be provided in section 3.4 . We define the asymptotic
symmetry algebra @xmath as the quotient of @xmath by the trivial
asymptotic parameters ( 6.54 ). This algebra can thus be expressed only
in terms of the leading order functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . By
setting @xmath , one can write the @xmath algebra explicitly as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

A convenient basis for non-trivial asymptotic symmetries consists in the
following generators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of these generators, the @xmath algebra reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while the other commutators are vanishing. One can recognize the exact
symmetry parameters ( 6.48 ) as a subalgebra of @xmath . Indeed, one has
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath where @xmath denote the
belonging to the same equivalence class of asymptotic symmetries.

In @xmath , the exact @xmath algebra is enhanced in the asymptotic
context to two copies of the Witt algebra. The Gödel metric can be
interpreted as a squashed @xmath geometry, which breaks the original
@xmath symmetry algebra down to @xmath [ 211 ] . The exact Killing
symmetry algebra is here enhanced to a semi-direct sum of a Witt algebra
with a @xmath loop algebra. Moreover, the gauge sector @xmath is
enhanced to another @xmath loop algebra also forming an ideal of the
@xmath algebra.

#### 3.3 Asymptotically Gödel fields

We defined in the previous section the asymptotic symmetry algebra
@xmath by a well-defined procedure starting from the background @xmath .
One can ask which are the field configurations @xmath such that the
preceding analysis leads to the same algebra ( 6.55 ) with @xmath
replaced by @xmath . The subset of such field configurations which is
preserved under the action of the asymptotic symmetry algebra will then
provide a natural definition of asymptotically Gödel fields @xmath . A
set of fields satisfying these conditions is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.58)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where all functions @xmath , … @xmath depend arbitrarily on @xmath and
@xmath . In order for these field configurations be left invariant under
the asymptotic symmetries, one has furthermore to restrict the
subleading component of @xmath to @xmath . The asymptotic symmetries
thus become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and always contain the asymptotic form of the exact symmetries ( 6.48 ).

However, for the purpose of providing a well-defined representation of
the asymptotic symmetry algebra, one has to restrict the definition of
fields @xmath by selecting those satisfying ( 5.1 ), ( 5.2 ), ( 5.3 )
and ( 5.4 ). These conditions are met if the following differential
equation hold,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

We finally define the set of asymptotically Gödel fields @xmath as those
satisfying the boundary conditions ( 6.58 ) and ( 6.60 ). In general,
the asymptotic symmetries are allowed to depend arbitrarily on the
fields, @xmath . They should however, by construction, obey the same
algebra @xmath . A basis for the asymptotic symmetries of @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the solution-dependent multiplicative factors @xmath and @xmath
have been added for convenience. We choose @xmath in order to match the
asymptotic symmetries ( 6.56 ) defined for the background. The choice of
multiplicative factors for generic fields @xmath is restricted by the
second integrability condition of ( 5.2 ).

Note that besides the background itself the asymptotically Gödel fields
contain the three parameters ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) particle
@xmath ( 4.17 ) and black hole @xmath solutions ( 4.31 ) ⁵ ⁵ 5 The
solutions written in ( 4.17 ), ( 4.31 ) differ from the solutions
written here by the change of coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . .

#### 3.4 Poisson algebra

We are now ready to represent the asymptotic algebra @xmath by
associated charges in the space of configurations defined in ( 6.58 )-(
6.60 ). An explicit computation shows that the charges associated with
each generator ( 6.61 ) are in general non-vanishing. We denote these
charges by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . On the contrary, all trivial
asymptotic parameters are associated with vanishing charges and thus
correspond to proper gauge transformations as it should. This provides
additional justification for the quotient @xmath taken in section 3.2 .

The central extensions ( 6.53 ) may be explicitly computed for any pair
of generators of the background ( 6.56 ). The only non-vanishing terms
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the Virasoro-type central charge @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to Theorem 18 on page 18 , the Gödel algebra is finally
represented at the level of charges by the following centrally extended
Poisson algebra

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The central extensions ( 6.62 ) are non-trivial because they cannot be
absorbed into the (undetermined classically) normalizations of the
generators. The @xmath form a Virasoro algebra while the two loop
algebras @xmath , @xmath are represented by centrally extended @xmath
affine algebras.

#### 3.5 Discussion

In @xmath asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes, the asymptotic
charge algebra which consists of two copies of the Virasoro algebra [ 75
] allows one to compute the entropy of the BTZ black hole via the Cardy
formula [ 221 ] . One may wonder if an analogous derivation based on the
asymptotic algebra ( 6.64 ) could be performed.

It turns out that the analysis in Gödel spacetimes is more tricky. The
Gödel black holes are given in ( 4.31 ). In this case, the @xmath
coordinate has the range @xmath and @xmath . The solution ( 4.31 )
displays an horizon and therefore describes a regular black hole only if
the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. The tachyonic Gödel solution corresponds to @xmath , @xmath .
Because the solutions with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are related by the
change of coordinates @xmath , @xmath with the solutions @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , the conserved quantity @xmath associated with @xmath does not
provide a satisfactory definition of mass. However, one can define the
quantity @xmath which is by definition positive for black holes and
which equals @xmath for the Gödel background. In particular, in the
anti-de Sitter limit @xmath , @xmath correctly reproduces the mass gap
between the zero mass BTZ black hole and anti-de Sitter space. It was
shown in section 1 of Chapter 4 that this quantity is associated with
the Killing vector @xmath . Note also that @xmath is associated with
@xmath .

Choosing the multiplicative factor @xmath , the charge associated with
the generator @xmath of ( 6.61 ) becomes for the black holes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath , the inequality ( 6.65 ) imposes that the spectrum of
@xmath is bounded from below. The Virasoro generators @xmath may then be
associated with operators acting on a ground state with minimal @xmath
-eigenvalue. When @xmath , one may instead consider the generators
@xmath satisfying also a Virasoro algebra

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and for which @xmath is also bounded from below. Remark that
in any of these two cases, the classical Virasoro central charge (
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ) is negative, which, in
general, implies that the representations of this algebra are
non-unitary. In the anti-de Sitter limit @xmath , the central charge
tends to minus the usual adS @xmath central charge @xmath . This
indicates a discontinuity in the limiting procedure.

The Bekenstein-Hawking entropy associated with the black hole solutions
( 4.31 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us consider without loss of generality the case @xmath and define
@xmath as the value of @xmath for the zero mass black hole @xmath ,
@xmath . We observe that the first term in ( 6.68 ) may be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath or @xmath and for @xmath in the large mass @xmath limit. In
the semi-classical limit @xmath , the latter formula is the Cardy
formula ⁶ ⁶ 6 Actually, the determination of the asymptotic density of
states in a conformal field theory from the Cardy formula (see e.g. [ 85
, 127 ] ) seems to be meaningful only when the effective central charge
@xmath is positive (which may encompass non unitary CFTs), which is the
case for @xmath , and it is not obvious to us that using an absolute
value is the right way to proceed when it is negative. We thank Mu-In
Park and Steve Carlip for their comments on this point. [ 68 , 84 , 127
] for the Virasoro algebra with generators @xmath .

It is possible to reproduce the second part of the entropy ( 6.68 ) via
the Cardy formula by introducing operators @xmath to each element of the
affine algebra @xmath , applying the Sugawara procedure to obtain a new
Virasoro algebra @xmath with central charge @xmath and by appropriately
choosing the lowest value @xmath of @xmath . In this case, the effective
central charge @xmath equals the effective central charge @xmath in the
initial Virasoro sector. However, this construction a posteriori is
quite artificial.

There are several points that deserve further investigations. It would
be interesting to study the supersymmetry properties of these black
holes by embedding the Lagrangian ( 6.41 ) in some supergravity theory.
The extension of the asymptotic symmetry algebra to a supersymmetric
asymptotic symmetry algebra in the spirit of [ 41 ] would then allow one
to fix the lowest value @xmath of @xmath undetermined classically and
left ambiguous even after the matching of the entropy with the Cardy
formula. Note that the naive dimensional reduction on a 2-sphere of the
@xmath minimal supergravity [ 139 ] in which Gödel black holes were
studied [ 146 ] does not admit ( 4.31 ) as solutions. There are however
other alternatives. Namely, it turns out that the three-dimensional
Gödel black holes can be promoted to a part of an exact string theory
background along the lines of [ 173 , 122 ] , and are in particular
solutions to the low energy effective action for heterotic or type II
superstring theories. It could therefore be instructive to check if the
present asymptotic analysis holds in this latter theories as well and
then study the supersymmetry properties of these solutions.

## Summary and outlook

In the first part of this thesis, a theory of exact symmetries in gauge
and gravity theories was formulated using techniques of the variational
calculus. Some very satisfactory results are worth emphasizing. Each
reducibility parameter (e.g. Killing vector for gravity) is associated
with a unique finite and conserved surface charge one-form in field
space. These one-forms form a representation of the Lie algebra of
reducibility parameters. For reducibility parameters associated with
integrable surface charge one-forms, conserved quantities can be defined
for a family of symmetric solutions. Using the geometric properties of
horizons, we showed how the first law of black hole mechanics is
universal in gravitation theories, regardless of the details of the
dynamics, the number of spacetime dimensions, the horizon topology or
the spacetime asymptotic structure.

In the case of exact symmetries, our definitions were shown to agree
with Hamiltonian methods and with covariant phase space methods when
applied, respectively, to Lagrangians of first order in time derivatives
and to diffeomorphic invariant Lagrangians. These comparisons between
different formalisms complement what can be found in the literature. The
systematic derivation of expressions for conserved charges in Einstein
gravity coupled to matter fields provided a very useful toolkit for the
description of conservation laws in gravity.

As applications, we recovered the charges of Kerr-anti-de Sitter black
holes in any dimensions and we studied the case of black rings with
dipole charges. By deriving the thermodynamics of black holes in Gödel
backgrounds and black strings in @xmath -waves backgrounds, we showed
that the analysis of classical charges associated with exact symmetries
can be done independently on the asymptotic structure of spacetimes.

We also constructed a new class of @xmath black hole and particle
solutions to the Einstein-Maxwell theory with negative cosmological
constant supplemented by a Chern-Simons coupling. These solutions were
shown to arise from identifications on the non-trivial @xmath factor of
the Gödel spacetime. They reduce to the BTZ solutions for two particular
choices of the Chern-Simons coupling.

In the second part of the thesis, asymptotically conserved charges were
defined on the sphere at infinity by integrating surface charges
one-forms associated with asymptotic reducibility parameters in a
convenient phase space of fields. The resulting representation theorem
of the Lie algebra of asymptotic symmetries by a possibly centrally
extended Lie algebra of charges reproduced similar theorems in
Hamiltonian as well as in covariant phase space methods.

Some advantages of our formalism are worth mentioning. First, the
technical tools used allow to treat gauge theories with higher
derivatives. Second, the Lagrangian formalism is suitable to obtain
covariant expressions, e.g. in diffeomorphic theories. Finally, what
makes most covariant phase space methods ambiguous, namely the
dependence of the pre-symplectic form on boundary terms added to the
Lagrangian, is avoided here by the choice of the invariant
pre-symplectic form.

For phase spaces which are asymptotically linear, well-known expressions
as ADM or Abbott-Deser charges can be recovered. Interestingly, the
formalism applies for more general boundary conditions. In general,
charge differences with respect to a given background become non-linear
functionals of the field deviation with respect to the background.

Phase spaces and asymptotic reducibility parameters were found for three
different asymptotic configurations in three-dimensional gravity by
following an unified algorithm. The previous result in asymptotically
anti-de Sitter spacetimes was expanded to flat and Gödel asymptotics
where centrally extended representations of the asymptotic symmetry
algebras were found. The following pattern of asymptotic charge algebra
in @xmath gravity now emerges:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first result, obtained 20 years ago, became 10 years later a sign
for the AdS/CFT correspondence. One may wonder if the other results hint
at similar correspondences, e.g. flat @xmath gravity and a field theory
admitting @xmath as global symmetry group or gravity with Gödel
asymptotics and a (probably non-unitary) field theory admitting @xmath
as a symmetry group. However, the serious consideration of these ideas
goes far beyond the scope of this thesis.

Let us finally mention some directions for the future. A technical issue
yet to be clarified is the role of the supplementary term @xmath in the
charges. This term does not appear in usual covariant phase space
methods, nor in Hamiltonian formalism where it is trivially zero and it
vanishes in all examples treated in this thesis. Also, an improved
algorithm to define phase spaces and asymptotic reducibility parameters
while avoiding the non-geometrical resolution of the reducibility
equations to first order is still to be found. Asymptotically flat
spacetimes at null infinity in @xmath dimensions require additional
considerations because non-conservation and non-integrability of the
charge one-forms are generic in that case [ 247 ] .

More generally, it would be of interest to compare our formalism with
spinorial techniques which are crucial in the proof of positive energy
theorems and in stability analyses. The link with quasi-local methods
would also be interesting, especially for numerical applications.
Topological charges, like magnetic charges or the NUT charge in gravity
are not associated with reducibility parameters in the usual formulation
of gauge theories. One can ask if there exists formulations in which
these topological charges can be treated on an equal setting as charges
related to gauge invariance.

Appendices

## Appendix A Elements from the variational bicomplex

The variational bicomplex was first introduced in the mid 1970’s as a
way of studying the inverse problem of the calculus of variations, see [
10 ] for a comprehensive review. More details on the variational
bicomplex can be found for instance in the textbooks [ 9 , 202 , 216 ,
124 ] .

### 1 Jet spaces and vector fields

Let @xmath be the base space with coordinates @xmath , @xmath which is
locally isomorphic to @xmath . Local coordinates in an open set @xmath
of the space of fields are denoted as @xmath . We assume to make it
simple that all fields are Grassmann even. They constitute the fiber
bundle @xmath where @xmath is locally @xmath . A section, or history of
fields, is then a mapping from @xmath to @xmath , @xmath . In general,
one may allow for a non-trivial fiber bundle. However, except when
explicitly mentioned, we will not take in consideration such global
properties and we will only work in local coordinate patches.

The jet space @xmath at a point @xmath of coordinates @xmath is the
equivalence class of sections at @xmath where two sections are
equivalent if they have the same partial derivatives up to the order
@xmath at @xmath . The jet fiber of order @xmath , @xmath is given
locally by @xmath . It has as coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, the @xmath -th order derivatives @xmath of a field @xmath at
@xmath are not all independent because the derivatives are symmetric
under permutations of the derivative indices @xmath . One has @xmath ,
etc. The infinite jet bundle @xmath is defined from @xmath by a limiting
procedure. A point in @xmath can be identified with an equivalence class
of local sections around a point in @xmath – equivalent local sections
at @xmath have the same Taylor coefficients to all orders at @xmath . As
in the classification of conservation laws the differential order of the
sought-after quantities is not known a priori , the appropriate space to
formulate conservation laws is the infinite jet bundle.

Local functions @xmath are smooth functions depending on the coordinates
@xmath of the base space @xmath , the fields @xmath , and a finite
number of the jet-coordinates @xmath denoted collectively as @xmath .

As in [ 113 , 9 ] , we define derivatives @xmath that act on the basic
variables through

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the round parentheses denote symmetrization with weight one,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For instance, the definition gives explicitly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We note that the use of these operators automatically takes care of many
combinatorial factors which arise in other conventions, such as those
used in [ 202 ] .

A generalized vector field on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Here @xmath means the sum over all @xmath , from @xmath
to infinity, with the summand for @xmath is given by @xmath , i.e., by
definition @xmath means “no indices @xmath ”. Furthermore, we are using
Einstein’s summation convention over repeated indices: for each @xmath
there is a summation over all tupels @xmath . Hence, for @xmath , the
sum over @xmath and @xmath contains both the tupel @xmath and the tupel
@xmath . These conventions extend to all other sums of similar type.

The total derivative is the vector field denoted by @xmath which acts on
local functions according to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A1)
  -- -------- -- ------

This vector field is defined such that for local functions @xmath and
for sections @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It also satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Euler-Lagrange derivative of a local functional @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It satisfies the remarkable property that @xmath if and only if @xmath
for @xmath .

An infinitesimal transformation is defined by the transformations @xmath
and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with which one associates the vector
field @xmath (one can also consider @xmath but this generalization is
not needed here). This vector field can be naturally prolonged onto
@xmath , see [ 50 ] . The resulting vector on the jet space @xmath is
then the sum of a total derivative @xmath and of the vector field

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A2)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath which is called the characteristic of the vector. The Lie
bracket of characteristics is defined by @xmath and satisfies @xmath .

For notational convenience, let us introduce the set of multiindices
that is the set of all tupels @xmath , including (for @xmath ) the empty
tupel. The one-element tuple is denoted by @xmath without round
parentheses, while a generic tuple is denoted by @xmath . The length,
i.e., the number of individual indices, of a multiindex @xmath is
denoted by @xmath . We use Einstein’s summation convention as well for
repeated multiindices as in [ 9 ] . For instance, the total derivative,
the variation with characteristic @xmath and the Euler-Lagrange
derivative may be written compactly as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

### 2 Horizontal complex

Let us consider the exterior algebra @xmath of differentials @xmath
which we treat as anticommuting (Grassmann odd) variables, @xmath .
Local horizontal forms are elements of @xmath , i.e. forms whose
coefficients are local functions. We define the action of the
symmetrized derivative on @xmath as @xmath .

If the space @xmath is endowed with a metric @xmath (which can be
contained in the set of fields), one can define the Hodge dual of an
horizontal @xmath -form @xmath as @xmath where indices are raised with
the metric and where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the numerically invariant tensor with @xmath . We have
the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As a consequence, one has @xmath , where @xmath is the signature of the
metric and if @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and @xmath forms with @xmath
, they obey

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The horizontal differential on horizontal forms is defined by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A3)
  -- -------- -- ------

For example, the derivative of a @xmath form @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One has also @xmath .

The fundamental theorem on the horizontal complex is the algebraic
Poincaré lemma [ 240 , 227 , 239 , 8 , 248 , 238 , 71 , 244 , 129 , 125
]

###### Theorem 20.

The cohomology @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath in form degree 0, vanishes
for form degrees @xmath and for @xmath is isomorphic to the equivalence
classes of @xmath -forms @xmath that differ by an (horizontal)
derivative, or stated differently the equivalence classes of local
@xmath -forms that admit the same Euler-Lagrange derivatives.

A Cartan calculus can be defined on the algebra @xmath . The inner
product by a vector @xmath is given by @xmath and the Lie differential
is defined by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A4)
  -- -------- -- ------

When acting on horizontal forms, any vector field @xmath can be
prolonged as @xmath such that it satisfies @xmath . For example, a
vector field acting on a @xmath -form @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A5)
  -- -------- -- ------

### 3 Lie-Euler operators and @xmath form

Except for a different notation, we follow closely [ 9 ] in this
section.

Multiple integrations by parts can be done using the following. If for a
given collection @xmath of local functions, the equality

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A6)
  -- -------- -- ------

holds for all local functions @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A7)
  -- -------- -- ------

Conversely, if ( A6 ) holds for a given collection @xmath then

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A8)
  -- -------- -- ------

By definition, when @xmath , the higher order Euler-Lagrange derivatives
@xmath are given by the associated @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (A9)
  -- -------- -- ------

As as consequence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A10)
  -- -------- -- -------

By definition, @xmath is the usual Euler-Lagrange derivative. The
crucial property of these operators is that they “absorb total
derivatives”,

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath      (A11)
        @xmath   @xmath      (A12)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

where, e.g.,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It may be also deduced that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A13)
  -- -------- -- -------

By considering the particular case where ( A6 ), ( A7 ) are used in
terms of @xmath with

  -- -- -- -------
           (A14)
  -- -- -- -------

we get @xmath . Splitting the term without derivatives on the r.h.s from
the others and defining

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A16)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note also that the variation of the @xmath form can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A17)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -- -- -------
           (A18)
  -- -- -- -------

### 4 Horizontal and vertical bicomplex

Let us denote by @xmath the ring of differential @xmath -forms on @xmath
and @xmath the ring of all differential forms on @xmath . A differential
form @xmath on @xmath is called a contact form if for every equivalence
class of local sections of @xmath , the pull-back of @xmath on @xmath is
zero. The set of contact forms on @xmath defines an ideal in @xmath
which is generated locally by the so-called vertical one forms @xmath
which are Grassmann odd. Remember that @xmath are not all independent
because its derivatives are symmetric under permutations of the indices.
A local basis of the full exterior algebra @xmath is thus given by the
forms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A19)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can now distinguish the forms @xmath of type @xmath as the forms that
can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A20)
  -- -------- -- -------

The forms of type @xmath constitute the horizontal forms described in
section 2 . Note for future purposes that the inner product of the form
@xmath dual to @xmath with the vector @xmath is given explicitly by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A21)
  -- -------- -- -------

The exterior derivative @xmath can be decomposed into horizontal and
vertical differentials

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A22)
  -- -------- -- -------

The horizontal differential has been defined on horizontal forms in ( A3
). It is extended to the vertical generators in such a way that @xmath .
Acting on @xmath forms, it is given explicitly by @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A23)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vertical differential is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A24)
  -- -------- -- -------

It satisfies @xmath and @xmath . The variational bicomplex for the fiber
bundle @xmath is the double complex @xmath .

For any vector field @xmath of @xmath , there is a unique vector field
@xmath called the prolongation of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
agree on functions on @xmath and such that the contact ideal is
preserved under the Lie derivative with respect to @xmath . The
prolonged vector field differs from the one defined before equation ( A2
) by vertical generators. Using the defining relation @xmath , any
vector field @xmath can be prolonged as @xmath with @xmath . The vector
field under characteristic form @xmath is now given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

in place of ( A2 ) and satisfies @xmath . We have still @xmath .

The inner product of a form @xmath with respect to a vector field @xmath
is defined as @xmath . It satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A26)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Augmented variational bicomplex

In the context of gauge theories, we also consider the augmented
bicomplex whose basic variables are the original set of fields @xmath
and several copies @xmath , @xmath of the gauge parameters. The whole
set of fields is denoted as @xmath and the variational bicomplex is
extended to this complete set, e.g. @xmath is defined in terms of @xmath
,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

When @xmath is restricted to act on the fields @xmath and their
derivatives alone we denote it by @xmath which is given by ( A24 ).

### 5 Horizontal homotopy operators

The horizontal homotopy operator [ 239 , 9 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A28)
  -- -------- -- -------

is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A29)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath a @xmath -form, @xmath . Note that there is a summation over
@xmath by Einstein’s summation convention. The following result (see
e.g. [ 9 ] ) is the key for showing local exactness of the horizontal
part of the variational bicomplex:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath      (A30)
        @xmath   @xmath      (A31)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

The last relation is sometimes called the “first variation formula”.
Note that the homotopy ( A29 ) enjoys the property

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A32)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, one can define the homotopy @xmath obtained by replacing
@xmath in ( A29 ) by @xmath . It also obeys

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath      (A33)
        @xmath   @xmath      (A34)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the context of the extended jet-bundle of gauge theories, we will
also use the following homotopy operators that only involve the gauge
parameters: for local functions @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A35)
  -- -------- -- -------

is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A36)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a form @xmath linear in @xmath and its derivatives @xmath , the
following relation holds,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A37)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the form @xmath with @xmath and their derivatives
replaced by @xmath and their derivatives.

In the augmented variational bicomplex, one can consider the augmented
homotopy operator @xmath where @xmath is given by ( A29 ) and @xmath
by ( A36 ). It obeys @xmath where @xmath is the augmented vertical
generator ( A27 ).

### 6 Commutation relations

Starting from @xmath and using ( A34 ) both on the inner terms of the
l.h.s and on the r.h.s gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A38)
  -- -------- -- -------

Starting from @xmath and using ( A10 ), we get @xmath @xmath , which can
be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In particular,

  -- -- -- -------
           (A40)
  -- -- -- -------

When combined with ( A16 ), we get

  -- -- -- -------
           (A41)
  -- -- -- -------

Similarly, applying to @xmath , gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (A42)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

Applying to @xmath , we also get

  -- -- -- -------
           (A43)
  -- -- -- -------

Starting from @xmath and using ( A41 ) to compute the last two terms, we
find

  -- -- -- -------
           (A44)
  -- -- -- -------

Similarly, for @xmath , by evaluating @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A45)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the same type of arguments, one shows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A46)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A47)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 7 Presymplectic @xmath forms

Let us define the @xmath -forms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A48)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the @xmath -form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A49)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the horizontal homotopy is given in ( A29 )

Using ( A30 ), ( A31 ) and ( A32 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A50)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A51)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the presymplectic @xmath form usually used in the context of
covariant phase space methods. Contrary to @xmath , @xmath involves only
the Euler-Lagrange derivatives of @xmath and is thus independent of
@xmath exact @xmath -forms that are added to @xmath . For this reason,
we call @xmath the invariant presymplectic @xmath form.

For first order theories, the invariant presymplectic @xmath form
coincides with the “symplectic” density @xmath considered in [ 180 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A52)
  -- -------- -- -------

The “second variational formula”, obtained by applying @xmath to ( A31
), can be combined with ( A51 ) to give

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A53)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our surface charges are related to @xmath , which is @xmath -closed only
up to a @xmath exact term,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A54)
  -- -------- -- -------

When @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A55)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, the quantity @xmath do not depend on exact terms added to
@xmath up to @xmath -exact terms,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A56)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the definitions of the homotopy operator ( A29 ), the higher order
Euler-Lagrange derivatives and the @xmath form ( 3 ), the invariant
symplectic form ( A48 ) smeared with two vectors fields, @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A57)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is manifestly antisymmetric in its arguments. The following
proposition provides a crucial alternative formula for the invariant
symplectic form:

###### Proposition 21.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The equality of the two right-hand sides of the first and second line is
a direct consequence of definitions ( A9 ), ( A29 ) and ( 3 ). The
equality in the first line is proven in Appendix C . 5 .

For later purposes, let us also write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A59)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -- -- -------
           (A60)
  -- -- -- -------

Starting from @xmath and using ( A34 ) on the outer terms of the l.h.s,
( 21 ) and ( A41 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A61)
  -- -------- -- -------

Adding to ( A38 ) gives in particular

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A62)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix B Elements from Lagrangian gauge field theories

### 1 The Lagrangian

In field theories, the action is a local functional

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whose equations of motion are used to define the dynamics of the theory.
The Lagrangian @xmath is required to depend only on a finite number
@xmath of derivatives of @xmath . In the jet space @xmath , the surface
defined by the equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is called the stationary surface. Local functions pulled back onto the
stationary surface will be called “on-shell” and an equality only valid
on the stationary surface will be called “weakly vanishing”. Under
appropriate regularity conditions on the Euler-Lagrange equations of
motion [ 160 , 51 ] , which we always assume to be fulfilled, we have
@xmath if and only if the local functions @xmath and @xmath differ by
terms involving local functions that are linear and homogeneous in and
their derivatives.

### 2 Symmetries

A symmetry of the action is a vector field that leaves the Lagrangian
invariant up to a total derivative, @xmath . As a consequence of ( A5 ),
any symmetry of the action is equivalent to a symmetry in characteristic
form. As a consequence of ( A40 ), any symmetry @xmath of the action is
a symmetry of the equations of motion, @xmath . However, a symmetry of
the equations of motion is not necessarily a symmetry of the action.

A Noether identity is an identity among the functions @xmath defining
the stationary surface,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The Noether operators are defined by @xmath and satisfy
@xmath . The Noether identities that vanish on-shell, e.g. @xmath , are
called trivial.

For @xmath a differential operator, one defines the adjoint operator by
@xmath . The adjoint operator can be decomposed in components @xmath as
@xmath . One has @xmath .

Gauge theories are Lagrangian theories admitting non-trivial Noether
identities. Gauge transformations are linear mappings from the space of
local functions @xmath to the vector space of symmetries of the action.

For @xmath , we denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a generating set of gauge symmetries of @xmath . Here, the operators
@xmath are defined as @xmath and act on local functions @xmath . Gauge
transformations of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath are called trivial gauge transformations.

The generating property means that every symmetry @xmath that depends
linearly and homogeneously on an arbitrary gauge parameter @xmath is
given by a combination of the gauge transformations @xmath and trivial
transformations,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with @xmath .

Noether’s second theorem proves that

###### Theorem 22.

There is a bijection between the gauge transformations and the Noether
identities. The Noether operator @xmath corresponds to the gauge
transformation of characteristic @xmath for @xmath and, conversely, the
gauge transformation of characteristic @xmath are associated with the
Noether operator @xmath .

This theorem can be used to integrate by parts the expression @xmath as

  -- -- -- ------
           (B1)
  -- -- -- ------

where @xmath are the Noether identities and @xmath is the Noether
current vanishing on-shell.

Let us finally define reducibility parameters or symmetry parameters as
sets of local functions @xmath that satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A trivial reducibility or symmetry parameter @xmath is a set of weakly
vanishing local functions @xmath . The equivalence class of reducibility
parameters modulo trivial ones is called the set of non-trivial
reducibility parameters.

### 3 Linearized theory

For @xmath a solution of the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion, one can
expand the Lagrangian around @xmath as (see [ 52 ] for details)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first term is a constant that can be dropped classically, the
second term is a total divergence according to ( A31 ) because @xmath is
a solution and the term in @xmath is the relevant term with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equations of motion of the linearized theory around @xmath are given
by @xmath . The fundamental relation ( B1 ) can also be expanded in
powers of @xmath and is given to lowest non-trivial order by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the characteristic @xmath and the possibly field dependent
parameter @xmath have been evaluated at @xmath . This relation expresses
the gauge invariance of @xmath under the transformation @xmath .
Assuming that the theory is linearizable, cfr [ 48 ] , these gauge
transformations provides a generating set of gauge transformations for
the Lagrangian @xmath .

The reducibility equations for the linearized theory are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and where @xmath means here “up to terms vanishing when the
linearized equations of motion are satisfied”. In particular, if the
reference solution @xmath admits solutions @xmath to @xmath , @xmath are
reducibility parameters of the linearized theory.

## Appendix C Technical proofs

### 1 Proof of Proposition 4

For compactness, let us define a generalized gauge transformation
through

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the variational bicomplex, the operator @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath given in ( A25 ). It satisfies @xmath .

According to the same reasoning that led to ( 1.3 ), combined with ( 1.6
) and the definitions ( 1.8 )-( 1.11 ) of Noether currents for gauge
symmetries, we get

  -- -- -- ------
           (C1)
  -- -- -- ------

Applying the contracting homotopy ( A36 ) with respect to the gauge
parameters @xmath now gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C2)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C3)
  -- -------- -- ------

By applying @xmath to @xmath and using @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C4)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using the property ( A30 ) of the homotopy operators, the expression
inside the parenthesis of r.h.s of ( C4 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C5)
  -- -------- -- ------

From equation ( C2 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C6)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using ( 1.15 ), ( A17 ), and ( A59 ), the direct computation of @xmath
gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C7)
  -- -------- -- ------

If

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C8)
  -- -------- -- ------

we finally have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (C9)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now @xmath if (i) @xmath is a solution to the Euler-Lagrange equations
of motion, (ii) @xmath and, (iii) @xmath is tangent to the space of
solutions at @xmath . This proves Proposition 4 . ∎

### 2 Proof of Proposition 7

Let us denote the set of fields collectively by @xmath . In order to
construct the surface charges, we first have to compute the current
@xmath defined according to ( 1.7 )-( 1.8 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Note that for any function @xmath not involving time derivatives of
@xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C11)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . In other words, @xmath coincides with the components of
the @xmath -form @xmath as defined in ( A29 ), ( A34 ) with @xmath
replaced by @xmath and @xmath replaced by @xmath , i.e., for spatial
forms with no time derivatives on @xmath . One has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the total derivative is defined by @xmath while the current @xmath
is determined in terms of the Hamiltonian structure operators through
the formula

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C13)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The weakly vanishing Noether currents @xmath are thus given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath , which is the relevant part of the surface one-form
@xmath at constant time, only involves the canonical variables @xmath
and the gauge parameters @xmath , but not the Lagrange multipliers
@xmath nor their variations, @xmath . This is so because @xmath does not
involve @xmath while the terms in @xmath with time derivatives involve
only time derivatives of @xmath and no Lagrange multipliers:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C16)
  -- -------- -- -------

More precisely, using ( A29 )-( C14 )-( C15 ), the @xmath components of
the @xmath -form ( 1.12 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C17)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( A13 ) then allows one to show that @xmath so that the terms
nicely combine to give

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C18)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking into account ( C11 ), we thus have proved the theorem.∎

### 3 Proof of Proposition 12

Let us prove the relation ( 3.48 ). Using the decomposition ( 3.46 ),
the left-hand side of equation ( 3.48 ) can written explicitly as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We have to relate this expression to the variation of the surface
gravity @xmath . This is merely an exercise of differential geometry.

Since the variation is chosen to commute with the total derivative, the
coordinates are left unchanged @xmath and the horizon @xmath stay at the
same location in @xmath . The covariant vector normal to the horizon
@xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath -dependent normalization function,
satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C20)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . From the variation of ( 3.3 ) and of the second
normalization condition ( 3.8 ), one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C21)
  -- -------- -- -------

which shows that @xmath has no component along @xmath and @xmath has a
component along @xmath which equals @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Note also the following
property that is useful in order to prove the first law in the way of [
174 ] . Using ( 3.32 ) and ( C20 ), we have

(C22)

It implies in particular that the expression @xmath has no
tangential-tangential component, @xmath , @xmath orthogonal to @xmath .
.

Let us develop the variation of @xmath starting from the definition (
3.30 ). One has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where all expressions are implicitly pulled-back on the horizon. The
first term in ( C24 ) is recognized as @xmath after using ( 3.11 ), (
C20 ) and ( 3.33 ). According to ( C20 )-( C21 ), the second term can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C25)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some @xmath tangent to @xmath . This term vanishes thanks to ( 3.33
). The third term can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C26)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, the Lie derivative of @xmath along @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C27)
  -- -------- -- -------

by using the Killing equation ( 3.28 ) and its variation ( 3.39 ). The
fourth term can then be written as

  -- -- -- -------
           (C28)
  -- -- -- -------

Adding all the terms, the variation of the surface gravity becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The last line is a consequence of ( 3.11 ). Contracting ( 3.39 ) with
@xmath we also have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C30)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, the last term in ( C29 ) reduces to @xmath where @xmath denotes
the covariant derivative with respect to the @xmath metric @xmath and
@xmath is the pull-back of @xmath on @xmath . Indeed, one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C31)
              @xmath   @xmath      (C32)
              @xmath   @xmath      (C33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the covariant derivative with respect to the @xmath
metric @xmath . The first line uses ( 3.28 )-( C21 ) and @xmath . The
last line uses the decomposition ( 3.11 ) and @xmath . We have finally
the result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C34)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expression ( C19 ) therefore equals to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the result ( 3.48 ) follows because @xmath is constant on the
horizon.∎

Remark that in classical derivations [ 45 , 91 ] , it is assumed that
the Killing vectors @xmath and @xmath have the same components before
and after the variation,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One then has @xmath and the variation of @xmath ( C29 ) reduces to the
well-known expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 4 Proof of Proposition 13

Contracting the vertical one-forms of ( A54 ) with the tangent vectors
@xmath and @xmath to @xmath , one gets after applying the homotopy
@xmath and integrating on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C36)
  -- -------- -- -------

as a consequence of ( 5.4 ). Using ( A26 ) and ( 1.6 ), we get on
solutions @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C37)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, the integrability conditions ( 5.2 ) imply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C38)
  -- -------- -- -------

Owing to ( 1.17 ), one gets

  -- -- -- -------
           (C39)
  -- -- -- -------

Note that because ( 1.16 ), one has for solutions @xmath and one-forms
@xmath tangent to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C40)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the note ( C40 ) one can plug ( C39 ) two times into ( C37 ) for
@xmath tangent to @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C41)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 1.16 ), we then get the result ( 5.9 ) and the proposition is
demonstrated. ∎.

### 5 Proof of Proposition 21

Let @xmath be the r.h.s of ( 21 ). Proposition 21 amounts to showing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C42)
  -- -------- -- -------

Splitting the derivatives @xmath in those acting on @xmath , denoted by
@xmath , and in those acting on the remaining expression, denoted by
@xmath and regrouping the indices @xmath , we get,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C43)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now evaluate @xmath as @xmath and use the fact that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C44)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C45)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expanding the @xmath derivatives,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C46)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C47)
  -- -------- -- -------

Antisymmetry ( C42 ) amounts to prove that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C48)
  -- -------- -- -------

From equation ( A43 ), we get

  -- -- -- -------
           (C49)
  -- -- -- -------

Using the definition of higher order Lie operators ( A9 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C50)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Evaluating @xmath as @xmath and using the equality

  -- -- -- -------
           (C51)
  -- -- -- -------

we finally obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Comparing with ( C47 ), we have ( C48 ) as it should. ∎

An explicitly antisymmetric expression for @xmath can also be found
along the following lines. Using the definition of the Euler-Lagrange
derivatives, it is straightforward to show that for any local function
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C53)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using then ( C53 ) where one replace @xmath by @xmath and taking into
account all combinatorial factors, one obtains that

###### Lemma 23.

For all local functions @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C54)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the indices are totally symmetrized, @xmath and @xmath .

Splitting further the indices @xmath in Lemma 23 into @xmath and posing
@xmath and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can now develop ( C47 ) by using the last expression with @xmath
replaced by @xmath and @xmath replaced by @xmath . The resulting
expression involves the following summation in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath (with now @xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C55)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C56)
  -- -------- -- -------

by expressing @xmath in terms of @xmath and posing @xmath . Using then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C57)
  -- -------- -- -------

we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C58)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Exchanging the role of @xmath and @xmath and of @xmath and @xmath in the
second term in the parenthesis, we finally obtain an expression
explicitly antisymmetric under the exchange of @xmath , @xmath .

### 6 Explicit computation of the @xmath algebra

Introducing the notation @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , the @xmath
-component of equation ( 6.21 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C59)
  -- -------- -- -------

The equation requires @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath . The
@xmath -component of equation ( 6.21 ) then gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C60)
  -- -------- -- -------

This leads to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath -component of
equation ( 6.21 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C61)
  -- -------- -- -------

It imposes @xmath and gives @xmath . From the @xmath component,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C62)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath -component of equation ( 6.21 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

implying @xmath , and @xmath . Finally, the @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath components of equation ( 6.21 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

One finds the following conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C66)
     @xmath      (C67)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . The constraints imposed by ( 6.21 ) on @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are summarized by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C68)
     @xmath      (C69)
     @xmath      (C70)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last two equations allow one to identify @xmath with the conformal
Killing vectors of the sphere in @xmath dimensions with metric @xmath .
