This manuscript focusses on algebraic shifting and its applications to
@xmath -vector theory of simplicial complexes and more general graded
posets. It includes attempts to use algebraic shifting for solving the
@xmath -conjecture for simplicial spheres, which is considered by many
as the main open problem in @xmath -vector theory. While this goal has
not been achieved, related results of independent interest were
obtained, and are presented here.

The operator algebraic shifting was introduced by Kalai over 20 years
ago, with applications mainly in @xmath -vector theory. Since then,
connections and applications of this operator to other areas of
mathematics, like algebraic topology and combinatorics, have been found
by different researchers. See Kalai’s recent survey [ skira ] . We try
to find (with partial success) relations between algebraic shifting and
the following other areas:

-   Topological constructions on simplicial complexes.

-   Embeddability of simplicial complexes: into spheres and other
    manifolds.

-   @xmath -vector theory for simplicial spheres, and more general
    complexes.

-   @xmath -vector theory for (non-simplicial) graded partially ordered
    sets.

-   Graph minors.

Combinatorially, a (finite) simplicial complex is a finite collection of
finite sets which is closed under inclusion. This basic object has been
subjected to extensive research. Its elements are called faces . Its
@xmath -vector @xmath counts the number of faces according to their
dimension, where @xmath is the number of its faces of size @xmath .
@xmath -vector theory tries to characterize the possible @xmath
-vectors, by means of numerical relations between the components of the
vector, for interesting families of simplicial complexes (and more
general objects); for example for simplicial complexes which
topologically are spheres.

Algebraic shifting associates with each simplicial complex @xmath a
shifted simplicial complex, denoted by @xmath , which is combinatorially
simpler. This is an invariant which on the one hand preserves important
invariants of @xmath , like its @xmath -vector and Betti numbers, while
on the other hand loses other invariants, like the topological, and even
homotopical, type of @xmath . A general problem is to understand which
invariants of @xmath can be read off from the faces of @xmath , and how.
There are two different variations of this operator: one is based on the
exterior algebra, the other - on the symmetric algebra; both were
introduced by Kalai. Many statements are true, or conjectured to be
true, for both variations. (Definitions appear in the next chapter.)

The main open problem in @xmath -vector theory is to characterize the
@xmath -vectors of simplicial spheres (i.e. simplicial complexes which
are homeomorphic to spheres). The widely believed conjecture for the
last 25 years, known as the @xmath -conjecture, is that the
characterization for simplicial convex polytopes, proved by Stanley
(necessity) [ St ] , and by Billera and Lee (sufficiency) [ Billera-Lee
] , holds also for the wider class of simplicial spheres, and even for
all homology spheres, i.e. Gorenstein @xmath complexes. Its open part is
to show that the @xmath -vector, which is determined by the @xmath
-vector, is an @xmath -sequence for these simplicial complexes.

The algebraic properties of face rings hard-Lefschetz and weak-Lefschetz
translate into certain properties of the symmetrically shifted complex.
Having any of these properties in the face ring of simplicial spheres
would imply the @xmath -conjecture. A conjecture by Kalai and by
Sarkaria, stating which faces are never in @xmath if @xmath can be
embedded in a sphere, would also imply the @xmath -conjecture for
simplicial spheres [ skira ] . The well known lower bound and upper
bound theorems for @xmath -vectors of simplicial spheres have algebraic
shifting conjectured refinements, which immediately imply these
theorems. Details appear in Chapters 4 and 5 . Partial results on these
conjectures include:

-   The known lower bound inequalities for simplicial spheres are shown
    to hold for the larger class of doubly Cohen-Macaulay (2-CM)
    complexes, by using algebraic shifting / rigidity theory for graphs
    and Fogelsanger’s theory of minimal cycle complexes [ Fogelsanger ]
    . Moreover, the initial part @xmath of the @xmath -vector of a
    @xmath -CM complex (of dimension @xmath ) is shown to be an @xmath
    -sequence. This supports the conjecture by Björner and Swartz that
    the entire @xmath -vector of a @xmath -CM complex is an @xmath
    -sequence [ Swartz ] . See Section 3.5 .

-   The non-negativity of the @xmath -vector, which translates to the
    generalized lower bound inequalities on the @xmath -vector, is
    proved for a special class of simplicial spheres, by using special
    edge contractions. These contractions are well behaved with respect
    to properties of the face rings of those simplicial complexes. To
    obtain this result, we first answer affirmatively a problem asked by
    Dey et. al. [ Dey ] concerning topology-preserving edge contractions
    in PL-manifolds. See Sections 5.4 and 4.6 .

-   The hard-Lefschetz property is preserved under the combinatorial
    operations of join, Stellar subdivisions and connected sum of
    spheres; thus supporting the @xmath -conjecture. See Sections 4.2 ,
    4.6 and 4.4 .

The (generic) rigidity property for a graph mapped into a Euclidean
space of fixed dimension is equivalent to the existence of a certain
edge in the symmetric algebraic shifting of the graph. Similarly, the
dimension of the space of stresses in a generic embedding equals the
number of edges of a certain type in its symmetric shifting. This
follows from a work by Lee [ Lee ] . Analogues for exterior shifting
involves Kalai’s notion of hyperconnectivity [ 56 ] . We use these
connections, together with graph minors, to conclude the following:

-   Shifting can tell minors: for every @xmath and every graph @xmath ,
    if @xmath then @xmath has a @xmath minor. As a corollary,
    obstructions to embeddability are obtained. See Section 3.6 .

-   Higher dimensional analogues: we generalized the notion of minors in
    graphs to the class of arbitrary simplicial complexes, and proved
    that it ’respects’ the Van-Kampen obstruction in equivariant
    cohomology. This suggests a new approach for proving the
    Kalai-Sarkaria conjecture (and hence the @xmath -conjecture).
    Details appear in Chapter 5 .

Algebraic shifting of more general graded partially ordered sets than
simplicial complexes may be used to prove some of their properties by
looking at the shifted object. For example, an open problem is to show
that the (toric) @xmath -vector of a general polytope is an @xmath
-sequence. The above approach may be useful in proving it. Recently Karu
has proved that this @xmath -vector is non-negative, by algebraic means.
We obtained the following progress in this direction:

-   We defined an algebraic shifting operator for geometric meet
    semi-lattices (simplicial complexes are an important example of
    these objects), by constructing face rings for these objects. This
    generalizes the construction for simplicial complexes. As an
    application, we reprove the fact that their @xmath -vector satisfies
    the Kruskal-Katona inequalities, proved by Wegner [ Wegner ] . See
    Section 6.2 , and the rest of Chapter 6 for further results in the
    same spirit.

Apart from applications, algebraic shifting became an interesting
research object by its own right, as indicated by numerous recent papers
done by multiple researchers.

-   We describe the behavior of algebraic shifting with respect to some
    basic constructions on simplicial complexes, like union, cone and
    more generally, join. For this, a ’homological’ point of view on
    algebraic shifting was developed. Interestingly, a multiplicative
    formula obtained for exterior shifting of joins, fails for symmetric
    shifting. The main applications are as follows; see Chapter 2 for
    details.

    -   Proving Kalai’s conjecture [ skira ] that if @xmath and @xmath
        are disjoint simplicial complexes, then @xmath .

    -   Disproving Kalai’s conjecture for joins [ skira ] , by providing
        examples where @xmath is not equal to @xmath .

    -   A new proof for Kalai’s formula for exterior shifting of a cone
        @xmath .

To summarize, the operator algebraic shifting is a powerful tool for
proving claims in @xmath -vector theory and has relations to the above
mentioned areas in mathematics. A better understanding of this operator
and these relations may be used to prove well known open problems like
the ones indicated here, and is also interesting by its own right.
Partial success in achieving this goal is presented in this manuscript.
However, it seems that the potential of this tool has not yet been
exhausted.
