# Acknowledgements

The writing of this thesis has been one of the most significant academic
challenges I have had to face. Without the support, patience and
guidance of the following people and institutes, this study would not
have been completed. It is to them that I owe my deepest gratitude.

In the first place I would like to record my gratitude to Saugata Basu
for his supervision. His wisdom, knowledge and commitment to the highest
standards inspired and motivated me. Moreover, he always gave me a lot
of freedom and made it possible to visit many interesting places in
order to learn from many outstanding researchers. I am indebted to him
more than he knows.

I gratefully acknowledge Laureano González-Vega for his advice and
supervision of my research during my two year visit to the Universidad
de Cantabria in Santander, Spain, which was supported by the European
RTNetwork Real Algebraic and Analytic Geometry (Contract
No. HPRN-CT-2001-00271). He introduced me to another very exciting area
of Real Algebraic Geometry. In additon, he serves on my committee.

Many thanks also go to John Etnyre, Mohammad Ghomi and Victoria Powers
for serving on my committee.

It is a pleasure to pay tribute also to the entire staff, especially to
Genola Turner, and the professors, especially to Alfred Andrew, Eric
Carlen, Luca Dieci, Wilfrid Gangbo and William Green, of the School of
Mathematics. Furthermore, I would like to thank Tomás Recio Muñiz and
Fernando Etayo Gordejuela from the Universidad de Cantabria. They all
have provided an environment that is both supportive and intellectually
stimulating.

I am very grateful to the European RTNetwork Real Algebraic and Analytic
Geometry (Contract No. HPRN-CT-2001-00271), the Institut Henri Poincaré
in Paris, France, the Institute for Mathematics and its Applications in
Minneapolis, MN, and the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in
Berkeley, CA, for giving me the opportunity to visit several workshops
and meeting many outstanding researchers. Moreover, I would like to
thank Chris Brown for his steady help with QEPCAD B, Michel Coste for
simplifying the proof of Proposition 2.24 , Ioana Necula for providing
her source code of the TOP-algorithm and Nicola Wolpert for very useful
discussions and comments.

I would also acknowledge the Fulbright Commission, the Kurt Fordan
Foundation for Outstanding Talents (Förderverein Kurt Fordan für
herausragende Begabungen e.V.) and the Foundation of Hans Rudolf
(Hans-Rudolf-Stiftung) for financial support during my first year at
Georgia Tech.

Furthermore, I would like to thank Daniel Rost, Erwin Schörner and
Wolfgang Zimmermann from the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München in
Munich, Germany, as well as the Association of German-American Club
(Deutsch-Amerikanischer Austauschstudentenclub) and the World Student
Fund for supporting my application to Georgia Tech.

I convey special acknowledgement to my friends Nadja Benes, Fabian
Bumeder, James M. Burkhart, Vanesa Cabieces Cabrillo, Fernando Carreras
Oliver, Jennifer Chung, Alberto Di Minin, Natalia Del Rio Pérez, Violeta
Fariñas Franco, Ignacio Fernández Rúa, Jascha Freess, Jürgen Gaul, Anja
and Torsten Götz, Marianela Gurria de las Cuevas, Leanne Metcalfe,
Javier Molleda González, Mira Kiridz̆ić-Marić, Sven Krasser, Ulrike
Leitermann, Korbinian Meindl, Silke Nowak, Pablo Orozco Dehesa, Paloma
Prieto Gorricho and her mother, Joseba Rodríguez Bayón, Tere Salas
Ibaseta, Ainhoa Sanchez Bas, Sebastian Stamminger, Nanette Ströbele,
Marcus Trügler, the Gröbenzell Bandits, the whole Skiles United team and
all my other friends all over the world for helping me when I needed it.
Each one in their own way widened my horizon, and they all contributed
to making this period of time the most beneficial in my life.

Last but not least, my Mum and my family deserve special mention for
their unconditional love and affection all these years. They taught me
uncountable many things. Words fail me to express my appreciation.

Thank you! Muchas gracias! Vielen Dank!

###### List of Figures

-    2.1 A cylindrical decomposition adapted to the unit sphere in
    @xmath
-    2.2 The polynomial @xmath is in generic position with respect to
    @xmath
-    2.3 The topology of @xmath
-    2.4 The topology of @xmath with respect to @xmath
-    2.5 The hollow torus
-    4.1 Schematic picture of the retraction of @xmath to @xmath .
-    5.1 Output of a cylindrical decomposition using QEPCAD B
-    5.2 Three ellipsoids
-    5.3 Six ellipsoids
-    5.4 Seven ellipsoids
-    5.5 Twenty ellipsoids
-    5.6 The intersection of three linearly independent quadrics
-    5.7 A curve and an isolated point
-    5.8 Two intersecting lines with @xmath
-    5.9 One connected component

###### List of Tables

-    5.1 Input polynomials defining the different arrangements
-    5.2 Experimental results for Example 5.14
-    5.3 Experimental results of Schömer and Wolpert [ 69 ]
-    5.4 Experimental results for Example 5.15
-    5.5 Experimental results for Example 5.16
-    5.6 Experimental results for Example 5.17
-    5.7 Experimental results for Example 5.18
-    5.8 Experimental results for Example 5.19

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1. Real Algebraic Geometry

In classical algebraic geometry, the main objects of interest are
complex algebraic sets, i.e. the zero set of a finite family of
polynomials over the field @xmath of complex numbers, meaning the set of
all points that simultaneously satisfy one or more polynomial equations.
But in many applications in computer-aided geometric design,
computational geometry, robotics or computer graphics one is interested
in the solutions over the field @xmath of real numbers. Moreover, they
also deal with the real solutions of finite systems of inequalities
which are the main objects of real algebraic geometry. Unfortunately,
real algebraic sets have a very different behavior than their complex
counterparts. For example, an irreducible algebraic subset of @xmath
having complex dimension @xmath , considered as an algebraic subset of
@xmath is connected, not bounded (unless it is a point) and has local
real dimension @xmath at every point (see, for instance, [ 27 ] ). But
this is no longer true for real algebraic sets (see Example 2.38 ).

In 1926, Emil Artin and Otto Schreier [ 7 , 6 ] introduced the notion of
a real closed field. Artin [ 5 , 6 ] used this new theory for solving
the 17th problem of Hilbert which asks whether a polynomial which is
nonnegative on @xmath is a sum of squares of rational functions. A real
closed field is an ordered field whose positive cone is the set of
squares @xmath and such that every polynomial in @xmath of odd degree
has a root in . Notice that real closed fields need not be complete nor
archimedean (see Chapter 2.1.2 ).

In this thesis, we consider semi-algebraic sets over a real closed field
defined by quadratic polynomials in @xmath variables. Semi-algebraic
sets of @xmath are defined as the smallest family of sets in @xmath that
contains the algebraic sets as well as the sets defined by polynomial
inequalities, and which is also closed under the boolean operations
(complementation, finite unions and finite intersections). Furthermore,
unlike algebraic sets (over ), the projection of a semi-algebraic set is
again semi-algebraic, this was proved by Tarski [ 75 ] and Seidenberg [
70 ] .

It is worthwhile to mention that in many applications in computer-aided
geometric design or computational geometry one deals with arrangements
of many geometric objects having a similar simple description [ 48 ] .
For instance, each object is a semi-algebraic set defined by few
polynomials of fixed degree. Thus, understanding the properties of
semi-algebraic sets and designing algorithms are important topics in
real algebraic geometry.

The class of semi-algebraic set defined by quadratic polynomials is of
particular interest for several reasons. First, any semi-algebraic set
can be defined by (quantified) formulas involving only quadratic
polynomials (at the cost of increasing the number of variables and the
size of the formula). Secondly, they are distinguished from arbitrary
semi-algebraic sets since one can obtain better results from an
algorithmic standpoint, as well as from the point of view of topological
complexity (as we will see later). Moreover, they can be much more
complicated topologically than semi-algebraic sets defined by only
linear polynomials. Thirdly, quadratic surfaces are widely used in
computer-aided geometric design, computational geometry [ 69 ] and
computer graphics as well as in robotics ( [ 68 ] ) and computational
physics ( [ 58 , 64 ] ).

One basic ingredient in most algorithms for computing topological
properties of semi-algebraic sets is an algorithm due to Collins [ 33 ]
, called cylindrical decomposition (see Chapter 2.1.4 ) which decomposes
a given semi-algebraic set into topological balls. Cylindrical
decomposition can be used to compute a semi-algebraic triangulation of a
semi-algebraic set (see Chapter 2.1.5 ), and from this triangulation one
can compute the homology groups, Betti numbers, et cetera. One
disadvantage of the cylindrical decomposition is that it uses iterated
projections (reducing the dimension by one in each step) and the number
of polynomials (as well as the degrees) is squared in each step of the
process. Thus, the complexity of performing cylindrical decomposition is
double exponential in the number of variables which makes it impractical
in most cases for computing topological information. Nevertheless, we
will see in Chapters 2.1.4 and 5 that it can be used quite efficiently
for several important problems in low dimensions.

### 1.2. Betti numbers

Important topological invariants of a semi-algebraic sets are the Betti
numbers @xmath (see Chapter 2.2.1 for a precise definition) which,
roughly speaking, measure the number of @xmath -dimensional holes of a
semi-algebriac set. The zero-th Betti number @xmath is the number of
connected components.

The initial result on bounding the Betti numbers of semi-algebraic sets
defined by polynomial inequalities was proved independently by Oleinik
and Petrovskii [ 65 ] , Thom [ 76 ] and Milnor [ 63 ] . They proved (see
Theorem 2.34 ) that the sum of the Betti numbers of a semi-algebraic set
in @xmath defined by @xmath polynomial inequalities of degree at most
@xmath has a bound of the form @xmath . Notice that this bound is
exponential in @xmath and this exponential dependence is unavoidable
(see Example 2.35 ). Recently, the above bound was extended to more
general classes of semi-algebraic sets. For example, Basu [ 11 ]
improved the bound of the individual Betti numbers of @xmath -closed
semi-algebraic sets (which are defined by a Boolean formula with atoms
of the form @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath ), while Gabrielov
and Vorobjov [ 44 ] extended the above bound to any @xmath
-semi-algebraic set (which is defined by a Boolean formula with atoms of
the form @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath ). They proved a bound
of @xmath . Moreover, Basu, Pollack and Roy [ 19 ] proved a similar
bound for the individual Betti numbers of the realizations of sign
conditions.

However, it turns out that for a semi-algebraic set @xmath defined by
@xmath quadratic inequalities, it is possible to obtain upper bounds on
the sum of Betti numbers of @xmath which are polynomial in @xmath and
exponential only in @xmath . The first such result was proved by
Barvinok [ 9 ] who proved a bound of @xmath (see Theorem 2.36 ). The
exponential dependence on @xmath is unavoidable as already remarked by
Barvinok, but the implied constant (which is at least two) in the
exponent of Barvinok’s bound is not optimal.

Using Barvinok’s result, as well as inequalities derived from the
Mayer-Vietoris sequence (see Chapter 2.2.2 ), Basu [ 11 ] proved a
polynomial bound (polynomial both in @xmath and @xmath ) on the top few
Betti numbers of a set defined by quadratic inequalities (see Theorem
2.37 ). Very recently, Basu, Pasechnik and Roy [ 18 ] extended these
bounds to arbitrary @xmath -closed (not just basic closed)
semi-algebraic sets defined in terms of quadratic inequalities.

Apart from their intrinsic mathematical interest, for example in
distinguishing the semi-algebraic sets defined by quadratic inequalities
from general semi-algebraic sets, the bounds proved by Barvinok and Basu
respectively have motivated recent work on designing polynomial time
algorithms for computing topological invariants of semi-algebraic sets
defined by quadratic inequalities. For instance, Grigoriev and Pasechnik
[ 47 ] presented a polynomial time algorithm (in @xmath ) for computing
sampling points meeting each connected component of a real algebraic set
defined over a quadratic map. Their result improves a result of Barvinok
[ 8 ] about the the feasibility of systems of real quadratic equations.
Basu [ 14 , 13 ] gave polynomial time algorithms for computing the Euler
characteristic and the higher Betti numbers of semi-algebraic sets
defined by quadratic inequalities. Furthermore, Basu and Zell [ 23 ]
gave a polynomial time algorithm for computing the lower Betti numbers
of projections defined by such semi-algebraic sets. For details, we
refer the reader to the papers mentioned above.

Traditionally an important goal in algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry
has been to design algorithms for computing topological invariants of
semi-algebraic sets, whose worst-case complexity matches the best upper
bounds known for the quantity being computed. It is thus of interest to
tighten the bounds on the Betti numbers of semi-algebraic sets defined
by quadratic inequalities, as it has been done recently in the case of
general semi-algebraic sets (see for example [ 44 , 11 , 19 , 18 ] ).
Notice that the problem of computing the Betti numbers of semi-algebraic
sets in single exponential time is considered to be a very important
open problem in algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry. Recent progress has
been made in several special cases (see [ 21 , 12 , 14 ] ).

In another direction, the bounds of the Betti numbers are used to
produce lower bounds for complexity decision problems. For instance,
Steele and Yao [ 74 ] recognized that the bounds for the sum of the
Betti numbers can be applied to obtain non-trivial lower bounds in terms
of the number of connected components for the model of algebraic
decision trees. This was extended to algebraic computation trees by
Ben-Or [ 25 ] .

### 1.3. Homotopy Types

A fundamental theorem in semi-algebraic geometry is Hardt’s Theorem (see
Theorem 2.15 ) which is a corollary of the existence of the cylindrical
decomposition. For a projection map @xmath on the last @xmath
co-ordinates and semi-algebraic subset @xmath of @xmath , it implies
that there is a semi-algebraic partition of @xmath , @xmath , such that
for each @xmath and any point @xmath , the pre-image @xmath is
semi-algebraically homeomorphic to @xmath by a fiber preserving
homeomorphism. In particular, for each @xmath , all fibers @xmath ,
@xmath , are semi-algebraically homeomorphic. Unfortunately, the
cylindrical decomposition algorithm implies a double exponential (in
@xmath and @xmath ) upper bound on the cardinality of @xmath and, hence,
on the number of homeomorphism types of the fibers of the map @xmath .
No better bounds than the double exponential bound are known, even
though it seems reasonable to conjecture a single exponential upper
bound on the number of homeomorphism types of the fibers of the map
@xmath .

Basu and Vorobjov [ 22 ] considered the weaker problem of bounding the
number of distinct homotopy types, occurring amongst the set of all
fibers of @xmath , and a single exponential upper bound was proved on
the number of homotopy types of such fibers (see Theorem 2.42 ). They
proved in the same paper a similar result for semi-Pfaffian sets as
well, and Basu [ 14 ] extended it to arbitrary o-minimal structures.
Both these bounds on the number of homotopy types are exponential in
@xmath as well as @xmath . As already pointed out in [ 22 ] , in this
generality the single exponential dependence on @xmath is unavoidable
(see Example 2.43 ).

Since sets defined by quadratic equalities and inequalities are the
simplest class of topologically non-trivial semi-algebraic sets, the
problem of classifying such sets topologically has attracted the
attention of many researchers. Motivated by problems related to
stability of maps, Wall [ 79 ] considered the special case of real
algebraic sets defined by two simultaneously diagonalizable quadratic
forms in @xmath variables. He obtained a full topological classification
of such varieties making use of Gale diagrams (from the theory of convex
polytopes). To be more precise, letting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Wall obtains as a consequence of his classification theorem, that the
number of different topological types of fibers @xmath is bounded by
@xmath . Similar results were also obtained by López [ 59 ] using
different techniques. Much more recently Briand [ 28 ] has obtained
explicit characterization of the isotopy classes of real varieties
defined by two general conics in two dimensional real projective space
@xmath in terms of the coefficients of the polynomials. His method also
gives a decision algorithm for testing whether two such given varieties
are isotopic.

In another direction Agrachev [ 1 ] studied the topology of
semi-algebraic sets defined by quadratic inequalities, and he defined a
certain spectral sequence converging to the homology groups of such
sets. We will give a parametrized version of Agrachev’s construction in
Chapter 4.3 which is due to Basu.

In view of the topological simplicity of semi-algebraic sets defined by
few quadratic inequalities as opposed to general semi-algebraic sets,
one might expect a much tighter bound on the number of topological types
compared to the general case. However one should be cautious, since a
tight bound on the Betti numbers of a class of semi-algebraic sets does
not automatically imply a similar bound on the number of topological or
even homotopy types occurring in that class. We refer the reader to [ 24
] for an explicit example of the large number of possible homotopy types
amongst finite cell complexes having very small Betti numbers.

### 1.4. Arrangements

Arrangements of geometric objects in fixed dimensional Euclidean space
are fundamental objects in computational geometry and computer-aided
geometric design (for instance, see [ 48 ] ). As already mentioned
before, usually it is assumed that each individual object in such an
arrangement has a simple description – for instance, they are
semi-algebraic sets defined by few polynomials of fixed degree.

Arrangements of quadratic surfaces, or quadrics, in three dimensional
space are of particular interest since they are widely used in CAD/CAM
and computer graphics as well as in robotics ( [ 68 ] ) and
computational physics ( [ 58 , 64 ] ). Therefore, it is often necessary
to compute or characterize the intersection of quadratic surfaces and
many approaches have already been proposed (see [ 56 , 57 , 81 , 80 , 82
, 40 , 38 , 37 , 77 ] ). In particular, computing the real intersection
of three quadrics is an important subject in computational geometry and
computer-aided geometric design (for instance, see [ 32 , 84 , 83 , 69 ]
).

Chionh, Goldman and Miller [ 32 ] used Macaulay’s multivariate resultant
to solve the problem in the case of finitely many intersection points.
But, as pointed out by Xu, Wang, Chen and Sun [ 84 ] , one can produce
quite general examples where the real intersection cannot be computed
using this approach. In [ 84 ] , the computation of the real
intersection of three quadrics is reduced to computing the real
intersection of two planar curves obtained by Levin’s method. Though
useful for curve tracing, Levin’s method ( [ 56 , 57 ] ) and its
improvement by Wang, Goldman and Tu [ 80 ] has serious limitations.
First of all, it produces a parameterization of the real intersection
curve of two quadrics with a square-root function but does not yield
information about reducibility or singularity of the real intersection.
Secondly, Levin’s method and similar methods ( [ 38 , 55 ] ) for
computing parameterization for the intersection set are restricted to
quadratic surfaces since higher degree intersection curves cannot be
parameterized easily.

In another direction, Chazelle, Edelsbrunner, Guibas and Sharir [ 31 ]
showed how to decompose an arrangement of @xmath objects in @xmath into
@xmath simple pieces. This was further improved by Koltun in the case
@xmath [ 54 ] . However, these decompositions while suitable for many
applications, are not useful for computing topological properties of the
arrangements, since they fail to produce a cell complex. Furthermore,
arrangements of finitely many balls in @xmath have been studied by
Edelsbrunner [ 39 ] from both combinatorial and topological viewpoint,
motivated by applications in molecular biology. But these techniques use
special properties of the objects, such as convexity, and are not
applicable to general semi-algebraic sets.

### 1.5. Review of the Results

We review the main results of this thesis.

#### 1.5.1. Bounding the Betti Numbers

In Chapter 3 we consider the problem of bounding the Betti numbers,
@xmath , of a semi-algebraic set @xmath defined by polynomial
inequalities

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , for @xmath .

We prove (see Theorem 3.1 ) that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We first bound the Betti numbers of non-singular complete intersections
of complex projective varieties defined by generic quadratic forms, and
use this bound to obtain bounds in the real semi-algebraic case. Because
of this new approach we are able to remove the constant in the exponent
in the bounds proved in [ 9 , 11 ] and this constitutes the main
contribution which appears in [ 17 ] .

#### 1.5.2. Bounding the Stable Homotopy Types of a Parameterized Family

In Chapter 4 we consider the following problem. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be a semi-algebaic set,
defined by a Boolean formula without negations, whose atoms are of the
form, @xmath . Let @xmath be the projection on the last @xmath
co-ordinates. Then the number of stable homotopy types (see Definition
2.28 ) amongst the fibers @xmath is bounded by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see Theorem 4.1 ).

Our result can be seen as a follow-up to the recent work by Basu and
Vorobjov [ 22 ] on bounding the number of homotopy types of fibers of
general semi-algebraic maps (see Theorem 2.42 ). However, our bound
(unlike the one proven in [ 22 ] ) is polynomial in @xmath for fixed
@xmath and @xmath , which constitutes the main contribution and appears
in [ 16 ] . Unfortunately, the exponential dependence on @xmath is
unavoidable (see Remark 4.2 ).

Due to technical reasons, we only obtain a bound on the number of stable
homotopy types, rather than homotopy types. But note that the notions of
homeomorphism type, homotopy type and stable homotopy type are each
strictly weaker than the previous one, since two semi-algebraic sets
might be stable homotopy equivalent, without being homotopy equivalent
(see [ 73 ] , p. 462), and also homotopy equivalent without being
homeomorphic. However, two closed and bounded semi-algebraic sets which
are stable homotopy equivalent have isomorphic homology groups.

#### 1.5.3. Algorithms and Their Implementations

In Chapter 5 we consider the problem of computing the first Betti
Numbers of arrangements of compact objects in @xmath as well as
computing the intersection of three quadratic surfaces in three
dimensional space @xmath .

##### Computing the Betti Numbers of Arrangements

In Chapter 5.1 we consider arrangements of compact objects in @xmath
which are simply connected. This implies, in particular, that their
first Betti number is zero. We describe an algorithm (see Algorithm 5.2
) for computing the number of connected components and the first Betti
number of such an arrangement, along with its implementation. For the
implementation, we restrict our attention to arrangements in @xmath and
take for our objects the simplest possible semi-algebraic sets in @xmath
which are topologically non-trivial – namely, each object is an
ellipsoid defined by a single quadratic equation. Ellipsoids are simply
connected, but with non-zero second Betti number. We also allow solid
ellipsoids defined by a single quadratic inequality. This algorithm
appears in [ 15 ] .

##### Computing the Real Intersection of Quadratic Surfaces

In Chapter 5.2 we consider the problem of computing the real
intersection of three quadratic surfaces, or quadrics, defined by the
quadratic polynomials @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We describe
an algorithm for computing the isolated points and a linear graph
embedded into @xmath (if the real intersection form a curve)
representing the real intersection of the three quadrics defined by the
three polynomials @xmath , along with its prototypical implementation
into the computer algebra system Maple (Version 9.5). For our
implementation, we restrict our attention to quadrics with defining
equation having rational coefficients. This algorithm appears in [ 52 ]
.

## Chapter 2 Mathematical Preliminaries

### 2.1. Real Algebraic Geometry

#### 2.1.1. Some Notations

Let be a real closed field and let be an algebraic closed field
containing such that @xmath . For each @xmath we will denote by @xmath
the set @xmath .

For @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , we denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We omit both @xmath and @xmath from the notation for the unit sphere
centered at the origin. For any polynomial @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the total degree of @xmath , the homogenization of
@xmath with respect to @xmath . The polynomial @xmath is @xmath -regular
if @xmath , i.e., if the polynomial @xmath has a non-vanishing constant
leading coefficient in the variable @xmath . The gcd-free part of a
polynomial @xmath with respect to another polynomial @xmath is the
polynomial @xmath . A polynomial @xmath is square-free if there is no
non-constant polynomial @xmath such that @xmath divides @xmath .
Equivalently, the polynomial @xmath is square-free if and only if @xmath
is equal (up to a constant) to the gcd-free part of @xmath and @xmath .

For any family of polynomials @xmath , and @xmath , we denote by @xmath
the set of common zeros of @xmath in @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a Boolean formula with atoms of the form @xmath , @xmath ,
or @xmath , where @xmath . We call @xmath a @xmath -formula , and the
semi-algebraic set @xmath defined by @xmath , a @xmath -semi-algebraic
set .

If the Boolean formula @xmath contains no negations, and its atoms are
of the form @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath , with @xmath , then we call
@xmath a @xmath -closed formula , and the semi-algebraic set @xmath
defined by @xmath , a @xmath -closed semi-algebraic set .

For an element @xmath introduce

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A sign condition @xmath on @xmath is an element of @xmath . The
realization of the sign condition @xmath is the basic semi-algebraic set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

A sign condition @xmath is realizable if @xmath . We denote by @xmath
the set of realizable sign conditions on @xmath . For @xmath we define
the level of @xmath as the cardinality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each level @xmath , @xmath , we denote by @xmath the subset of
@xmath of elements of level @xmath . Furthermore, for a sign condition
@xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, for any family of homogeneous polynomials @xmath , we denote by
@xmath (resp., @xmath ) the set of common zeros of @xmath in the real
(resp., complex) projective space @xmath (resp., @xmath ) of dimension
@xmath .

#### 2.1.2. Infinitesimals

In Chapter 3 and 4 we will extend the ground field by infinitesimal
elements which are smaller than any positive element of . The
infinitesimals are used to deform our semi-algebraic sets such that we
get very similar semi-algebraic sets having some additional properties.

We denote by @xmath the real closed field of algebraic Puiseux series in
@xmath with coefficients in (see [ 20 ] for more details). The sign of a
Puiseux series in @xmath agrees with the sign of the coefficient of the
lowest degree term in @xmath . This induces a unique order on @xmath
which makes @xmath infinitesimal, i.e., @xmath is positive and smaller
than any positive element of . Given a semi-algebraic set @xmath in
@xmath , the extension of @xmath to @xmath , denoted @xmath , is the
semi-algebraic subset of @xmath defined by the same quantifier free
formula that defines @xmath . The set @xmath is well defined (i.e., it
only depends on the set @xmath and not on the quantifier free formula
chosen to describe it). This is an easy consequence of the
Tarski-Seidenberg principle (see for instance [ 20 ] ).

We will also need the following remark about extensions which is again a
consequence of the Tarski-Seidenberg transfer principle.

###### Remark 2.1.

Let @xmath be two closed and bounded semi-algebraic subsets of @xmath ,
and let @xmath be a real closed extension of . Then @xmath and @xmath
are semi-algebraically homotopy equivalent if and only if @xmath and
@xmath are semi-algebraically homotopy equivalent.

#### 2.1.3. Resultants and Subresultants

We recall next the notion of resultant and subresultant which will play
an important role in the cylindrical decomposition and its applications
(see Chapter 2.1.4 ). We will define them and recall some of their
properties which will be very helpful in our settings. But we will omit
the details on how to compute them. We refer to [ 20 ] for more details
on the algorithm. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to mention that
subresultants can be computed very efficiently in practice.

Let @xmath be a field. Let @xmath and @xmath be two polynomials in
@xmath of positive degree @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 in the case
@xmath , we replace @xmath by @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, we introduce the well-known Sylvester-Habicht matrix.

###### Definition 2.2 (Sylvester-Habicht matrix).

For @xmath , the @xmath -th Sylvester-Habicht matrix of @xmath and
@xmath , denoted by @xmath , is the matrix whose rows are
@xmath considered as vectors in the basis @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under these conditions, the resultant of two polynomials @xmath and
@xmath is defined as follows.

###### Definition 2.3 (Resultant).

The (univariate) resultant of @xmath and @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is
@xmath .

The signed subresultants of @xmath and @xmath will play a key role in
what follows. For any @xmath , the signed subresultant of @xmath and
@xmath of index @xmath is the polynomial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and each @xmath are elements of @xmath defined as
determinants of submatrices coming from @xmath (see [ 20 ] for a precise
definition). Note that @xmath .

We write @xmath (resp., @xmath ) for the @xmath -th subresultant (resp.,
resultant) of the polynomials @xmath , @xmath with respect to @xmath .
The @xmath -th signed subresultant coefficient of @xmath and @xmath ,
denoted by @xmath or @xmath , is the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath .

Next, we notice that one of the main characteristics of subresultants is
that they provide a very easy to use characterization of the greatest
common divisor of two polynomials (see [ 20 ] for a proof).

###### Theorem 2.4.

Let @xmath , @xmath be two polynomials of degree @xmath and @xmath .
Then the following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath and @xmath have a gcd of degree @xmath

2.  @xmath , @xmath

In this case, @xmath is the greatest common divisor of P and Q.

The following well-known theorem is very helpful.

###### Theorem 2.5 (The Extension Theorem).

Let @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and assume that @xmath , then either

1.  @xmath or @xmath vanish at @xmath , or

2.   there is a number @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath vanish at
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 35 ] . ∎

In other words, if we assume that @xmath and @xmath are in , i.e.,
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath -regular, and that @xmath and @xmath do not
have a common factor, then any solution @xmath of the equation @xmath
can be extended to a solution @xmath of the polynomials @xmath and
@xmath . Note that we always can ensure that the polynomials are @xmath
-regular by a change of coordinates. (see [ 83 ] for details). Moreover,
the common factor can be detected a priori by computing the greatest
common divisor of @xmath and @xmath .

The following proposition shows why resultants are very useful in our
setting (see, for instance, Chapter 2.1.4 and 5.2 ).

###### Proposition 2.6.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be three square-free and @xmath -regular
polynomials in @xmath such that two of them do not have a common factor.
Moreover, assume that the polynomials @xmath and @xmath do not have a
common factor, i.e. @xmath . Then the number of distinct roots of the
system

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is finite.

###### Proof.

By [ 35 ] , Chapter  3.6., Proposition 1, we know that @xmath is in the
elimination ideal @xmath . Therefore, by Proposition 2.5 , only the
solutions of the system

  ------- -- -------- --
  (2.1)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

can be extended to a solution of the equations ( 2.6 ). But there are
only finitely many such solutions since @xmath .

Hence, let @xmath be a solution of the equations ( 2.1 ). Then every
@xmath is not identically zero, as all of them are @xmath -regular. In
particular, they only have finitely many solutions. Now, the claim
follows. ∎

#### 2.1.4. The Cylindrical Decomposition

##### Definition

One basic ingredient in most algorithms for computing topological
properties of semi-algebraic sets is an algorithm due to Collins [ 33 ]
, called cylindrical decomposition, which decomposes a given
semi-algebraic set into topological balls. In this chapter, we recall
some facts about the cylindrical decomposition which can be turned into
an algorithm for solving several important problems. For instance,
computing the topology of planar curves (see Chapter 2.1.4 ), computing
the (real) intersection of quadratic surfaces (see Chapter 5.2 ), the
general decision problem or the quantifier elimination problem (see [ 20
] ). Moreover, cylindrical decomposition can be used to compute a
semi-algebraic triangulation of a semi-algebraic set (see Chapter 2.1.5
). For more details on the algorithm in the general case we refer to [
33 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 20 ] .

###### Definition 2.7.

A Cylindrical Decomposition of @xmath is a sequence @xmath , where, for
each @xmath , @xmath is a finite partition of @xmath into semi-algebraic
subsets ( cells of level i ), which satisfy the following properties:

-   Each cell @xmath is either a point or an open interval.

-   For every @xmath and every @xmath there are finitely many continuous
    semi-algebraic functions

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    such that the cylinder @xmath (also called a stack over the cell S )
    is a disjoint union of cells of @xmath which are:

    -   either the graph of one of the functions @xmath , for @xmath :

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

    -   or a band of the cylinder bounded from below and above by the
        graphs of the functions @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath , where
        we take @xmath and @xmath .

Note that a cylindrical decomposition has a recursive structure, i.e.,
the decomposition of @xmath induces a decomposition of @xmath and
vice-versa.

###### Definition 2.8.

Given a finite set @xmath of polynomials in @xmath , a subset @xmath of
@xmath is @xmath -invariant if every polynomial @xmath in @xmath has
constant sign on @xmath . A cylindrical decomposition of @xmath adapted
to @xmath is a cylindrical decomposition for which each cell in @xmath
is @xmath -invariant.

The following example illustrate the above definitions.

###### Example 2.9 (Decomposition adapted to the unit sphere).

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see Figure 2.1 ). The decomposition of (i.e., the line) consists of
five cells of level 1 corresponding to the points @xmath and @xmath and
the three intervals they define. The decomposition of @xmath (i.e., the
plane) consists of 13 cells of level 2. For instance, the two bands to
the left and right of the circle, the two cells corresponding to the
points @xmath and @xmath and the cell that corresponds to the set @xmath
. The decomposition of @xmath consists of 25 cells of level 3. For
instance, the two cells corresponding to the points @xmath and @xmath
and the cell that corresponds to the set @xmath . For a more detailed
description of this example see [ 20 ] , Shapter 5.1.

The Cylindrical Decomposition Algorithm ( [ 33 , 20 ] ) consists of two
phases: the projection and the lifting phase. During the projection
phase one eliminates the variables @xmath by iterative use of
(sub)-resultant computations. In the lifting phase the cells defined by
these (sub)-resultants are used to define inductively, starting with
@xmath , the cylindrical decomposition.

One disadvantage of the Cylindrical Decomposition Algorithm is that it
uses iterated projections (reducing the dimension by one in each step)
and the number of polynomials (as well as the degrees) square in each
step of the process. Thus, the complexity of performing cylindrical
decomposition is double-exponential in the number of variables which
makes it impractical in most cases for computing topological
information.

Nevertheless, we will see in the next chapters that it can be used quite
efficiently for several important problems in low dimensions.

##### Computing the Topology of Planer Curves

The simplest situation where the cylindrical decomposition method can be
performed is the case of one single non-zero bivariate polynomial @xmath
or a set of bivariate polynomials @xmath . In particular, we are
interested in the topology of the curve @xmath (resp., of @xmath ),
i.e., to determine a planar graph homeomorphic to @xmath (resp., @xmath
).

We consider planar algebraic curves being in generic position which we
define next.

###### Definition 2.10.

Two square-free bi-variate polynomials @xmath and @xmath are in generic
position with respect to the projection on the @xmath -axis if the
following conditions hold.

1.  @xmath ( @xmath -regular),

2.  @xmath ,

3.  for all @xmath the number of distinct (complex) roots of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is @xmath or @xmath .

In particular, a single bi-variate polynomial @xmath is called in
generic position with respect to @xmath (resp., generic position ) if
@xmath and @xmath are in generic position and, for @xmath , @xmath
(resp., @xmath ).

It is worthwhile to mention that it is always possible to put a set of
planar algebraic curves in generic position by a linear change of
coordinates and computing the gcd-free part of each polynomial.
Furthermore, two plane curves in generic position behalf nicely, i.e.,
their intersection points can be described using signed subresultant
computations.

The following proposition makes this precise.

###### Proposition 2.11.

Let @xmath , @xmath be two square-free polynomials in generic position.
If @xmath is an intersection point of @xmath and @xmath , then there
exists a unique @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the unique integer such that @xmath and @xmath . Then
@xmath is the greatest common divisor of the polynomials @xmath and
@xmath by Theorem 2.4 . Since @xmath and @xmath are in generic position,
there is only one intersection point of @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
-coordinate equal to @xmath . In particular, @xmath is the only root of
@xmath and hence @xmath . ∎

González-Vega and Necula presented an algorithm TOP [ 45 ] which
computes the topology of a plane curve. The TOP-algorithm takes a single
bi-variate polynomial @xmath as an input. While computing, it checks if
the polynomial @xmath is in generic position and performs a change of
coordinates until the polynomial is in generic position. The
TOP-algorithm outputs the topology of @xmath as described below (see
Algorithm 2.12 ).

For example, consider the curves given in Figure 2.2 . The polynomial
@xmath (defining the two ellipses) is in generic position with respect
to the polynomial @xmath (defining the dotted ellipse). The output of
the TOP-algorithm is as in Figure 2.3 .

After some slight modifications one can use this algorithm for the
following two problems, which might occur simultaneously.

1.  Computing the topology of a plane curve @xmath with respect to
    another plane curve @xmath , and

2.  computing the common roots of two plane curves.

Note that the proof presented in [ 45 ] can easily be adapted to those
two problems, but the modified algorithm detects for the first problem
whether or not the polynomial @xmath is in generic position with respect
to @xmath and for the second one if @xmath and @xmath are in generic
position.

For our example considered above the modified TOP-algorithm output is as
in Figure 2.4 . Note that @xmath additional points are computed.

Finally, we simply recall the in- and output of the TOP-algorithm which
we later will use as a black-box in Chapter 5.2 , and we refer the
reader to [ 45 , 20 ] for more details.

###### Algorithm 2.12 (Top).

Input: a square-free polynomial @xmath .
Output: the topology of the curve @xmath , described by

-   The real roots @xmath of @xmath . We set by @xmath , @xmath .

-   The number @xmath of roots of @xmath in when @xmath varies on @xmath
    .

-   The number @xmath of roots of @xmath in . We denote these roots by
    @xmath .

-   A number @xmath such that if @xmath is the unique critical point of
    the projection of @xmath on the @xmath -axis above @xmath , @xmath .

##### Cell Adjacency

An important piece of information that we require from the cylindrical
decomposition algorithm is that of cell adjacency. In other words, we
need to know given two cells in a set @xmath , whether the closure of
one intersects the other. In Example 2.9 , for instance, we have that
the cell corresponding to the point @xmath is adjacent to the cell
@xmath .

We need the following notation. We distinguish between the inter-stack
cell adjacency of level @xmath , which is the adjacency of cells of
level @xmath in two different stacks, and the intra-stack cell adjacency
of level @xmath , which is the adjacency of cells of level @xmath within
the same stack.

Moreover, we use the following intuitive labeling of cells.

-   A cell in , i.e., a cell in the induced decomposition (line) of the
    induced decomposition (plane), is denoted by @xmath , where the
    @xmath ranges over the number of cells in the induced decomposition
    of . Note that @xmath if and only if the cell @xmath “occurs to the
    left” of the cell @xmath .

-   A cell in @xmath , i.e., a cell in the induced decomposition of the
    plane, is denoted by @xmath , where @xmath ranges over the number of
    cells in the line and the @xmath ranges over the number of cells in
    the stack over the cell @xmath . Note that @xmath if and only if the
    cell @xmath “occurs lower in the plane” than the cell @xmath .

-   A cell in @xmath is denoted by @xmath , where @xmath is a cell in
    the induced decomposition of the plane and the @xmath ranges over
    the number of cells in the stack over the cell @xmath . Note that
    @xmath if and only if the cell @xmath “occurs lower” than the cell
    @xmath .

Furthermore, we distinguish among 0-cells, 1-cells, 2-cells and 3-cells
of the cylindrical decomposition, that are points, graphs and cylinders
bounded below and above by graphs. The adjacency between a @xmath -cell
and @xmath -cell will be denoted by @xmath -adjacency .

We illustrate the above notation on Example 2.9 (Decomposition adapted
to the unit sphere).

###### Example 2.13 (cont.).

For instance, the cell @xmath and @xmath correspond to the points @xmath
and @xmath (in the line), whereas the cells @xmath and @xmath correspond
the point @xmath and the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, the cell @xmath corresponds to the point @xmath and the cell
@xmath corresponds to the set @xmath .

While there are algorithms known for computing the cell adjacencies of a
cylindrical decomposition of @xmath (see ( [ 3 , 4 ] ), we will only be
interested in the cell adjacencies for a cylindrical decomposition
adapted to family @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath is @xmath -regular
for every polynomial @xmath .

It is worthwhile to mention that we do not need to compute all cell
adjacencies. In our applications (see Chapter 5 ) it suffices to compute
the @xmath -inter-stack adjacencies which we can do by a simple
combinatorial type approach. In other words, we determine the full
adjacency information for the boundary of the semi-algebraic set by
using the simpler structure induced by the quadratic polynomials which
we describe next.

Assume that the @xmath -cell @xmath and the @xmath -cell @xmath are
adjacent in the induced decomposition of the plane. To be more precise,
the @xmath -cell @xmath and the @xmath -cell @xmath correspond to a
point and a curve segment of @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are two
input quadratic polynomials that are @xmath -regular. We have the
following two cases:

Case 1: The stack over the 0-cell @xmath contains exactly one 0-cell
@xmath . Note, that the stack over 1-cell @xmath must contain two @xmath
-cells @xmath and @xmath (corresponding to graphs), since the polynomial
@xmath is of degree equal to @xmath in the variable @xmath . Therefore,
the 0-cell @xmath must be adjacent to both cells @xmath and @xmath ,
since the semi-algebraic set @xmath is closed.

Case 2: The stack over the 0-cell @xmath contains two @xmath -cells
@xmath and @xmath . As above, the stack over the @xmath -cell @xmath
must contain two @xmath -cells @xmath and @xmath . Remember that both
stacks are ordered from the bottom to the top. Hence, the cells @xmath
and @xmath as well as the cells @xmath and @xmath must be adjacent for
the same reason as above. It is worthwhile to mention that is not
possible to have just one @xmath -cell above @xmath , i.e., @xmath , by
the properties of the cylindrical decomposition.

#### 2.1.5. Triangulation of Semi-algebraic Sets

Another important property of closed and bounded semi-algebraic sets is
that they are homeomorphic to a simplicial complex. The following makes
this statement precise.

Let @xmath be points of @xmath that are affinely independent. The @xmath
- simplex with vertices @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the dimension of @xmath is @xmath .

An @xmath - face of the @xmath -simplex @xmath is any simplex @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The open simplex, denoted by @xmath , corresponding to a simplex @xmath
consists of all points of @xmath which do not belong to any proper face
of s:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simplicial complex in @xmath is a finite set of simplices in @xmath
such that @xmath implies

-   every face of @xmath is in ,

-   @xmath is a common face of both @xmath and @xmath .

A triangulation of a semi-algebraic set @xmath is a simplicial complex
@xmath together with a semi-algebraic homeomorphism @xmath , where the
set @xmath is the realization of .

A triangulation of @xmath respecting a finite family of semi-algebraic
sets @xmath contained in @xmath is a triangulation @xmath such that each
@xmath is the union of images by @xmath of open simplices of .

We have the following theorem.

###### Theorem 2.14.

Let @xmath be a closed and bounded semi-algebraic set, and let @xmath be
semi-algebraic subsets of @xmath . There exists a triangulation of
@xmath respecting @xmath . Moreover, the vertices of can be chosen with
rational coefficients.

###### Proof.

See [ 20 ] ∎

For example, let @xmath be a closed and bounded subset of @xmath such
that @xmath . Then Theorem 2.14 implies that there is a triangulation
@xmath of @xmath such that for every simplex @xmath and @xmath either
@xmath or @xmath .

Finally, note that one can compute a triangulation of a closed and
bounded semi-algebraic set using the cylindrical decomposition which
decomposes a given semi-algebraic set into double exponential number (in
the dimension) of topological balls.

#### 2.1.6. Triviality of Semi-algebraic Mappings

The finiteness of the topological types of algebraic subsets of @xmath
defined by polynomials of fixed degree is an easy consequence of Hardt’s
triviality theorem, which we recall next.

###### Theorem 2.15 (Hardt’s triviality theorem [49, 20]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be semi-algebraic sets. Given a continuos
semi-algebraic function @xmath , there exists a finite partition of
@xmath into semi-algebraic sets @xmath , so that for each @xmath and any
@xmath , @xmath is semi-algebraically homeomorphic to @xmath .

Hardt’s theorem is a corollary of the existence of cylindrical
decompositions (see Chapter 2.1.4 ), which implies a double exponential
(in @xmath ) upper bound on the cardinality of the set @xmath .
Moreover, it follows that one can always retract a closed semi-algebraic
set to a closed and bounded set. The following proposition makes this
precise.

###### Proposition 2.16 (Conic structure at infinity).

Let @xmath be a closed semi-algebraic set. There exists @xmath , @xmath
, such that for every @xmath , @xmath , there is a semi-algebraic
deformation retraction from @xmath to @xmath and a semi-algebraic
deformation retraction from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 20 ] , Proposition 5.49. ∎

### 2.2. Algebraic Topology

#### 2.2.1. Some Notations

In this chapter we recall the basic objects from algebraic topology like
homology and co-homology theory. Unless otherwise noted, we will
consider vector spaces over @xmath in what follows next.

Given a simplicial complex , we denote by @xmath the vector space
generated by the @xmath -dimensional oriented simplices of . The
elements of @xmath are called the @xmath -chains of . For @xmath , we
define @xmath .

Given an oriented @xmath -simplex @xmath , @xmath , the boundary of
@xmath is the @xmath -chain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath means that the @xmath is omitted. For @xmath , we define
@xmath . The map @xmath extends linearly to a homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we have the following sequence of vector space homomorphism with
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sequence of pairs @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is called the
simplicial chain complex .

We denote by @xmath the @xmath -th simplicial homology group of , that
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the subspace of @xmath -cycles , and @xmath is the
subspace of @xmath -boundaries .

Note that @xmath is a finite dimensional vector space. The dimension of
@xmath as a vector space is called the @xmath -th Betti number of and
denoted by @xmath . We will denote by @xmath the sum @xmath .

Next, we define the dual notion of cohomology groups.

We denote by @xmath the vector space dual to @xmath , and by @xmath the
co-boundary map @xmath which is the homomorphism dual to @xmath in the
simplicial chain complex @xmath . More precisely, given @xmath , and a
@xmath -simplex @xmath of , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we have the following sequence of (dual) vector space
homomorphism,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The sequence of pairs @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is
called the simplicial cochain complex .

We denote by @xmath the @xmath -th simplicial cohomology group of , that
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the subspace of @xmath -cocycles , and @xmath is the
subspace of @xmath -coboundaries .

Note that @xmath is a finite dimensional vector space and its dimension
as a vector space is equal to @xmath . To be more precise, we have by
the Universal Coefficient Theorem for cohomology (see [ 51 ] ,
Theorem 3.2, page 195) that @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic for every
@xmath . Moreover, the cohomology group @xmath can be identified with
the vector space of locally constant functions on @xmath (see [ 20 ] ,
Proposition 6.5).

Next, we define simplicial (co)-homology groups for a closed
semi-algebraic set. Let @xmath be a closed semi-algebraic set. By
Proposition 2.16 (Conic structure at infinity), there exists @xmath ,
@xmath , such that for every @xmath , @xmath , there is a semi-algebraic
deformation from @xmath to @xmath and a semi-algebraic deformation from
@xmath to @xmath . Note that the set @xmath is closed and bounded. By
Theorem 2.14 , the set @xmath can be triangulated by a simplicial
complex with rational coordinates. Choose a semi-algebraic triangulation
@xmath , then for @xmath the homology groups @xmath are @xmath (resp.,
cohomology groups @xmath are @xmath ). Note that the (co)-homology
groups do not depend on the particular triangulation. The dimension of
@xmath as a vector space is called the @xmath -th Betti number of @xmath
and denoted by @xmath . We will denote by @xmath the sum @xmath .

For completeness we now consider a basic locally closed semi-algebraic
set @xmath which is, by definition, the intersection of a closed
semi-algebraic set with a basic open one. Let @xmath be the (one point)
Alexandroff compactification of @xmath . Then the dimension of @xmath as
a vector space is called the @xmath -th Betti number of @xmath and
denoted by @xmath . This definition is well-defined since the
Alexandroff compactification @xmath of @xmath is closed, bounded, unique
(up to semi-algebraic homeomorphism) and semi-algebraically homeomorphic
to @xmath . We will denote by @xmath the sum @xmath . Note that the
homology groups of a semi-algebraic set @xmath are finitely generated.
Hence, the Betti numbers @xmath are finite.

We illustrate Betti numbers with the following example.

###### Example 2.17.

Let @xmath be the hollow torus in @xmath (see Figure 2.5 ), then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Intuitively, @xmath measures the number of @xmath -dimensional holes in
the set @xmath . The zero-th Betti number, @xmath , is the number of
connected components.

Similarly, one can define @xmath , the @xmath -th Betti number with
coefficients in @xmath , as the @xmath -vector space dimension of @xmath
. We denote by @xmath the sum @xmath .

It follows from the Universal Coefficients Theorem, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see [ 51 ] , Corollary 3.A6 (b)).

Hence, any bounds proved for Betti numbers with @xmath -coefficients
also apply to the ordinary Betti numbers (with coefficients in @xmath ).

#### 2.2.2. The Mayer-Vietoris Theorem

We have seen in Chapter 2.1.4 that we can use the cylindrical
decomposition in order to decompose a semi-algebraic set into smaller
pieces. The Mayer-Vietoris inequalities (see Proposition 2.19 ) bound
the Betti numbers of the union (resp., intersection) of semi-algebraic
sets in terms of intersections (resp., unions) of fewer semi-algebraic
sets. This will be very useful in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 . We first
recall a semi-algebraic version of the Mayer-Vietoris theorem.

###### Theorem 2.18 (Semi-algebraic Mayer-Vietoris).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two closed and bounded semi-algebraic subsets
of @xmath . Then there is a long exact sequence.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By Theorem 2.14 there is a triangulation of @xmath that is
simultaneously a triangulation of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Let
@xmath be the simplicial complex corresponding to @xmath . Then there is
a a short exact sequence of simplicial chain complexes,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The claim follows by a standard argument about short and long exact
sequences (see [ 20 ] , Lemma 6.10). ∎

From the exactness of the Mayer-Vieotoris sequence, we have the
following proposition.

###### Proposition 2.19 (Mayer-Vietoris inequalities).

Let be @xmath subsets of @xmath be all open or all closed. Then for each
@xmath we have,

  ------- -- -------- --
  (2.2)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

and

  ------- -- -------- --
  (2.3)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Follows from [ 20 ] , Proposition 7.33. ∎

The following proposition characterizes @xmath and @xmath in a special
case of unions of simplicial complexes. It is a slightly strengthened
version of a similar proposition appearing in [ 21 , 20 ] . We do not
require that the complexes @xmath be acyclic, but only that their first
co-homology group vanishes. We need the following notations.

Let @xmath be sub-complexes of a finite simplicial complex @xmath such
that

-   each @xmath is connected, i.e., @xmath ,

-   @xmath , and

-   @xmath , @xmath .

Note that the intersections of any number of the sub-complexes, @xmath ,
is again a sub-complex of @xmath . We will denote by @xmath the
sub-complex @xmath , and by @xmath the sub-complex @xmath .

Recall that @xmath can be identified as the vector space of locally
constant functions on the simplicial complex . Hence, we can define the
following sequence of generalized restriction homomorphisms.

Let @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now are able to state our proposition.

###### Proposition 2.20.

Let @xmath be sub-complexes of a finite simplicial complex @xmath such
that @xmath and for each @xmath ,

1.  @xmath , and

2.  @xmath .

Let the homomorphisms @xmath and @xmath in the following sequence be
defined as above.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then,

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

Follows from [ 20 ] , Theorem 6.9. ∎

###### Remark 2.21.

One could use the so-called generalized Mayer-Vietoris sequence and some
spectral sequence argument in order to prove Proposition 2.20 . We refer
to [ 10 , 15 ] for more details.

#### 2.2.3. Smith Theory

In Chapter 3 we will reduce the problem of bounding the Betti numbers of
a semi-algebraic set to the problem of bounding the Betti numbers of
some real projective algebraic sets. Using the Smith inequality (see
Theorem 2.22 below) allows us to relate the Betti numbers of these real
projective algebraic sets to the corresponding complex projective
algebraic sets. As we will see in Chapter 2.3.2 , we have precise
information about the corresponding complex projective algebraic set.
Before we recall a version of the Smith inequality, we need the
following.

Let @xmath be a compact topological space and @xmath an involution. We
regard @xmath as a @xmath -space, where @xmath . We denote by @xmath the
orbit space, and by @xmath , the fixed point set of the involution
@xmath . Moreover, we identify @xmath with its image in @xmath .

Then there are two exact sequences, called (homology and cohomology)
Smith sequences of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We refer the reader to [ 78 ] , p. 131, for more details.

Next, we state a version of the Smith inequality which follows from the
exactness of the Smith sequence. We consider the special case where
@xmath is a complex projective algebraic set defined by real forms, with
the involution taken to be complex conjugation. Then we have the
following theorem.

###### Theorem 2.22 (Smith inequality).

Let @xmath be a family of homogeneous polynomials. Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.2.4. Alexander Duality

In Chapter 3 , we also use the well-known Alexander duality theorem
which relates the Betti numbers of a compact subset of a sphere to those
of its complement.

###### Theorem 2.23 (Alexander Duality).

Let @xmath . For any closed subset @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , denotes the reduced cohomology group of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 62 ] , Theorem 6.6. ∎

#### 2.2.5. The Betti Numbers of a Double Cover

Let @xmath be a topological space. A covering space of @xmath is a space
@xmath together with a continuous surjective map @xmath , such that for
every @xmath there exists an open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath such
that @xmath is a disjoint union of open sets in @xmath each of which is
mapped homeomorphically onto @xmath by @xmath . In particular, if for
every @xmath the fiber @xmath has two elements, we speak of a double
cover .

The following proposition relates the Betti numbers (with @xmath
coefficients) of a finite simplicial complex to its double cover. Note
that the proposition is no longer true for Betti numbers (with @xmath
-coefficients). A simple counterexample is provided by the @xmath -torus
which is a double cover of the Klein bottle, for which the stated
inequality is not true for @xmath for Betti numbers (with @xmath
-coefficients).

###### Proposition 2.24.

Let @xmath be a finite simplicial complex and @xmath a double cover of
@xmath . Then for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the chain map sending each simplex of @xmath to the sum of its
two preimages in @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the chain map induced by the covering map @xmath .

It is an easy exercise to check that the following sequence is exact,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The corresponding long exact sequence in homology,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives the required inequality. ∎

###### Remark 2.25.

The above proof is due to Michel Coste.

#### 2.2.6. The Betti Numbers of a Projection

The following proposition gives a bound on the Betti numbers of the
projection @xmath of a closed and bounded semi-algebraic set @xmath in
terms of the number and degrees of polynomials defining @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.26 ([43]).

Let be a real closed field and let @xmath be the projection map on to
last @xmath co-ordinates. Let @xmath be a closed and bounded
semi-algebraic set defined by a Boolean formula with @xmath distinct
polynomials of degrees not exceeding @xmath . Then the @xmath -th Betti
number of the projection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

See [ 43 ] . ∎

#### 2.2.7. The Smale-Vietoris Theorem

In Chapter 4 we also need the following version of the well-known
Smale-Vietoris Theorem [ 71 ] .

###### Theorem 2.27 ([71]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be closed and bounded semi-algebraic sets, and
@xmath a continuous semi-algebraic map such that @xmath is contractible
for every @xmath . Then the map @xmath is a homotopy equivalence.

#### 2.2.8. Stable homotopy equivalence and Spanier-Whitehead duality

For any finite CW-complex @xmath we will denote by @xmath the suspension
of @xmath , which is the quotient of @xmath by collapsing @xmath to one
point and @xmath to another point.

Recall from [ 72 ] that for two finite CW-complexes @xmath and @xmath ,
an element of

  ------- -- -------- --
  (2.4)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

is called an S-map (or map in the suspension category ). (When the
context is clear we will sometime denote an S-map @xmath by @xmath ).

###### Definition 2.28.

An S-map @xmath is an S-equivalence (also called a stable homotopy
equivalence ) if it admits an inverse @xmath . In this case we say that
@xmath and @xmath are stable homotopy equivalent .

If @xmath is an S-map, then @xmath induces a homomorphism,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following theorem characterizes stable homotopy equivalence in terms
of homology.

###### Theorem 2.29.

[ 73 ] Let @xmath and @xmath be two finite CW-complexes. Then @xmath and
@xmath are stable homotopy equivalent if and only if there exists an
S-map @xmath which induces isomorphisms @xmath (see [ 36 ] , pp. 604)
for all @xmath .

In order to compare the complements of closed and bounded semi-algebraic
sets which are homotopy equivalent, we will use the duality theory due
to Spanier and Whitehead [ 72 ] . We will need the following facts about
Spanier-Whitehead duality (see [ 36 ] , pp. 603 for more details). Let
@xmath be a finite CW-complex. Then there exists a dual complex, denoted
@xmath . The dual complex @xmath is defined only upto S-equivalence. In
particular, any deformation retract of @xmath represents @xmath .
Moreover, the functor @xmath has the following property. If @xmath is
another finite CW-complex, and the S-map represented by @xmath is a
stable homotopy equivalence, then there exists a stable homotopy
equivalence @xmath . Moreover, if the map @xmath is an inclusion, then
the dual S-map @xmath is also represented by a corresponding inclusion.

###### Remark 2.30.

Note that, since Spanier-Whitehead duality theory deals only with finite
polyhedra over @xmath , it extends without difficulty to general real
closed fields using the Tarski-Seidenberg transfer principle.

#### 2.2.9. Homotopy colimits

Let @xmath , where each @xmath is a sub-complex of a finite CW-complex.

Let @xmath denote the standard simplex of dimension @xmath with vertices
in @xmath . For @xmath , we denote by @xmath the @xmath -dimensional
face of @xmath corresponding to @xmath , and by @xmath the CW-complex
@xmath .

The homotopy colimit, @xmath , is a CW-complex defined as follows.

###### Definition 2.31.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the equivalence relation @xmath is defined as follows.

For @xmath , let @xmath denote the inclusion map of the face @xmath in
@xmath , and let @xmath denote the inclusion map of @xmath in @xmath .

Given @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath if and only if @xmath
and @xmath .

We have a obvious map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

sending @xmath . It is a consequence of the Smale-Vietoris theorem (see
Theorem LABEL:Smale-Vietoris ) that

###### Lemma 2.32.

The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a homotopy equivalence.

Now let @xmath (resp. @xmath ) be a set of sub-complexes of a finite
CW-complex. For each @xmath let @xmath be a stable homotopy equivalence,
having the property that for each @xmath , @xmath . Then we have an
induced S-map, @xmath , and we have that

###### Lemma 2.33.

The induced S-map @xmath is a stable homotopy equivalence.

###### Proof.

Using the Mayer-Vietoris exact sequence it is easy to see that if the
@xmath ’s induce isomorphisms in homology, so does the map @xmath . Now
apply Theorem 2.29 . ∎

### 2.3. The Topology of Algebraic and Semi-Algbraic Sets

#### 2.3.1. Bounds on the Topology of Semi-Algebraic Sets

The initial result on bounding the Betti numbers of semi-algebraic sets
defined by polynomial inequalities was proved independently by Oleinik
and Petrovskii [ 65 ] , Thom [ 76 ] and Milnor [ 63 ] . They proved:

###### Theorem 2.34.

[ 65 , 76 , 63 ] Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , @xmath and let @xmath be the set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that the theorem includes the case where the set @xmath is a real
algebraic set. Moreover, the above bound is exponential in @xmath and
this exponential dependence is unavoidable (see Example 2.35 below).
Recently, the above bound was extended to more general classes of
semi-algebraic sets. For example, Basu [ 11 ] improved the bound of the
individual Betti numbers of @xmath -closed semi-algebraic sets while
Gabrielov and Vorobjov [ 44 ] extended the above bound to any @xmath
-semi-algebraic set. They proved a bound of @xmath . Moreover, Basu,
Pollack and Roy [ 19 ] proved a similar bound for the individual Betti
numbers of the realizations of sign conditions.

###### Example 2.35.

The set @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has @xmath .

However, it turns out that for a semi-algebraic set @xmath defined by
@xmath quadratic inequalities, it is possible to obtain upper bounds on
the Betti numbers of @xmath which are polynomial in @xmath and
exponential only in @xmath . The first such result was proved by
Barvinok who proved the following theorem.

###### Theorem 2.36.

[ 9 ] Let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Then, @xmath .

Theorem 2.36 is proved using a duality argument that interchanges the
roles of @xmath and @xmath , and reduces the original problem to that of
bounding the Betti numbers of a semi-algebraic set in @xmath defined by
@xmath polynomials of degree at most @xmath . One can then use Theorem
2.34 to obtain a bound of @xmath . The constant hidden in the exponent
of the above bound is at least two. Also, the bound in Theorem 2.36 is
polynomial in @xmath but exponential in @xmath . The exponential
dependence on @xmath is unavoidable as remarked in [ 9 ] , but the
implied constant (which is at least two) in the exponent of Barvinok’s
bound is not optimal.

Using Barvinok’s result, as well as inequalities derived from the
Mayer-Vietoris sequence, Basu proved a polynomial bound (polynomial both
in @xmath and @xmath ) on the top few Betti numbers of a set defined by
quadratic inequalities. More precisely, he proved the following theorem.

###### Theorem 2.37.

[ 11 ] Let @xmath and let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that for fixed @xmath , the bound in Theorem 2.37 is polynomial
in both @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.3.2. Bounds on the Topology of Complex Algebraic Sets

By separating the real and imaginary parts one can consider a complex
algebraic set @xmath as a real algebraic subset of @xmath .
Unfortunately, real and complex algebraic sets do not have the same
properties. To be more precise, an irreducible algebraic subset of
@xmath having complex dimension @xmath , considered as an algebraic
subset of @xmath is connected, not bounded (unless it is a point) and
has local real dimension @xmath at every point (see, for instance, [ 27
] ). But this is no longer true for real algebraic sets as we will see
in the following examples.

###### Example 2.38 ([27]).

1.  The circle @xmath is bounded.

2.  The cubic curve @xmath has an isolated point at the origin.

However, in Chapter 3 we will show how to reduce the problem of bounding
the Betti numbers of a real algebraic set to the problem of bounding the
Betti numbers of a complex projective algebraic set involving the same
polynomials. Moreover, this complex projective algebraic set will have
the property that is a non-singular complete intersection, which we
define next.

###### Definition 2.39.

A projective algebraic set @xmath of codimension @xmath is a
non-singular complete intersection if it is the intersection of @xmath
non-singular hypersurfaces in @xmath that meet transversally at each
point of the intersection.

Next, we recall some results about the Betti numbers of a complex
projective algebraic set which is a non-singular complete intersection.
We need the following notation.

Fix a @xmath -tuple of natural numbers @xmath . Let @xmath , such that
the degree of @xmath is @xmath , denote a complex projective algebraic
set of codimension @xmath which is a non-singular complete intersection.

Let @xmath denote the sum of the Betti numbers with @xmath coefficients
of @xmath . This is well defined since the Betti numbers only depend
only on the degree sequence and not on the specific @xmath (see, for
instance, [ 41 ] ).

The function @xmath satisfies the following (see [ 26 ] ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the special case when each @xmath , we denote by @xmath . We then
have the following recurrence for @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, we show some properties of @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.40.

1.  @xmath and @xmath .

2.   For @xmath , @xmath .

3.   For @xmath and @xmath odd, @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first part is shown by two easy computations and noting that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, we can assume that the statements are true for @xmath and that
@xmath . Note that for the special case @xmath , we have that @xmath
since @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and, for @xmath odd,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

Hence, we get the following bound for @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.41.

1.  

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath , for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Follows from Lemma 2.40 . ∎

#### 2.3.3. Bounds on the Topology of Parametrized Semi-algebraic Sets

Let @xmath be the projection map on the last @xmath co-ordinates, and
for any @xmath we will denote by @xmath the restriction of @xmath to
@xmath . Moreover, when the map @xmath is clear from context, for any
@xmath we will denote by @xmath the fiber @xmath . One way to interpret
this setting is that the set @xmath depends on @xmath parameters and
@xmath is the projection onto the parameter space.

Hardt’s triviality theorem (see Theorem 2.15 ) implies that there exists
a semi-algebraic partition @xmath of @xmath having the following
property. For each @xmath and any point @xmath , the pre-image @xmath is
semi-algebraically homeomorphic to @xmath by a fiber preserving
homeomorphism. In particular, for each @xmath , all fibers @xmath ,
@xmath are semi-algebraically homeomorphic.

As mentioned in Chapter 2.1.6 the existence of cylindrical
decompositions implies a double exponential (in @xmath and @xmath )
upper bound on the cardinality of @xmath and, hence, on the number of
homeomorphism types of the fibers of the map @xmath . No better bounds
than the double exponential bound are known, even though it seems
reasonable to conjecture a single exponential upper bound on the number
of homeomorphism types of the fibers of the map @xmath .

In [ 22 ] , Basu and Vorobjov considered the weaker problem of bounding
the number of distinct homotopy types occurring amongst the set of all
fibers of @xmath , and they proved a single exponential upper bound (in
@xmath and @xmath ) on the number of homotopy types of such fibers.

They proved the following theorem.

###### Theorem 2.42.

[ 22 ] Let @xmath , with @xmath for each @xmath and cardinality @xmath .
Then there exists a finite set @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for every @xmath , there exists @xmath such that for every
@xmath -semi-algebraic set @xmath , the set @xmath is semi-algebraically
homotopy equivalent to @xmath . In particular, for any fixed @xmath
-semi-algebraic set @xmath , the number of different homotopy types of
fibers @xmath for various @xmath is also bounded by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that the bound in Theorem 2.42 is single exponential in @xmath .
The following example, which also appears in [ 22 ] , shows that the
single exponential dependence on @xmath is unavoidable.

###### Example 2.43.

Let @xmath be the polynomial defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The algebraic set defined by @xmath in @xmath with coordinates @xmath ,
consists of @xmath lines all parallel to the @xmath axis. Consider now
the semi-algebraic set @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to verify that, if @xmath is the projection map on the @xmath
co-ordinate, then the fibers @xmath , for @xmath are 0-dimensional and
of different cardinality, and hence have different homotopy types.

#### 2.3.4. Some Useful Constructions

In this chapter, we recall some very useful constructions for
semi-algebraic subsets of @xmath which are well-known in real algebraic
geometry.

Let @xmath with @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be the basic semi-algebraic
set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be an infinitesimal, and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the basic semi-algebraic set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 2.44.

The bounded set @xmath and the set @xmath are homotopy equivalent.
Moreover, the homology groups of the @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic.

###### Proof.

It follows from Proposition 2.16 (Conic structure at infinity) that the
semi-algebraic set @xmath has the same homotopy type as @xmath . The
claim now follows since one can extend any triangulation over to a
triangulation over @xmath . ∎

Let @xmath be the basic semi-algebraic set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 2.45.

For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Note that @xmath is bounded by Proposition 2.44 and @xmath is the
projection from the origin of the set @xmath onto the unit sphere @xmath
in @xmath . Since @xmath is bounded, the projection does not intersect
the equator and consists of two disjoint copies (each homeomorphic to
the set @xmath ) in the upper and lower hemispheres. ∎

## Chapter 3 Bounding the Betti Numbers

### 3.1. Results

We prove the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.1.

[ 17 ] Let @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Then, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a consequence of Theorem 3.1 we get a new bound on the sum of the
Betti numbers, which we state for the sake of completeness.

###### Corollary 3.2.

Let @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.3.

The technique used in this chapter was proposed as a possible
alternative method by Barvinok in [ 9 ] , who did not pursue this
further in that paper. Also, Benedetti, Loeser, and Risler [ 26 ] used a
similar technique for proving upper bounds on the number of connected
components of real algebraic sets in @xmath defined by polynomials of
degrees bounded by @xmath . However, these bounds (unlike the bounds we
obtain) are exponential in @xmath . Finally, there exists another
possible method for bounding the Betti numbers of semi-algebraic sets
defined by quadratic inequalities, using a spectral sequence argument
due to Agrachev [ 1 ] . However, this method also produces a non-optimal
bound of the form @xmath (similar to Barvinok’s bound) where the
constant in the exponent is at least two. We omit the details of this
argument referring the reader to [ 13 ] for an indication of the proof
(where the case of computing, and as a result, bounding the
Euler-Poincaré characteristics of such sets is worked out in full
details).

### 3.2. Proof Strategy

Our strategy for proving Theorem 3.1 is as follows. Using certain
infinitesimal deformations we first reduce the problem to bounding the
Betti numbers of another closed and bounded semi-algebraic set defined
by a new family of quadratic polynomials. We then use inequalities
obtained from the Mayer-Vietoris exact sequence to further reduce the
problem of bounding the Betti numbers of this new semi-algebraic set to
the problem of bounding the Betti numbers of the real projective
algebraic sets defined by each @xmath -tuple, @xmath , of the new
polynomials. The new family of polynomials also has the property that
the complex projective algebraic set defined by each @xmath -tuple,
@xmath , of these polynomials is a non-singular complete intersection.
According to Theorem 2.41 we have precise information about the Betti
numbers of these complex complete intersections. An application of the
Smith inequality (see Theorem 2.22 ) then allows us to obtain bounds on
the Betti numbers of the real parts of these algebraic sets and, as a
result, on the Betti numbers of the original semi-algebraic set.

### 3.3. Constructing Non-singular Complete Intersections

In Chapter 2.3.2 we introduced the notion of a projective complex
algebraic set which is a non-singular complete intersection (see
Definition 2.39 ). Next, we show the existence of such a set and how to
obtain a non-singular complete intersection from a given algebraic set
in complex projective space.

###### Proposition 3.4.

There exists a family @xmath of positive definite quadratic forms such
that @xmath is a non-singular complete intersection for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall that the set of positive definite quadratic forms is open in the
set of quadratic forms over . Moreover, any real closed field contains
the real closure of @xmath . Thus, we can choose a family @xmath of
positive definite quadratic forms such that their coefficients are
algebraically independent over @xmath . It follows by Bertini’s Theorem
(see [ 50 ] , Theorem 17.16) that @xmath , @xmath , is a non-singular
complete intersection. ∎

The following proposition allows us to replace a family of real
quadratic forms by another family obtained by infinitesimal
perturbations of the original family and whose zero sets are
non-singular complete intersections in complex projective space.

###### Proposition 3.5.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a set of quadratic forms and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a family of positive definite quadratic forms such that @xmath is a
non-singular complete intersection for every @xmath .

Let @xmath be infinitesimals, and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a non-singular complete intersection.

###### Proof.

Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , and let @xmath be defined by,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, @xmath contains @xmath . Moreover, since being a non-singular
complete intersection is a stable condition, @xmath must contain an open
neighborhood of @xmath in and so must @xmath . Finally, the set @xmath
is constructible, since it can be defined by a first order formula.
Since a constructible subset of is either finite or the complement of a
finite set (see for instance, [ 19 ] , Corollary 1.25), @xmath must
contain an interval @xmath . Hence, its extension to @xmath contains
@xmath . ∎

### 3.4. Proof of Theorem 3.1

Before we prove Theorem 3.1 , we need what follows next:

Let @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be the basic
semi-algebraic set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be infinitesimals, and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the basic semi-algebraic set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The homology groups of @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic by Proposition
2.44 . Moreover, the set @xmath is bounded.

Let @xmath be the basic semi-algebraic set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Lemma 2.45 .

We now fix a family of polynomials that will be useful in what follows.
By Proposition 3.4 we can choose a family @xmath of positive definite
quadratic forms such that @xmath is a non-singular complete intersection
for every @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath (resp., @xmath ) be the basic
semi-algebraic set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively.

Also, let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.6.

We have,

1.   the homology groups of @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic,

2.   the homology groups of @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic,

3.   for all @xmath ,
    @xmath is a non-singular complete intersection, and

4.   for all @xmath ,
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

For the first part note that the sets @xmath and @xmath have the same
homotopy type using  Lemma 16.17 in [ 20 ] .

The second part is clear since we have a retraction from @xmath to
@xmath .

The third part follows from Proposition 3.5 .

For the last part, let @xmath be the double cover obtained by
identifying antipodal points. Then the restriction of @xmath to @xmath
gives a double cover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now apply Proposition 2.24 . ∎

###### Proposition 3.7.

For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

First note that by Lemma 3.6 ( 3 ) @xmath is a complete intersection for
all @xmath . For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the first inequality is a consequence of the fact that, @xmath is
an open subset of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and disconnected from its complement in @xmath , and the last inequality
follows from Theorem 2.23 (Alexander Duality).

It follows from Proposition 2.19 ( 2.2 ), Lemma 3.6 ( 4 ) and Theorem
2.22 (Smith inequality) that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that for @xmath the number of possible @xmath -ary intersections is
equal to @xmath and using Theorem 2.41 , we conclude

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

We are now in a position to prove Theorem 3.1 .

###### Proof of Theorem 3.1.

It follows from the Universal Coefficients Theorem (see [ 51 ] ,
Corollary 3.A6 (b)), that @xmath . We have by Lemma 3.6 that the
homology groups (with @xmath coefficients) of @xmath and @xmath are
isomorphic. Moreover @xmath , for @xmath , by Proposition 2.44 and Lemma
2.45 . Hence, the first inequality follows from Proposition 3.7 .

The second inequality follows from an easy computation. ∎

## Chapter 4 Bounding the Number of Homotopy Types

### 4.1. Result

We prove the following theorem.

###### Theorem 4.1.

[ 16 ] Let be a real closed field and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Let @xmath be the projection on the last @xmath
co-ordinates. Then for any @xmath -closed semi-algebraic set @xmath ,
the number of stable homotopy types (see Definition 2.28 ) amongst the
fibers, @xmath , is bounded by @xmath

###### Remark 4.2.

1.  The bound in Theorem 4.1 (unlike the one in Theorem 2.42 ) is
    polynomial in @xmath for fixed @xmath and @xmath . The exponential
    dependence on @xmath is unavoidable, as can be seen from a slight
    modification of Example 2.43 . Consider the semi-algebaic set @xmath
    defined by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Let @xmath be the projection on the @xmath -coordinate. Then, the
    sets @xmath , @xmath , have different number of connected
    components, and hence have distinct (stable) homotopy types.

2.  The technique used to prove Theorem 2.42 in [ 22 ] does not directly
    produce better bounds in the quadratic case, and hence we need a new
    approach to prove a substantially better bound in this case. For
    technical reasons, we only obtain a bound on the number of stable
    homotopy types, rather than homotopy types. But note that the
    notions of homeomorphism type, homotopy type and stable homotopy
    type are each strictly weaker than the previous one, since two
    semi-algebraic sets might be stable homotopy equivalent, without
    being homotopy equivalent (see [ 73 ] , p. 462), and also homotopy
    equivalent without being homeomorphic. However, two closed and
    bounded semi-algebraic sets which are stable homotopy equivalent
    have isomorphic homology groups.

### 4.2. Proof Strategy

The strategy underlying our proof of Theorem 4.1 is as follows. We first
consider the special case of a semi-algebraic subset, @xmath , defined
by a disjunction of @xmath homogeneous quadratic inequalities restricted
to the unit sphere in @xmath . We then show that there exists a closed
and bounded semi-algebraic set @xmath (see ( 4.14 ) below for the
precise definition of the semi-algebraic set @xmath ), consisting of
certain sphere bundles, glued along certain sub-sphere bundles, which is
homotopy equivalent to @xmath . The number of these sphere bundles, as
well descriptions of their bases, are bounded polynomially in @xmath
(for fixed @xmath ).

In the presence of parameters @xmath , the set @xmath , as well as
@xmath , will depend on the values of the parameters. However, using
some basic homotopy properties of bundles, we show that the homotopy
type of the set @xmath stays invariant under continuous deformation of
the bases of the different sphere bundles which constitute @xmath .
These bases also depend on the parameters, @xmath , but the degrees in
@xmath of the polynomials defining them are bounded by @xmath . Now,
using techniques similar to those used in [ 22 ] , we are able to
control the number of isotopy types of the bases which occur as the
parameters vary over @xmath . The bound on the number of isotopy types,
also gives a bound on the number of possible homotopy types of the set
@xmath , and hence of @xmath , for different values of the parameter.

In order to prove the results for semi-algebraic sets defined by more
general formulas than disjunctions of weak inequalities, we first use
Spanier-Whitehead duality to obtain a bound in the case of conjunctions,
and then use the construction of homotopy colimits to prove the theorem
for general @xmath -closed sets. Because of the use of Spanier-Whitehead
duality we get bounds on the number of stable homotopy types, rather
than homotopy types.

### 4.3. Topology of Sets Defined by Quadratic Constraints

One of the main ideas behind our proof of Theorem 4.1 is to parametrize
a construction introduced by Agrachev in [ 1 ] while studying the
topology of sets defined by (purely) quadratic inequalities (that is
without the parameters @xmath in our notation). However, we avoid
construction of Leray spectral sequences as was done in [ 1 ] . For the
rest of this section, we fix a set of polynomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are homogeneous of degree @xmath in @xmath , and of degree at most
@xmath in @xmath .

We will denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the map defined by the polynomials @xmath , and generally, for @xmath ,
we denote by @xmath , the map whose co-ordinates are given by @xmath ,
@xmath . When @xmath , we will often drop the subscript @xmath from our
notation.

For any subset @xmath , let @xmath be the semi-algebraic set defined by

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.1)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

and let

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.2)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

For @xmath we denote by @xmath the polynomial defined by

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.3)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

For @xmath , we will denote by @xmath the quadratic form in @xmath
obtained from @xmath by specializing @xmath .

Let @xmath be the semi-algebraic set defined by

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.4)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

We denote by @xmath and @xmath the two projection maps (see diagram
below).

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.5)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

The following key proposition was proved by Agrachev [ 1 ] in the
unparametrized situation, but as we see below it works in the
parametrized case as well.

###### Proposition 4.3.

The map @xmath gives a homotopy equivalence between @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

In order to simplify notation we prove it in the case @xmath , and the
case for any other @xmath would follow immediately. We first prove that
@xmath If @xmath then there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
for @xmath (where @xmath if @xmath , and @xmath otherwise), we see that
@xmath . Conversely, if @xmath then there exists @xmath such that,
@xmath . Since @xmath and not all @xmath , this implies that @xmath for
some @xmath . This shows that @xmath .

For @xmath , the fiber

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a non-empty subset of @xmath defined by a single linear inequality.
Thus each non-empty fiber is an intersection of a convex cone with
@xmath , and hence contractible.

The proposition now follows from the well-known Vietoris-Smale theorem
(see Theorem 2.27 ). ∎

We will use the following notation.

###### Notation 4.4.

For any quadratic form @xmath , we will denote by @xmath the number of
negative eigenvalues of the symmetric matrix of the corresponding
bilinear form, that is of the matrix @xmath such that, @xmath for all
@xmath (here @xmath denotes the usual inner product). We will also
denote by @xmath , @xmath , the eigenvalues of @xmath in non-decreasing
order, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , let

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.6)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

It is clear that each @xmath is a closed semi-algebraic subset of @xmath
and that they induce a filtration of the space @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 4.5.

The fiber of the map @xmath over a point @xmath has the homotopy type of
a sphere of dimension @xmath .

###### Proof.

As before, we prove the lemma only for @xmath . The proof for a general
@xmath is identical. First notice that for @xmath , the first @xmath
eigenvalues of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, letting @xmath be the co-ordinates with respect to an
orthonormal basis @xmath , consisting of eigenvectors of @xmath , we
have that @xmath is the subset of @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since, @xmath it follows that for @xmath , the fiber @xmath is homotopy
equivalent to the @xmath -dimensional sphere defined by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the sphere defined by @xmath . ∎

For each @xmath , let @xmath denote the sum of the non-negative
eigenspaces of @xmath (i.e., @xmath is the largest linear subspace of
@xmath on which @xmath is positive semi-definite). Since @xmath stays
invariant as @xmath varies over @xmath , @xmath varies continuously with
@xmath .

We will denote by @xmath the semi-algebraic set defined by

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.7)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

The following proposition relates the homotopy type of @xmath to that of
@xmath .

###### Proposition 4.6.

The semi-algebraic set @xmath defined above is homotopy equivalent to
@xmath (see ( 4.4 ) for the definition of @xmath ).

###### Proof.

We give a deformation retraction of @xmath to @xmath constructed as
follows. For each @xmath , we can retract the fiber @xmath to the
zero-dimensional sphere, @xmath by the following retraction. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the co-ordinates with respect to an orthonormal basis @xmath ,
consisting of eigenvectors of @xmath corresponding to non-decreasing
order of the eigenvalues of @xmath . Then, @xmath is the subset of
@xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is defined by @xmath . We retract @xmath to the
zero-dimensional sphere, @xmath by the retraction sending,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

at time @xmath to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that even though the local co-ordinates @xmath in @xmath with
respect to the orthonormal basis @xmath may not be uniquely defined at
the point @xmath (for instance, if the quadratic form @xmath has
multiple eigenvalues), the retraction is still well-defined since it
only depends on the decomposition of @xmath into orthogonal complements
@xmath and @xmath . We can thus retract simultaneously all fibers over
@xmath continuously, to obtain a semi-algebraic set @xmath , which is
moreover homotopy equivalent to @xmath .

This retraction is schematically shown in Figure 4.1 , where @xmath is
the closed segment, and @xmath are its end points.

Now starting from @xmath , retract all fibers over @xmath to the
corresponding one dimensional spheres, by the retraction sending

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

at time @xmath to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to obtain @xmath , which is homotopy equivalent to @xmath . Continuing
this process we finally obtain @xmath , which is clearly homotopy
equivalent to @xmath by construction. ∎

Notice that the semi-algebraic set @xmath is a @xmath -bundle over
@xmath under the map @xmath , and @xmath is a union of these sphere
bundles. We have good control over the bases, @xmath , of these bundles,
that is we have good bounds on the number as well as the degrees of
polynomials used to define them. However, these bundles could be
possibly glued to each other in complicated ways, and it is not
immediate how to control this glueing data, since different types of
glueing could give rise to different homotopy types of the underlying
space. In order to get around this difficulty, we consider certain
closed subsets, @xmath of @xmath , where each @xmath is an infinitesimal
deformation of @xmath , and form the base of a @xmath -bundle. Moreover,
these new sphere bundles are glued to each other along sphere bundles
over @xmath , and their union, @xmath , is homotopy equivalent to @xmath
. Finally, the polynomials defining the sets @xmath are in general
position in a very strong sense, and this property is used later to
bound the number of isotopy classes of the sets @xmath in the
parametrized situation.

We now make precise the argument outlined above. Let @xmath be the
polynomial in @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , and each @xmath .

Notice, that @xmath is obtained from @xmath by setting the variable
@xmath to @xmath in the polynomial @xmath for each @xmath .

Note also that for @xmath , the polynomial @xmath being the
characteristic polynomial of a real symmetric matrix has all its roots
real. It then follows from Descartes’ rule of signs (see for instance [
20 ] ), that for each @xmath , where @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath is
determined by the sign vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, denoting by

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.8)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

we have

###### Lemma 4.7.

For each @xmath , @xmath is the intersection of @xmath with a @xmath
-closed semi-algebraic set @xmath .

###### Notation 4.8.

Let @xmath be defined by the formula

  ------- -- -------- --
  (4.9)      @xmath   
  ------- -- -------- --

for some @xmath . Note that, @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

Now, let @xmath and @xmath be infinitesimals such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.10)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

Given @xmath , and @xmath , we denote by @xmath the set defined by the
formula @xmath obtained by taking the conjunction of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, we denote by @xmath the set defined by the formula @xmath
obtained by taking the conjunction of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , let

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  (4.11)            @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where we denote by @xmath . We also denote by @xmath .

We now note some extra properties of the sets @xmath ’s.

###### Lemma 4.9.

For each @xmath , @xmath is a @xmath -closed semi-algebraic set, where

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.12)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Follows from the definition of the sets @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 4.10.

For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

In order to keep notation simple we prove the proposition only for
@xmath . The proof for a general @xmath is identical. The inclusions,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

follow directly from the definitions of the sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the fact that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows immediately that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is disjoint from @xmath , and hence from @xmath . ∎

We now associate to each @xmath a @xmath -dimensional sphere bundle as
follows. For each @xmath , let @xmath denote the sum of the non-negative
eigenspaces of @xmath (i.e., @xmath is the largest linear subspace of
@xmath on which @xmath is positive semi-definite). Since @xmath stays
invariant as @xmath varies over @xmath , @xmath varies continuously with
@xmath .

Let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the eigenvalues of @xmath for @xmath . There is a continuous
extension of the map sending @xmath to @xmath .

To see this observe that for @xmath the block of the first @xmath
(negative) eigenvalues, @xmath , and hence the sum of the eigenspaces
corresponding to them can be extended continuously to any infinitesimal
neighborhood of @xmath , and in particular to @xmath . Now @xmath is the
orthogonal complement of the sum of the eigenspaces corresponding to the
block of negative eigenvalues, @xmath .

We will denote by @xmath the semi-algebraic set defined by

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.13)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

Note that the projection @xmath , makes @xmath the total space of a
@xmath -dimensional sphere bundle over @xmath .

Now observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is also a @xmath dimensional sphere bundle over @xmath .

Let

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.14)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

We have that

###### Proposition 4.11.

@xmath is homotopy equivalent to @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
defined in ( 4.7 ) and ( 4.10 ) respectively.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

First observe that @xmath where @xmath is the semi-algebraic set defined
in ( 4.7 ) above.

Now let,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Notice that each @xmath is a closed and bounded semi-algebraic set.
Also, for @xmath , let @xmath be the semi-algebraic set obtained by
replacing @xmath (resp., @xmath ) in the definition of @xmath by the
variable @xmath . Then, there exists @xmath , such that for all @xmath ,
@xmath .

It follows (see Lemma 16.17 in [ 20 ] ) that for each @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath is homotopy equivalent to @xmath . ∎

### 4.4. Partitioning the Parameter Space

The goal of this section is to prove the following proposition
(Proposition 4.12 ). The techniques used in the proof are similar to
those used in [ 22 ] for proving a similar result. We go through the
proof in detail in order to extract the right bound in terms of the
parameters @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.12.

There exists a finite set of points @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for any @xmath , there exists @xmath , with the following
property.

There is a semi-algebraic path, @xmath and a continuous semi-algebraic
map, @xmath (see ( 4.2 ) and ( 4.10 ) for the definition of @xmath and
@xmath ),

with @xmath , @xmath , and for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a homeomorphism for each @xmath .

Before proving Proposition 4.12 we need a few preliminary results. Let

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.15)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in ( 4.12 ) above.

Note that for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is a @xmath -closed
semi-algebraic set. Moreover, let @xmath be the projection onto the last
@xmath co-ordinates.

###### Notation 4.13.

We fix a finite set of points @xmath such that for every @xmath there
exists @xmath such that for every @xmath -semi-algebraic set @xmath ,
the set @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath .

The existence of a finite set @xmath with this property follows from
Hardt’s triviality theorem (Theorem 2.15 ) and the Tarski-Seidenberg
transfer principle, as well as the fact that the number of @xmath
-semi-algebraic sets is finite.

Now, we note some extra properties of the family @xmath . The notations
@xmath and @xmath were introduced in Chapter 2.1.1 .

###### Lemma 4.14.

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath is a non-singular @xmath -dimensional
manifold such that at every point @xmath , the @xmath -Jacobi matrix,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has maximal rank @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the unit sphere in @xmath . Suppose without loss of
generality that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the equation @xmath eliminates the variable @xmath from the
polynomials. It follows that it suffices to show that the algebraic set

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.16)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

is a smooth @xmath -dimensional manifold such that at every point on it
the @xmath -Jacobi matrix,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has maximal rank @xmath .

Let @xmath . Consider the semi-algebraic map @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the semi-algebraic version of Sard’s theorem (see [ 27 ] ), the set
of critical values of @xmath is a semi-algebraic subset @xmath of @xmath
of dimension strictly less than @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are
infinitesimals, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, the algebraic set @xmath defined in ( 4.16 ) has the desired
properties, and the same is true for the basic semi-algebraic set @xmath
.

We now prove that @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . As we have just proved,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a finite set of points. But the polynomial @xmath cannot vanish on
each of these points as @xmath and @xmath are infinitesimals. ∎

###### Lemma 4.15.

For every @xmath , and @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the following holds.

1.  @xmath , and

2.  @xmath is a non-singular @xmath -dimensional manifold such that at
    every point @xmath , the @xmath -Jacobi matrix,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    has maximal rank @xmath .

###### Proof.

Note that @xmath for each @xmath and @xmath . The proof is now identical
to the proof of Lemma 4.14 . ∎

###### Lemma 4.16.

For any bounded @xmath -semi-algebraic set @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the partitions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are compatible Whitney stratifications of @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

###### Proof.

Follows directly from the definition of Whitney stratification (see [ 46
, 34 ] ), and Lemma 4.14 . ∎

Fix some sign condition @xmath . Recall that @xmath is a critical point
of the map @xmath if the Jacobi matrix,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

at @xmath is not of the maximal possible rank. The projection @xmath of
a critical point is a critical value of @xmath .

Let @xmath be the set of critical points of @xmath over all sign
conditions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(i.e., over all @xmath with @xmath ). For a bounded @xmath
-semi-algebraic set @xmath , let @xmath be the set of critical points of
@xmath over all sign conditions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(i.e., over all @xmath with @xmath ).

Let @xmath be the union of @xmath over all

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(i.e., over all @xmath with @xmath ). For a bounded @xmath
-semi-algebraic set @xmath , let @xmath be the union of @xmath over all

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(i.e., over all @xmath with @xmath ).

Denote @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.17.

For each bounded @xmath -semi-algebraic @xmath , the set @xmath is
closed and bounded.

###### Proof.

The set @xmath is bounded since @xmath is bounded. The union @xmath of
strata of dimensions less than @xmath is closed since @xmath is closed.

Let @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , and if @xmath , then
@xmath for any @xmath . It follows that stratum @xmath lies in the
closure of the stratum @xmath . Let @xmath be the finite family of
@xmath -minors such that @xmath is the set of all critical points of
@xmath . Then @xmath is either contained in @xmath (when @xmath ), or is
contained in the set of all critical points of @xmath (when @xmath ). It
follows that the closure of @xmath lies in the union of the following
sets:

1.  @xmath ,

2.  sets of critical points of some strata of dimensions less than
    @xmath ,

3.  some strata of dimension less than @xmath .

Using induction on descending dimensions in case ( 2 ), we conclude that
the closure of @xmath is contained in @xmath . Hence, @xmath is closed.
∎

###### Definition 4.18.

We denote by @xmath , and @xmath . Similarly, for each bounded @xmath
-semi-algebraic set @xmath , we denote by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.19.

We have @xmath . In particular, @xmath for every bounded @xmath
-semi-algebraic set @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.15 , for all @xmath , and @xmath ,

1.  @xmath , and

2.  @xmath is a non-singular @xmath -dimensional manifold such that at
    every point @xmath , the @xmath -Jacobi matrix,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    has the maximal rank @xmath .

If a point @xmath , then there exists @xmath such that @xmath is a
critical point of @xmath for some @xmath , and this is impossible by ( 2
).

Similarly, @xmath , implies that there exists @xmath such that @xmath
for some @xmath , and this is impossible by ( 1 ). ∎

Let @xmath be a connected component of @xmath , and for a bounded @xmath
-semi-algebraic set @xmath , let @xmath be a connected component of
@xmath .

###### Lemma 4.20.

For every bounded @xmath -semi-algebraic set @xmath , all fibers @xmath
, @xmath are homeomorphic.

###### Proof.

Lemma 4.15 and Lemma 4.16 imply that @xmath is a Whitney stratified set
having strata of dimensions at least @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is a
proper stratified submersion. By Thom’s first isotopy lemma (in the
semi-algebraic version, over real closed fields [ 34 ] ) the map @xmath
is a locally trivial fibration. In particular, all fibers @xmath ,
@xmath are homeomorphic for every connected component @xmath . The lemma
follows, since the inclusion @xmath implies that either @xmath for some
connected component @xmath , or @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 4.21.

For each @xmath , there exists a connected component @xmath of @xmath ,
such that @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath for every bounded @xmath
-semi-algebraic set @xmath and for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a bounded @xmath -semi-algebraic set and @xmath . By Lemma
4.19 , @xmath belongs to some connected component @xmath of @xmath .
Lemma 4.20 implies that @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath for every
@xmath . ∎

We now are able to prove Proposition 4.12 .

###### Proof of Proposition 4.12.

Recall that @xmath , where @xmath is the union of sets of critical
values of @xmath over all strata @xmath of dimensions at least @xmath ,
and @xmath is the union of projections of all strata of dimensions less
than @xmath .

By Lemma 4.21 it suffices to bound the number of connected components of
the set @xmath . Denote by @xmath the family of closed sets of critical
points of @xmath , over all sign conditions @xmath such that strata
@xmath have dimensions at least @xmath (the notation @xmath was
introduced in Chapter 2.1.1 ). Let @xmath be the family of closed sets
@xmath , over all sign conditions @xmath such that strata @xmath have
dimensions equal to @xmath . Let @xmath . Denote by @xmath the image
under the projection @xmath of the union of all sets in the family
@xmath .

Because of the transversality condition, every stratum of the
stratification of @xmath , having the dimension less than @xmath , lies
in the closure of a stratum having the next higher dimension. In
particular, this is true for strata of dimensions less than @xmath . It
follows that @xmath , and thus every connected component of the
complement @xmath is contained in a connected component of @xmath .
Since @xmath , every connected component of @xmath contains a connected
component of @xmath . Therefore, it is sufficient to estimate from above
the Betti number @xmath which is equal to @xmath by the Alexander’s
duality.

The total number of sets @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath , is
@xmath because each @xmath is defined by a conjunction of at most @xmath
of possible @xmath polynomial equations.

Thus, the cardinality @xmath , as well as the number of images under the
projection @xmath of sets in @xmath is @xmath . According to ( 2.2 ) in
Proposition 2.19 , @xmath does not exceed the sum of certain Betti
numbers of sets of the type

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where every @xmath and @xmath . More precisely, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously, there are @xmath sets of the kind @xmath .

Using inequality ( 2.3 ) in Proposition 2.19 , we have that for each
@xmath as above, the Betti number @xmath does not exceed the sum of
certain Betti numbers of unions of the kind,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . More precisely,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is clear that there are at most @xmath sets of the kind @xmath .

If a set @xmath , then it is defined by @xmath polynomials of degrees at
most @xmath . If a set @xmath , then it is defined by @xmath polynomials
of degrees @xmath , since the critical points on strata of dimensions at
least @xmath are defined by @xmath determinantal equations, the
corresponding matrices have orders @xmath , and the entries of these
matrices are polynomials of degrees at most @xmath .

It follows that the closed and bounded set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined by @xmath polynomials of degrees @xmath .

By Proposition 2.26 , @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath . Then @xmath for
every @xmath . Since there are @xmath sets of the kind @xmath , we get
the claimed bound

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The rest of the proof follows from Proposition 4.21 . ∎

### 4.5. Proof of the Result

#### 4.5.1. The Homogeneous Case

We first consider the case where all the polynomials in @xmath are
homogeneous in variables @xmath and we bound the number of homotopy
types among the fibers @xmath , defined by the @xmath -closed
semi-algebraic subsets @xmath of @xmath . We first the prove the
following theorems for the special cases of unions and intersections.

###### Theorem 4.22.

Let be a real closed field and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath is homogeneous of degree @xmath in the variables
@xmath , and of degree at most @xmath in @xmath .

For @xmath , let @xmath be semi-algebraic sets defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the projection on the last @xmath co-ordinates.

Then, the number of homotopy types amongst the fibers @xmath is bounded
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With the same assumptions as in Theorem 4.22 we have

###### Theorem 4.23.

The number of stable homotopy types amongst the fibers @xmath is bounded
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Before proving Theorems 4.22 and 4.23 we first prove two preliminary
lemmas.

###### Lemma 4.24.

There exists a finite set @xmath , with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for every @xmath there exists @xmath , a semi-algebraic set
@xmath , and semi-algebraic maps @xmath , as shown in the diagram below,
such that @xmath are both homotopy equivalences.

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.17)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

Moreover, for each @xmath , there exists a subset @xmath , such that the
restrictions, @xmath , of @xmath to @xmath give rise to the following
diagram in which all maps are again homotopy equivalences.

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.18)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

For each @xmath , @xmath and the maps @xmath are restrictions of @xmath
.

###### Proof of Lemma 4.24.

By Proposition 4.12 , there exists @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for every @xmath , there exists @xmath , with the following
property.

There is a semi-algebraic path, @xmath and a continuous semi-algebraic
map, @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath , and for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a homeomorphism for each @xmath (see ( 4.2 ), ( 4.10 ) and ( 4.11 )
for the definition of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ).

Now, observe that @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is a sphere bundle over @xmath
(resp. @xmath ). Moreover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, for @xmath , we have @xmath .

We now prove that the map @xmath induces a homeomorphism @xmath , which
for each @xmath and @xmath restricts to a homeomorphism @xmath .

First recall that by a standard result in the theory of bundles (see for
instance, [ 42 ] , p. 313, Lemma 5), the isomorphism class of the sphere
bundle @xmath , is determined by the homotopy class of the map,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the Grassmannian variety of @xmath dimensional
subspaces of @xmath .

The map @xmath induces for each @xmath , a homotopy between the maps

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(after indentifying the sets @xmath and @xmath since they are
homeomorphic) which respects the inclusions @xmath , and @xmath .

The above observation in conjunction with Lemma 5 in [ 42 ] is
sufficient to prove the equivalence of the sphere bundles @xmath and
@xmath . But we need to prove a more general equivalence, involving all
the sphere bundles @xmath simultaneously, for @xmath .

However, note that the proof of Lemma 5 in [ 42 ] proceeds by induction
on the skeleton of the CW-complex of the base of the bundle. After
choosing a sufficiently fine triangulation of the set @xmath compatible
with the closed subsets @xmath , the same proof extends without
difficulty to this slightly more general situation to give a fiber
preserving homeomorphism, @xmath , which restricts to an isomorphism of
sphere bundles, @xmath for each @xmath and @xmath .

We have the following maps.

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.19)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

The map @xmath is the inclusion map, and @xmath is a retraction shown to
exist by Proposition 4.11 .

Since all the maps @xmath have been shown to be homotopy equivalences,
by Propositions 4.6 , 4.3 , and 4.11 , their composition is also a
homotopy equivalence.

Moreover, for each @xmath , the maps in the above diagram restrict
properly to give a corresponding diagram:

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.20)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

Now let @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath . Finally, for each @xmath , let
@xmath and the maps @xmath the restrictions of @xmath and @xmath
respectively to @xmath . The collection of sets @xmath and the maps
@xmath clearly satisfy the conditions of the lemma. This completes the
proof of the lemma. ∎

###### Remark 4.25.

Note that if @xmath is a real closed sub-field of , then Lemma 4.24
continues to hold after we substitute “ @xmath ” and “for all @xmath ”
in place of “ @xmath ” and “for all @xmath ” in the statement of the
lemma. This is a consequence of the Tarski-Seidenberg transfer
principle.

With the same hypothesis as in Lemma 4.24 we also have,

###### Lemma 4.26.

There exists a finite set @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for every @xmath , there exists @xmath , for each @xmath , a
semi-algebraic set @xmath defined over @xmath , where @xmath (see ( 4.10
for the definition of @xmath and @xmath ), and S-maps @xmath as shown in
the diagram below such that @xmath are both stable homotopy
equivalences.

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.21)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

For each @xmath , @xmath and the maps @xmath are restrictions of of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an infinitesimal. For @xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the set @xmath is homotopy equivalent to @xmath for each
@xmath and @xmath . Applying Lemma 4.24 (see Remark 4.25 ) to the family
@xmath , we have that there exists a finite set @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for every @xmath , there exists @xmath such that for each
@xmath , the following diagram

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.22)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

where for each @xmath we denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath are homotopy equivalences.

Note that for each @xmath , the set @xmath is a deformation retract of
the complement of @xmath and hence is Spanier-Whitehead dual to @xmath .
The lemma now follows by taking the Spanier-Whitehead dual of diagram (
4.22 ) above for each @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 4.22.

Follows directly from Lemma 4.24 . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 4.23.

Follows directly from Lemma 4.26 . ∎

We now prove a homogenous version of Theorem 4.1

###### Theorem 4.27.

Let be a real closed field and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath is homogeneous of degree @xmath in the variables
@xmath , and of degree at most @xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath be the projection on the last @xmath co-ordinates. Then, for
any @xmath -closed semi-algebraic set @xmath , the number of stable
homotopy types amongst the fibers @xmath is bounded by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We first replace the family @xmath by the family,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the cardinality of @xmath is @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows from Lemma 4.26 that there exists a set @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for every @xmath and @xmath , there exists @xmath and a
semi-algebraic set @xmath defined over @xmath and S-maps @xmath as shown
in the diagram below such that @xmath are both stable homotopy
equivalences.

  -------- -- -------- --
  (4.23)      @xmath   
  -------- -- -------- --

Now notice that each @xmath -closed set @xmath is a union of sets of the
form @xmath with @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, the intersection of any sub-collection of sets of the kind,
@xmath with @xmath , is also a set of the same kind. More precisely, for
any @xmath there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are not able to show directly a stable homotopy equivalence between
@xmath and @xmath . Instead, we note that the S-maps @xmath and @xmath
induce S-maps (cf. Definition 2.31 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are stable homotopy equivalences by Lemma 2.33 since each @xmath
and @xmath is a stable homotopy equivalence.

Since @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is homotopy equivalent by Lemma 2.32 to
@xmath (resp. @xmath ), it follows (see Remark 2.1 ) that @xmath is
stable homotopy equivalent to @xmath . This proves the theorem. ∎

#### 4.5.2. Inhomogeneous case

We are now in a position to prove Theorem 4.1 .

###### Proof of Theorem 4.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -closed formula defining the @xmath -closed
semi-algebraic set @xmath . Let @xmath be an infinitesimal, and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , and let @xmath be the @xmath -closed formula defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defining the @xmath -closed semi-algebraic set @xmath . Note that the
set @xmath is bounded.

It follows from the local conical structure of semi-algebraic sets at
infinity [ 27 ] that the semi-algebraic set @xmath has the same homotopy
type as @xmath .

Considering each @xmath as a polynomial in the variables @xmath with
coefficients in @xmath , and let @xmath denote the homogenization of
@xmath . Thus the polynomials @xmath and are homogeneous of degree
@xmath in the variables @xmath .

Let @xmath be the semi-algebraic set defined by the @xmath -closed
formula @xmath (replacing @xmath by @xmath in @xmath ). It is clear that
@xmath is a union of two disjoint, closed and bounded semi-algebraic
sets each homeomorphic to @xmath , which has the same homotopy type as
@xmath .

The theorem is now proven by applying Theorem 4.27 to the family @xmath
and the semi-algebraic set @xmath . Note that two fibers @xmath and
@xmath are stable homotopy equivalent if and only if @xmath and @xmath
are stable homotopy equivalent (see Remark 2.1 ). ∎

### 4.6. Metric upper bounds

In [ 22 ] certain metric upper bounds related to homotopy types were
proven as applications of the main result. Similar results hold in the
quadratic case, except now the bounds have a better dependence on @xmath
. We state these results without proof.

We first recall the following results from [ 22 ] . Let @xmath be a
@xmath -semi-algebraic set, where @xmath . Suppose for each @xmath ,
@xmath , and the maximum of the absolute values of coefficients in
@xmath is less than some constant @xmath , @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.28.

There exists a constant @xmath , such that for any @xmath we have

1.  @xmath and @xmath are homotopy equivalent, and

2.  @xmath and @xmath are homotopy equivalent.

In the special case of quadratic polynomials we get the following
improvement of Theorem 4.28 .

###### Theorem 4.29.

Let be a real closed field. Let @xmath be a @xmath -semi-algebraic set,
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , @xmath and the maximum of the absolute values of
coefficients in @xmath is less than some constant @xmath , @xmath .

There exists a constant @xmath , such that for any @xmath we have,

1.  @xmath and @xmath are stable homotopy equivalent, and

2.  @xmath and @xmath are stable homotopy equivalent.

## Chapter 5 Algorithms and Their Implementation

### 5.1. Computing the Betti Numbers of Arrangements

In this chapter, we consider arrangements of compact objects in @xmath
which are simply connected. This implies, in particular, that their
first Betti number is zero. We describe an algorithm for computing the
zero-th and the first Betti number of such an arrangement, along with
its implementation [ 15 ] . For the implementation, we restrict our
attention to arrangements in @xmath and take for our objects the
simplest possible semi-algebraic sets in @xmath which are topologically
non-trivial – namely, each object is an ellipsoid defined by a single
quadratic equation. Ellipsoids are simply connected, but with
non-vanishing second co-homology groups. We also allow solid ellipsoids
defined by a single quadratic inequality. Computing the Betti numbers of
an arrangement of ellipsoids in @xmath is already a challenging
computational problem in practice and to our knowledge no existing
software can effectively deal with this case. Note that arrangements of
ellipsoids are topologically quite different from arrangements of balls.
For instance, the union of two ellipsoids can have non-zero first Betti
number, unlike in the case of balls.

#### 5.1.1. Outline of the Method

The following corollary follows immediately from Proposition 2.20 .

###### Corollary 5.1.

Let be @xmath such that @xmath are compact semi-algebraic sets with

1.  @xmath , and

2.  @xmath , @xmath .

Let the homomorphisms @xmath and @xmath in the following sequence be
defined as in Chapter 2.2.2 (identifying @xmath with the @xmath -vector
space of locally constant functions on a simplicial complex ).

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The importance of Corollary 5.1 lies in the following observation. Given
an arrangement, @xmath , of @xmath simply connected objects in @xmath ,
suppose we are able to identify the connected components of all pairwise
and triple-wise intersections of these objects and their incidences
(that is, which connected component of @xmath is contained in which
connected component of @xmath ). Then this information is sufficient to
compute the zero-th and the first Betti number of the arrangement. We
only have to look at the objects of the arrangement at most three at a
time. Thus, the cost of computing the connected components and
incidences is @xmath . This is to be compared with having to compute a
global triangulation of the whole arrangement using cylindrical
algebraic decomposition which would have entailed a cost of @xmath .

Recall that a cylindrical decomposition (see Chapter 2.1.4 ) adapted to
a finite set @xmath of polynomials in @xmath produces a graph where the
vertices correspond to cells in @xmath and edges correspond to
adjacencies. Moreover, each cell in @xmath is @xmath -invariant and we
know the sign for each @xmath in @xmath on each such cell. Hence, given
an arrangement, @xmath , of @xmath semi-algebraic sets in @xmath , we
are able to identify the connected components of all pairwise and
triple-wise intersections of these objects and their incidences by
computing a cylindrical decomposition adapted to the families @xmath ,
where @xmath is the set of polynomials used in the definition of @xmath
and @xmath and by performing a graph transversal algorithm on the graph
described above.

To sum up, we now formally describe our algorithm for computing the
zero-th and the first Betti numbers of an arrangement of @xmath simply
connected compact objects in @xmath .

###### Algorithm 5.2 (Computing the zero-th and the first Betti number).

Input: compact sets @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath .
Output: @xmath and @xmath .
Procedure:

-   For each triple @xmath , do the following:
    Compute a cylindrical decomposition adapted to the set @xmath .
    Identify the connected components of all pairwise and triple-wise
    intersections and their incidences.

-   Compute the matrices @xmath and @xmath corresponding to the sequence
    of homomorphisms:

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

-   Compute

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath , @xmath is the dimension of
    @xmath , and the rank of a matrix is denoted by @xmath .

#### 5.1.2. The Implementation

The algorithm has been prototypically implemented using
QEPCAD B (Version 1.27) [ 66 ] and Magma [ 60 ] for compact sets @xmath
. We use the package QEPCAD B for computing the cylindrical
decompositions, in Step 1 of Algorithm 5.2 . There are several other
packages available for computing cylindrical decompositions, for
instance REDLOG [ 67 ] . The main reason for using QEPCAD B is that it
provides some important information regarding cell adjacency, that is
not provided by the other systems.

In Figure 5.1 , which shows the QEPCAD B output for a cylindrical
decomposition adapted to the unit sphere, the first (resp., second and
third) column corresponds to the cylindrical decomposition of the line
(resp. plane and @xmath ). Note that the signs accompanying the cells
give the signs of projection factors computed by QEPCAD B and the letter
”T” and ”F” corresponds to true and false value of the cells, i.e.,
depending upon whether our input formula is true or false on this cell.

Even though QEPCAD B does not provide full information regarding cell
adjacencies in dimension three, we are still able to deduce all the
needed cell adjacencies as described in Chapter 2.1.4 , making use of
the fact that input polynomials are quadratic.

We use Magma for post-processing of the information output by QEPCAD B,
in Steps 2 and 3 of the algorithm. Note that all computations performed
are exact with no possibility of numerical errors.

To illustrate our implementation, we consider four examples where the
ellipsoids

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath , are defined by the following list of polynomials (see Table 5.1
)

We denote by @xmath and @xmath the matrices of the homomorphisms @xmath
and @xmath with respect to the obvious basis. The columns (resp., the
rows) of the matrix @xmath are labeled by @xmath (resp., @xmath ), while
the columns (resp., the rows) of the matrix @xmath are labeled by @xmath
(resp., @xmath ), where @xmath corresponds to @xmath , @xmath
corresponds to the @xmath -th connected component of @xmath and @xmath
corresponds to the @xmath -th connected component of @xmath .

###### Remark 5.3.

In the examples described below, we have modified the matrix @xmath as
follows. Since we know that each input set @xmath has exactly one
connected component, we can simplify the computation. We only need to
check whether or not the intersection @xmath is empty. Therefore, we
have exactly one row for each intersection instead of one row for each
connected component of each intersection @xmath , and this reduces the
size of the matrix @xmath without changing its rank. For the matrix
@xmath we delete all rows containing only zeros which correspond to
empty triple intersections @xmath .

###### Example 5.4 (Three ellipsoids).

Let @xmath be the union of the first three ellipsoids, i.e., @xmath (see
Figure 5.2 ). Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Example 5.5 (Six ellipsoids).

Let the set @xmath be the union of the first six ellipsoids @xmath ,
@xmath , i.e., @xmath (see Figure 5.3 ). Then

[]

and

[]

In this case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Example 5.6 (Seven ellipsoids).

Let the set @xmath be the union of the first seven ellipsoids @xmath ,
@xmath , i.e., @xmath (see Figure 5.4 ). Then

[]

and

[]

In this case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Example 5.7 (20 ellipsoids).

Let the set @xmath be the union of the last 20 ellipsoids @xmath ,
@xmath , i.e., @xmath (see Figure 5.5 ). Thus, we get a @xmath -matrix
@xmath of rank equal to @xmath , a @xmath -matrix @xmath of rank equal
to @xmath , and the dimension of @xmath is equal to @xmath . In this
case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### 5.2. Computing the Real Intersection of Quadratic Surfaces

In this chapter, we consider the problem of computing the real
intersection of three quadratic surfaces, or quadrics, defined by the
quadratic polynomials @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We describe
an algorithm for computing the isolated points and a linear graph
embedded into @xmath (if the real intersection form a curve)
representing the real intersection of the three quadrics defined by the
three polynomials @xmath , along with its implementation [ 52 ] . For
the implementation, we restrict our attention to quadrics with defining
equation having rational coefficients.

Before outlining our method, we define the silhouette curve and cut
curve, which can be interpreted in our setting as the projection of one
quadric and the projection of intersection curve of two quadrics into
the @xmath -plane, respectively.

###### Definition 5.8.

Let @xmath , @xmath . The algebraic curves with defining polynomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are called silhouette curve and cut curve respectively.

Another geometric interpretation of the silhouette curve in our setting
is the following. The silhouette curve defined by @xmath contains all
points @xmath such that the polynomial @xmath has exactly one root
@xmath of multiplicity @xmath .

#### 5.2.1. Outline of the Method

The basic idea of computing the intersection of three quadrics is based
on the cylindrical decomposition (see Chapter 2.1.4 ). As the algorithm
of Schömer and Wolpert [ 69 , 83 ] , our approach can be summarized by
several phases:

preparation, projection, planar arrangement analysis and lifting phase .

But our analysis of the planar arrangement and lifting phase differs
from the methods presented in [ 69 , 83 ] .

First, we project one input quadric and the resulting space intersection
curves of the pairwise intersections by computing (univariate)
resultants onto the plane assuming that we have a “good” coordinate
system by using the Brown-McCallum projection operation (see [ 30 , 29 ]
). The Brown-McCallum projection operation produces, based on the
current literature, the smallest projection set in our setting. Then we
analyze the planar arrangement of curves before we lift our solution
into space (if possible). In other words, we compute the defining
polynomial @xmath of the silhouette curve of the input quadric @xmath ,
and the defining polynomial @xmath of the corresponding cut curves (see
Definition 5.8 ). Then we identify the common factor @xmath of @xmath
and @xmath and the corresponding gcd-free parts @xmath .

While Schömer and Wolpert [ 69 ] use resultants for computing the
candidates of the @xmath and @xmath -coordinates and analyze the
resulting grid (see [ 69 ] for more details) afterwards, our planar
analysis is based on the TOP algorithm (see Algorithm 2.12 ). To be more
precise, we use the TOP-algorithm in order to obtain the topology of the
curve defined by the common factor @xmath (including some relevant
points on the curve). In addition, we generalize the idea of [ 45 ] of
using subresultants to two planar curves. We perform a linear change of
coordinates (if it is needed) in order to have two planar curves of the
arrangement in generic position (see Definition 2.10 ). Then we compute
the @xmath -coordinates of the (planar) intersection points of two
curves using resultants as well as the @xmath -coordinates of those
points that can be described rationally in terms of @xmath via
subresultant computations.

Furthermore, when the intersection points form a curve, the set of
solutions is described topologically via a linear graph embedded in
@xmath . The computed graph provides all the information for tracing
this curve numerically since we know exactly how to proceed when we are
close to a complicated point. Nevertheless, all computed points lie in
the real intersection set of the three quadric surfaces defined by the
three polynomials @xmath .

Next we describe all necessary steps, but we omit the details on the
change of coordinates to which we refer to several times. For more
details on the change of coordinates see [ 45 ] .

#### 5.2.2. Details on the Preparation Phase

Before starting the real computation, we test the input quadrics for
degeneracy and if they behave well under resultant computations. We want
to make sure that all quadrics are of degree equal to two, @xmath
-regular, square-free and pairwise do not have a common factor of degree
equal to one. The absence of the latter two conditions can easily be
detected and solved as it simplifies the considered problem. For
example, one quadric describes a single plane if it is not square-free,
whereas two quadrics define three planes, with one of them in common, if
they have a common factor of degree equal to one. Therefore, we omit the
details on these cases, though we can detect and solve them easily. In
the case that one of the other conditions is violated, we make a change
of coordinates and start the computation again.

Finally, from now on we use the following assumption for the input
polynomials @xmath .

###### Assumption 5.9.

The trivariate polynomials @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with coefficients
in @xmath are all of degree equal to two, square-free, @xmath -regular
and pairwise do not have a common factor of degree equal to one.

#### 5.2.3. Details on the Projection Phase

After a suitable preparation of our input quadrics, we assume throughout
this and the following sections that the quadratic input polynomials
have the properties of Assumption 5.9 . It is worthwhile to mention that
Assumption 5.9 is necessary in order to interpret correctly the
projection onto the @xmath - @xmath plane via resultant computation. Our
projection method is based on the so-called restricted equational
version of the Brown-McCallum projection operation (see [ 30 ] , [ 29 ]
) where we use the polynomial @xmath as the pivot constraint. The
Brown-McCallum projection operation produces, based on the current
literature, the smallest projection set @xmath and consists of the
following polynomials in our setting,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in the beginning of our computation, we need to test the polynomials
contained in the set @xmath for degeneracy in order to interpret
correctly the following resultant computations. Thus, we simplify the
set @xmath further and we obtain the set @xmath containing the following
polynomials,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath , where @xmath is the greatest common divisor of @xmath
and @xmath . Moreover, we decompose the polynomial @xmath further. We
write @xmath where @xmath (resp., @xmath ) is the gcd-free part (resp.,
greatest common divisor) of @xmath and @xmath . Note, that the
decomposition of the polynomial @xmath into @xmath and @xmath will be
very useful for the lifting phase (see Chapter 5.2.5 ). Finally, we can
summarize the projection phase as follows.

###### Algorithm 5.10 (Projection).

Input: three polynomials @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath with the
properties of Assumption 5.9 .
Output: @xmath
such that @xmath is the square-free part of @xmath with respect to
@xmath ,
where @xmath . Moreover, we decompose the polynomial @xmath into @xmath
where @xmath (resp., @xmath ) is the gcd-free part (resp., greatest
common factor) of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.2.4. Details on the Analysis of the Planar Arrangement

In this section, we describe how we analyze the planar arrangement. We
assume from now on that the set @xmath computed before is of the
following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath , where @xmath is the square-free part of the common
factor of @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, we decompose the polynomial
@xmath further. We write @xmath where @xmath (resp., @xmath ) is the
gcd-free part (resp., greatest common factor) of @xmath and @xmath .

The problem, which might occur, is that the planar curves might not be
in generic position which would ensure that we can use subresultants in
order to compute the critical points (including intersection points with
another curve) of the planar curves in our arrangement. In this case, we
start the computation again after a change of coordinates if the planar
curves are not in generic position. Hence, we assume throughout this and
the following sections that the set @xmath has the following properties.

###### Assumption 5.11.

Let @xmath as computed in Algorithm 5.10 such that all polynomials are
@xmath -regular. The polynomials @xmath and @xmath as well as @xmath are
in generic position. Moreover, @xmath is in generic position with
respect to @xmath .

By using the Brown-McCallum projection operation for eliminating the
variable @xmath , it follows that the (possible) intersection points of
all three quadrics lie on the cut curves defined by @xmath and @xmath ,
i.e., on the intersection of @xmath and @xmath , or on @xmath . In
addition, we need to identify the common points of those curves with the
silhouette curve @xmath since the number and type of points above a
point on @xmath might be different than for points which do not lie on
@xmath . But observe that the curve @xmath contains all points @xmath
such that @xmath has exactly one root @xmath of multiplicity @xmath . To
sum up, we need to compute the following:

1.  the intersection points of @xmath and @xmath and whether or not they
    lie on the curve @xmath , and

2.  the topology of @xmath including the common points with @xmath which
    could be finitely or infinitely many.

By decomposing the polynomial @xmath we simplify the second problem
further since we just need to compute the following:

1.  the topology of @xmath including the common points with @xmath ,

2.  the topology of @xmath including the common points with @xmath .

It is worthwhile to mention that we can not decide without further
computation whether or not a planar point can be lifted to a solution of
all three quadrics. This comes from the fact that two different (space)
points in @xmath might get projected to the same (planar) point.
Nevertheless, this problem can be solved easily as we will see in
Chapter 5.2.5 . We summarize the above discussion in the following
algorithm.

###### Algorithm 5.12 (Planar Arrangement Analysis).

Input: the set of polynomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the properties of Assumption 5.11
Output:

-   the common points of @xmath and @xmath ,

-   the topology of the curve @xmath , described by

    -   the real roots @xmath of @xmath , @xmath and
        @xmath . We denote by @xmath , @xmath .

    -   The number @xmath of roots of @xmath in @xmath when @xmath
        varies on @xmath . We denote this root by @xmath .

    -   The number @xmath of roots of @xmath in @xmath . We denote these
        roots by @xmath .

    -   A number @xmath such that if @xmath is the unique critical point
        of the projection of @xmath on the @xmath -axis or an
        intersection point of @xmath and @xmath above @xmath , @xmath .

Procedure:
– Compute the common points of @xmath and @xmath using Algorithm 2.12
(TOP) as a black-box.
– Compute the topology of @xmath including the common points with @xmath
by using Algorithm 2.12 (TOP) as a black-box.

#### 5.2.5. Details on the Lifting Phase

##### Lifting of Single Points

We recall some well-known facts about the real roots of a quadratic
polynomial in one variable. Note that we know a priori what case we do
have to consider in our setting. For example, a candidate @xmath which
also lie on @xmath corresponds to the case @xmath (see Proposition 5.13
), i.e., the polynomial @xmath has exactly one real root.

###### Proposition 5.13.

Let @xmath with @xmath and let @xmath . Then we get the following cases.

1.   If @xmath , then the polynomial @xmath has exactly one solution
    @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then the polynomial @xmath has two real solution @xmath
    and @xmath . In this case, @xmath and @xmath .

3.   If @xmath , then the polynomial P has only two complex conjugated
    roots.

By using the information computed by Algorithm 5.12 we can now easily
determine the solutions @xmath , @xmath , of the polynomial @xmath where
@xmath is a possible candidate in the plane.

##### Lifting of a Curve

Our approach for lifting a curve is similar to lifting a single point as
described in the chapter before. By computing some extra points on
@xmath as described in the previous section, we can determine easily the
adjacency of the (possible) space curve which is induced by the plane
curve @xmath .

Assume that we computed the topology of @xmath as described in Algorithm
5.12 . First, we lift all points (if possible) onto @xmath . Note that
we can easily determine the missing adjacencies as described in Chapter
2.1.4 , since there are only one or two points above. Then we just need
to test whether or not our candidates lie on @xmath and @xmath as well.
It is worthwhile to mention that not all components of @xmath might get
lifted even though they can be lifted to a solution on @xmath .

#### 5.2.6. The Implementation

The algorithm has been prototypically implemented in the Computer
Algebra System Maple (version 9.5) [ 61 ] and it follows the approach
outlined closely. It starts always with three quadratic polynomials
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath and, due to efficiency reasons, it performs
most of the computations by using floating point arithmetic. The latter
one comes from the fact that we extended Laureano Gonzalez-Vega and
Ioana Necula’s TOP algorithm code ( [ 45 ] ). Hence, the only
computations that are performed symbolically are:

1.  the computation of the projection set @xmath .

2.  the computations of the different signed subresultant sequences and
    their coefficients for the projection set @xmath .

3.  the computation of the square-free part of the resultant of two
    polynomials @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and its decomposition with
    respect to the signed subresultant coefficients.

The remaining computations consist in solving numerically different
polynomial equations (without multiple roots) or evaluating at these
roots some of the polynomials symbolically computed. Initially the
chosen precision is 15 digits, but one can choose any other starting
precision @xmath . As in the implementation of the TOP-algorithm, we
choose a threshold @xmath that depends on the chosen precision in order
to decide whether or not a polynomial is zero at a given point.

Once the planar arrangement @xmath is computed, we analyze the size
@xmath of the input polynomials @xmath and the set @xmath . Afterwards,
we update the precision to @xmath digits, where @xmath . Furthermore,
the Maple function fsolve is used to solve the square-free univariate
polynomial equations before mentioned. If fsolve does not return the
correct number of roots (which are known in advance) or some numerical
evaluation returns some non guaranteed value, the precision is increased
by 10 digits and those computations are performed again. Moreover, we
output the coordinates of the isolated points and a three dimensional
linear graph if the intersection points form a curve.

We end this section by giving some examples, which illustrate our
approach. The experimentations were performed on a PowerPC G4 1GHz. The
following example is taken from [ 69 ] .

###### Example 5.14 (two isolated points, [69]).

Let be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then the projection set @xmath contains of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Our computations end with a precision of 26 digits. The real
intersection is computed in @xmath seconds and consists of two isolated
points, namely,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, Table 5.2 and Table 5.3 present a comparison between the
computing times (in seconds) obtained by our approach and the
prototypically and improved implementation of [ 69 ] ¹ ¹ 1 running times
are measured on a Intel Pentium 700 and Pentium III Mobile 800 using
different numbers of decimal digits for the three input quadrics.
Moreover, Table 5.2 contains the following additional information:

-   size of Input (resp., @xmath ) – number of decimal digits of the
    Input (resp., the projection set @xmath .

-   Changes – number of linear changes of variables

-   Precision – used precision for obtaining the result

It is worthwhile to mention that we obtain similar running times for all
our experiments. Additionally, the improvement of the running times do
not only depend on the newer computer.

###### Example 5.15 (closed curve).

Let be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note, that the three quadrics are linearly independent and the
projection set @xmath contains of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then the real intersection of the three quadrics defined by @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath consists of infinitely many points. Figure 5.6 shows
the linear three dimensional graph computed by our implementation. The
computations start and end with a precision of 15 digits and is computed
in @xmath seconds. For representing the linear graph we computed the
following four points. The points

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which correspond to the lift of the intersection points of the two plane
curves @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are two sample points for the two curve segments between the
critical points @xmath and @xmath .

###### Example 5.16 (2 isolated points, @xmath).

Let be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note, that @xmath . Then the projection set @xmath contains of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Our computations end with a precision of 19 digits. The real
intersection consists of two isolated points

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is computed in @xmath seconds.

###### Example 5.17 (empty intersection).

Let be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then the projection set @xmath contains of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Our computations start and end with precision of 15 digits. The real
intersection is empty and computed in @xmath s.

###### Example 5.18 (a curve and an isolated point).

Let be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note, that @xmath . Then the projection set @xmath contains of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note, that @xmath consists of two isolated points and and open curve.
Our computations start and end with precision of 15 digits. The real
intersection is computed in @xmath seconds and consists of the isolated
point @xmath and an open curve (see Figure 5.7 ). For the curve we
computed the following three points.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which corresponds to the lift of the (non-isolated) critical point of
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are sample points for the two branches ending and starting of
@xmath .

###### Example 5.19 (a curve, @xmath).

Let be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then the projection set @xmath contains of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Our computations start and end with precision of 15 digits. The real
intersection is computed in @xmath seconds and consists of two
intersecting lines. We computed the following five points. The point

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which corresponds to the lift of the critical point of @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are sample points for the two branches attached to the left and to
the right of @xmath .

###### Example 5.20 (one connected component).

Let be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note, that @xmath . Then the projection set @xmath contains of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Our computations start and end with precision of 15 digits. The real
intersection is computed in @xmath seconds and consists of one connected
component (see Figure 5.9 ).

#### 5.2.7. Remark on Cubic Surfaces

We would like to remark that the algorithm presented in Chapter 5.2 has
been extended to three cubic surfaces defined by the polynomials @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath . Note that in this case the silhouette curve
@xmath contains all points @xmath such that the polynomial @xmath has a
root @xmath of multiplicity @xmath or @xmath . Theorem 2.4 implies that
in the first case the polynomial @xmath whereas in the latter one @xmath
. Moreover, one can also use a solution formula for cubic polynomials in
one variable in order to lift a single point.

Like in the case for quadrics, we can easily determine the missing
adjacency information while lifting the curve @xmath using a simple
combinatorial type approach.

Finally, this new algorithm has similarly implemented in the Computer
Algebra System Maple (version 9.5) as well. The experimental results
archived show a very good performance. We refer to [ 53 ] for more
details.