## Acknowledgements

I would like to express my profound thanks to my advisor prof. Gil
Kalai, for numerous helpful and inspiring mathematical discussions, as
well as for his encouragement, support and care during the years of work
on this thesis.

During those years I had fruitful discussions with various
mathematicians, which reflect directly in this work. Discussions with
Eric Babson about the content of Chapters 4 and 5 led to the results
about join and Stellar subdivisions in Chapter 4; with Yhonatan Iron to
Proposition 4.3.1 ; with Carsten Thomassen to the proofs in Subsection
3.6.2 ; as well as helpful discussions with Ed Swartz about the content
of Chapter 4.

With many other mathematicians as well I had interesting and inspiring
discussions concerning this work, including Nir Avni, Uri Bader, Anders
Björner, Nati Linial, Isabella Novik, Vic Reiner, Uli Wagner and Volkmar
Welker. I am thankful to all of them.

During 2005 I attended the program on algebraic combinatorics held in
Institut Mittag-Leffler. This period was very fruitful and pleasant for
me. I deeply thank the organizers Anders Björner and Richard Stanley for
the invitation, and my host Svante Linusson at the Swedish node of the
“Algebraic Combinatorics in Europe” program, which kindly supported my
stay there.

In the last two years I have been supported by a Charles Clore
Foundation Fellowship for Ph.D. students. This fellowship allowed me to
participate in conferences, to devote more time to research and to study
tranquilly. I thank Dame Vivien Duffield and the Clore Foundation for
this support.

I also wish to thank the people of the math department at the Hebrew
University for a pleasant and supportive atmosphere to work in.

Finally, I take this opportunity to thank my family and friends, Anna
and Marni.

###### Contents

-    1 Basic Definitions and Concepts
    -    1.1 Basics of simplicial complexes
    -    1.2 Basics of algebraic shifting
        -    1.2.1 Exterior shifting
        -    1.2.2 Symmetric shifting
        -    1.2.3 Basic properties
-    2 Algebraic Shifting and Basic Constructions on Simplicial
    Complexes
    -    2.1 Shifting union of simplicial complexes
        -    2.1.1 General unions
        -    2.1.2 How to shift a disjoint union?
        -    2.1.3 How to shift a union over a simplex?
    -    2.2 Shifting near cones
        -    2.2.1 The Sarkaria map
        -    2.2.2 Shifting a near cone: exterior case.
    -    2.3 Shifting join of simplicial complexes
    -    2.4 Open problems
-    3 Algebraic Shifting and Rigidity of Graphs
    -    3.1 Basics of rigidity theory of graphs
    -    3.2 Rigidity and symmetric shifting
    -    3.3 Hyperconnectivity and exterior shifting
    -    3.4 Minimal cycle complexes
    -    3.5 Rigidity and doubly Cohen-Macaulay complexes
    -    3.6 Shifting and minors of graphs
        -    3.6.1 Shifting can tell minors
        -    3.6.2 Minors
        -    3.6.3 Shifting and embedding into @xmath -manifolds
    -    3.7 Open problems
-    4 Lefschetz Properties and Basic Constructions on Simplicial
    Spheres
    -    4.1 Basics of Lefschetz properties
    -    4.2 Hard Lefschetz and join
    -    4.3 Weak Lefschetz and gluing
    -    4.4 Lefschetz properties and connected sum
    -    4.5 Swartz lifting theorem and beyond
    -    4.6 Lefschetz properties and Stellar subdivisions
    -    4.7 Open problems
-    5 Algebraic Shifting and the @xmath -Conjecture: a Topological
    Approach
    -    5.1 Kalai-Sarkaria conjecture
    -    5.2 Van Kampen’s Obstruction
        -    5.2.1 Deleted join and @xmath coefficients
        -    5.2.2 Deleted product and @xmath coefficients
    -    5.3 Relation to minors of simplicial complexes
        -    5.3.1 Definition of minors and statement of results
        -    5.3.2 Proof of Theorem 5.3.1
        -    5.3.3 Proof of Theorem 5.3.4
    -    5.4 Topology preserving edge contractions
        -    5.4.1 PL manifolds
        -    5.4.2 PL spheres
    -    5.5 Open problems
-    6 Face Rings for Graded Posets
    -    6.1 Some classic @xmath -vector results for graded posets
    -    6.2 Algebraic shifting for geometric meet semi-lattices
    -    6.3 Algebraic shifting for generalized multicomplexes
    -    6.4 Open problems

## Chapter 1 Basic Definitions and Concepts

### 1.1 Basics of simplicial complexes

Let @xmath , and @xmath denote the subsets of @xmath of size @xmath . A
collection @xmath of subsets of @xmath is called a (finite abstract)
simplicial complex if it is closed under inclusion, i.e. @xmath implies
@xmath . Note that if @xmath is not empty (which we will assume from now
on) then @xmath . The @xmath -th skeleton of @xmath is @xmath . The
elements of @xmath are called faces ; those in @xmath have dimension i .
The @xmath -dimensional faces are called vertices , the @xmath
-dimensional faces are called edges and the maximal faces with respect
to inclusion are called facets . If all the facets have the same
dimension, @xmath is pure . The @xmath - vector (face vector) of @xmath
is @xmath where @xmath . The dimension of K is @xmath ; e.g. a
1-dimensional simplicial complex is a simple graph. The @xmath -
polynomial of @xmath is @xmath .

The link of a face @xmath is @xmath . Note that @xmath is also a
simplicial complex, and that @xmath . The (open) star of @xmath is
@xmath , which is not a simplicial complex; the closed star of @xmath in
@xmath is @xmath , which is a simplicial complex. The anti star of
@xmath is @xmath , which is a simplicial complex. The join of two
simplicial complexes @xmath with disjoint sets of vertices is the
simplicial complex @xmath . Note that @xmath .

A simplex in @xmath is the convex hull of some affinely independent
points in @xmath . Its intersection with a supporting hyperplane is a
face of it, as well as the empty face. The 0-dimensional simplices are
called vertices. A (finite) geometric simplicial complex @xmath in
@xmath is a finite collection of simplices in @xmath such that:
(a) Every face of a simplex in @xmath is in @xmath .
(b) The intersection of any two simplices in @xmath is a face of each of
them.
We endow the union of simplices in @xmath with the induces topology as a
subspace of the Euclidian space @xmath , and call it the topology of
@xmath . A geometric realization of an abstract simplicial complex
@xmath is a geometric simplicial complex @xmath in some @xmath such that
@xmath is combinatorially isomorphic to @xmath , i.e. as posets w.r.t.
inclusion. Any two geometric realizations of the same simplicial
complex, @xmath , are (piecewise linearly) homeomorphic, and we denote
this topological space by @xmath . We refer to topological properties of
@xmath as properties of @xmath ; e.g. @xmath , the complete graph on 5
vertices, is not embeddable in @xmath . We say that a simplicial complex
@xmath is a triangulation of a topological space @xmath if @xmath is
homeomorphic to @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the reduced @xmath -th (simplicial) homology group of
@xmath with field @xmath coefficients. @xmath is the @xmath -th Betti
number of @xmath with @xmath coefficients, and @xmath is its Betti
vector .

Let @xmath denote the usual order on the natural numbers. A simplicial
complex @xmath with vertices @xmath is shifted if for every @xmath ,
@xmath , also @xmath . Let @xmath be the product partial order on equal
sized ordered subsets of @xmath . That is, for @xmath and @xmath @xmath
iff @xmath for every @xmath . Then @xmath is shifted iff @xmath implies
@xmath . It is easy to see that every simplicial complex has a shifted
simplicial complex with the same @xmath -vector: for some @xmath apply
@xmath for all @xmath to obtain @xmath , which is also a simplicial
complex, with the same f-vector. Repeat this process as long as
possible, to obtain a shifted simplicial complex @xmath . Note that
@xmath depends on the order of choices of pairs @xmath . The operation
@xmath is called combinatorial shifting , introduced by Erds̈ Ko and Rado
[ Erdos-Ko-Rado ] .

Note that a shifted complex @xmath is homotopy equivalent to a wedge of
spheres, where the number of @xmath -dimensional spheres in this wedge
is @xmath . In particular, its Betti numbers are easily read off from
its combinatorics: @xmath for every field @xmath .

For further details about simplicial complexes, and about simplicial
homology, we refer to Munkres’ book [ Munkres ] .

Another useful way to encode the information in the @xmath -vector
@xmath is by the h-vector . Let @xmath be @xmath -dimensional, and
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently, @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath - polynomial of @xmath is
@xmath , hence @xmath . If @xmath is a sphere, then @xmath is symmetric,
i.e. @xmath for every @xmath . Equivalently, @xmath . These relations
are known as Dehn-Sommerville equations. In this case @xmath can be
recovered from the g-vector : @xmath , @xmath for @xmath . @xmath .

For more information about the importance of the @xmath - and @xmath
-vectors, we refer to Stanley’s book [ St ] , and to Chapter 4 below.

### 1.2 Basics of algebraic shifting

We give the definition of exterior and symmetric algebraic shifting and
state some of there basic properties. We develop a ’dual’ point of view
which leads to equivalent definitions, and use these ’dual’ definitions
to cut the faces of the shifted complex into ’intervals’ which play a
crucial role in the proofs of the results of Chapter 2 .

#### 1.2.1 Exterior shifting

##### Via the exterior algebra

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath be a field extension of @xmath of
transcendental degree @xmath (e.g. @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath and
@xmath where @xmath are intermediates). Let @xmath be an @xmath
-dimensional vector space over @xmath with basis @xmath . Let @xmath be
the graded exterior algebra over @xmath . Denote @xmath where @xmath .
Then @xmath is a basis for @xmath . Note that as @xmath is a simplicial
complex, the ideal @xmath of @xmath and the vector subspace @xmath of
@xmath consist of the same set of elements in @xmath . Define the
exterior algebra of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a basis of @xmath , generic over @xmath with respect to
@xmath , which means that the entries of the corresponding transition
matrix @xmath ( @xmath for all @xmath ) are algebraically independent
over @xmath . Let @xmath be the image of @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath
be the lexicographic order on equal sized subsets of @xmath , i.e.
@xmath iff @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to be the shifted complex, introduced by Kalai [ 55 ] . The construction
is canonical, i.e. it is independent of the choice of the generic matrix
@xmath , and for a permutation @xmath the induced simplicial complex
@xmath satisfies @xmath . It results in a shifted simplicial complex,
having the same face vector and Betti vector as @xmath ’s [ BK ] . Some
more of its basic properties are detailed in subsection 1.2.3 .

##### Via dual setting

Fixing the basis @xmath of @xmath induces the basis @xmath of @xmath as
a @xmath -vector space, which in turn induces the dual basis @xmath of
@xmath by defining @xmath and extending bilinearly. @xmath stands for
the space of @xmath -linear functionals on @xmath . For @xmath @xmath
will denote @xmath . Define the so called left interior product of
@xmath on @xmath [ 56 ] , where @xmath , denoted @xmath , by the
requirement that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the adjoint operator of @xmath w.r.t. the bilinear form @xmath
on @xmath . Thus, @xmath is a bilinear function, satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . This implies in particular that for a monomial @xmath
(i.e. @xmath is a wedge product of elements of degree 1) @xmath is a
boundary operation on @xmath , and in particular on @xmath [ 56 ] . Let
@xmath and @xmath . We denote:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the definition of @xmath makes sense more generally when
@xmath (and not merely when @xmath ), and still @xmath operates on the
subspace @xmath of @xmath for every @xmath . (Recall that @xmath where
@xmath is a generic matrix.) Define @xmath , and @xmath where @xmath .
By equation ( 1.1 ), the following equality of operators on @xmath
holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we give some equivalent descriptions of the exterior shifting
operator, using the kernels defined above. This approach will be used in
Chapter 2 . The following generalizes a result for graphs [ 56 ] (the
proof is similar):

###### Proposition 1.2.1

Let @xmath , @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : Recall that @xmath . Thus, if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now suppose @xmath . The set @xmath forms a basis of @xmath , so there
is some @xmath , @xmath , (note that @xmath ) such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We get that for @xmath : @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath which completes
the proof. @xmath

In the next proposition we determine the shifting of a simplicial
complex by looking at the intersection of kernels of boundary operations
(actually only at their dimensions): Let @xmath be a subset of @xmath of
size @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath , we look at @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.2.2

Let @xmath . The following quantities are equal:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
     @xmath      (1.4)
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular, @xmath iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(equivalently, @xmath iff @xmath ).

@xmath : First we show that ( 1.3 ) equals ( 1.4 ). For every @xmath ,
@xmath , decompose @xmath , where @xmath . For each @xmath satisfying
@xmath , we have @xmath . Each @xmath , where @xmath , is a linear
combination of the @xmath ’s, @xmath , so @xmath is a linear combination
of such @xmath ’s. Thus, for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining with ( 1.2 ) the desired equality follows.

Next we show that ( 1.5 ) equals ( 1.4 ). Let @xmath and @xmath . Let us
express @xmath and @xmath in the basis @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the minor of @xmath (transition matrix) with respect to
the rows @xmath and columns @xmath , and where @xmath is a scalar in
@xmath .

By bilinearity we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus ( 1.4 ) equals the dimension of the solution space of the system
@xmath , where @xmath is the matrix @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . But, since the row indices of @xmath are an initial
set with respect to the lexicographic order, the intersection of @xmath
with this set of indices determines a basis of the row space of @xmath .
Thus, @xmath . But @xmath and @xmath have the same @xmath -vector, so we
get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired. @xmath

##### Dividing @xmath into intervals

For each @xmath and @xmath , @xmath we define @xmath to be the set of
lexicographically least @xmath elements in @xmath , and for every @xmath
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath . In the sequel, all the sets of numbers we
consider are subsets of @xmath . In order to simplify notation, we will
often omit noting that. We get the following information about the
partition of the faces in the shifted complex into ’intervals’:

###### Proposition 1.2.3

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : By Proposition 1.2.1 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see that the last equation is true, one needs to check that @xmath .
By Proposition 1.2.2 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here one checks that @xmath . Thus, the proof of the proposition is
completed. @xmath

Note that on @xmath the lexicographic order and the partial order @xmath
coincide, since all sets in @xmath have the same @xmath least elements.
As @xmath is shifted, @xmath is an initial set of @xmath with respect to
@xmath . Denote for short

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is indeed independent of the particular @xmath we choose, as long
as @xmath . We observe that:

###### Proposition 1.2.4

Let @xmath and @xmath be subsets of @xmath . Then: @xmath @xmath

Another easy preparatory lemma is the following:

###### Proposition 1.2.5

Let @xmath . Then: @xmath

@xmath : It follows from the fact that @xmath (Kalai [
Kalai-SymmMatroids ] , or later on here in Corollary 2.2.7 ). @xmath

#### 1.2.2 Symmetric shifting

##### Via the symmetric algebra

For symmetric shifting, let us look on the face ring (Stanley-Reisner
ring) of @xmath @xmath where @xmath is the homogenous ideal generated by
the monomials whose support is not in @xmath , @xmath . @xmath is graded
by degree. Let @xmath be fields as before and let @xmath be generic
linear combinations of @xmath w.r.t. @xmath . We choose a basis for each
graded component of @xmath , up to degree @xmath , from the canonic
projection of the monomials in the @xmath ’s on @xmath , in the greedy
way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath iff for @xmath @xmath ). The combinatorial information in
@xmath is redundant: if @xmath is of degree @xmath then @xmath are also
in @xmath . Thus, @xmath can be reconstructed from its monomials of the
form @xmath where @xmath , @xmath . Denote this set by @xmath , and
define @xmath for such @xmath . The collection of sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

carries the same combinatorial information as @xmath . @xmath is a
simplicial complex. Again, the construction is canonic, in the same
sense as for exterior shifting. If @xmath has characteristic zero then
@xmath is shifted [ Kalai-SymmMatroids ] . Further basic properties of
@xmath are detailed in subsection 1.2.3 .

##### Via dual setting

Denote monomials in the graded polynomial ring @xmath by @xmath where
@xmath , and define a bilinear form on @xmath by @xmath . For a subspace
@xmath of @xmath denote its orthogonal subspace by @xmath . Every
element @xmath defines a map on @xmath by multiplication @xmath , and
denote its adjoint map by @xmath . This induces a bilinear map on @xmath
, @xmath which satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath means that componentwise @xmath . Thus, for a simplicial
complex @xmath with @xmath , the restriction @xmath is into @xmath , as
a basis for this subspace is @xmath where @xmath . Denote the degree
@xmath part of @xmath by @xmath , and the degree of an element @xmath by
@xmath . For a homogenous element @xmath , let @xmath .

Let @xmath be a generic basis for @xmath w.r.t. the basis @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.2.6

Let @xmath be a monomial in the basis @xmath (i.e. @xmath ), and @xmath
. Then @xmath .

@xmath : By the associativity and commutativity of multiplication in
@xmath , when passing to adjoint maps one obtains @xmath , and hence
@xmath . Conversely, if @xmath , there exists a monomial @xmath in the
basis @xmath such that @xmath (as such monomials @xmath span @xmath over
@xmath ). Write @xmath for suitable @xmath (this is possible as @xmath
). Then @xmath , in particular @xmath @xmath
Convention : From now on when writing the relation of monomials @xmath
it will mean that we assume @xmath even if we do not say so explicitly.

###### Proposition 1.2.7

Let @xmath be monomials in the basis @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : First note that the intersection on RHS does not change when
replacing the @xmath ’s with their orthogonal projection on @xmath (as
for @xmath , @xmath ), thus we may assume @xmath .

Consider the @xmath matrix @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath . @xmath

##### Dividing @xmath into intervals

For a monomial @xmath and @xmath let @xmath be the lexicographically
least monomial of degree @xmath which divides @xmath . For every @xmath
define the following subsets of monomials with variables in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.2.8

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : By Proposition 1.2.6 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, by Proposition 1.2.7 , equals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

#### 1.2.3 Basic properties

Both exterior and symmetric shifting share the following basic
properties; see [ skira ] for more details and references to the
original proofs. We denote both shifting operators by @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.9

(Kalai) Let @xmath and @xmath be simplicial complexes, and @xmath
denotes algebraic shifting. Then:

1.  @xmath is a simplicial complex.

2.  @xmath for @xmath combinatorially isomorphic to @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

4.  @xmath .

5.  @xmath is shifted (assume @xmath for @xmath ).

6.  @xmath (assume @xmath for @xmath ).

7.  @xmath is the same for fields with the same characteristic.

8.   If @xmath then @xmath .

Later we will prove further properties of algebraic shifting, and will
exhibit properties which hold only for one of the two versions.

## Chapter 2 Algebraic Shifting and Basic Constructions on Simplicial
Complexes

### 2.1 Shifting union of simplicial complexes

#### 2.1.1 General unions

###### Problem 2.1.1

( [ skira ] , Problem 13) Given two simplicial complexes @xmath and
@xmath , find all possible connections between @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

##### Exterior shifting

We look on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as subspaces of @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath . As before, the @xmath ’s are generic linear
combinations of the @xmath ’s w.r.t. @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . First we find a connection between boundary operations on the
spaces associated with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath via the
following commutative diagram of exact sequences:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where all sums @xmath in the bottom sequence are taken over @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

By the snake lemma, ( 2.1 ) gives rise to the following exact sequence:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the connecting homomorphism. Let ( @xmath ) be the
diagram obtained from ( 2.1 ) by replacing @xmath with @xmath
everywhere, and renaming the maps by adding a superscript to each of
them. Let ( @xmath ) be the sequence derived from ( @xmath ) by applying
to it the snake lemma. If @xmath in ( 2.2 ), and also the connecting
homomorphism @xmath in ( @xmath ), then by Proposition 1.2.3 the
following additive formula holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Theorem 2.1.2

Let @xmath and @xmath be two simplicial complexes, and let @xmath be the
dimension of @xmath . For every subset @xmath of the set of vertices
@xmath , the following additive formula holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath : Put @xmath in ( 2.1 ) and in ( @xmath ). Thus, the range and
domain of @xmath in ( 2.1 ) and of @xmath in ( @xmath ) are zero, hence
@xmath and @xmath , and the theorem follows. @xmath

It would be interesting to understand what extra information about
@xmath we can derive by using more of the structure of @xmath , and not
merely its dimension. In particular, it would be interesting to find
combinatorial conditions that imply the vanishing of @xmath in ( 2.2 ).
The proof of Theorem 2.1.6 provides a step in this direction. The
Mayer-Vietoris long exact sequence (e.g. [ Munkres ] p.186) gives some
information of this type, by the interpretation of the Betti vector
using the shifted complex [ BK ] , mentioned in the Introduction.

##### Symmetric shifting

Let @xmath be a monomial of degree @xmath in the generic basis @xmath
w.r.t. the basis @xmath of @xmath , and let @xmath be an integer.
Analogously to ( 2.1 ), the following is a commutative diagram of exact
sequences of subspaces of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where all sums @xmath in the bottom sequence are taken over @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are @xmath restricted to
the relevant subspaces of @xmath .

As in the exterior case, by the snake lemma we obtain the following
exact sequence:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the connecting homomorphism, and similarly we get (
@xmath ) with @xmath as the connecting homomorphism when applying the
snake lemma to the diagram obtained from ( 2.5 ) by replacing @xmath
with @xmath everywhere.

Under which conditions do we get @xmath , which provides an additive
formula? Such conditions are given in the next two subsections.

We do not know whether the symmetric analogue of Theorem 2.1.2 holds or
not.

#### 2.1.2 How to shift a disjoint union?

As a corollary to Theorem 2.1.2 we get the following combinatorial
formula for shifting the disjoint union of simplicial complexes:

###### Corollary 2.1.3

Let @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : Put @xmath and @xmath in Theorem 2.1.2 , and by Proposition
1.2.4 we are done. @xmath
Similarly, in the symmetric case note that @xmath , hence for disjoint
union and @xmath @xmath in ( ), @xmath in ( ) and @xmath in ( @xmath ).
By Proposition 1.2.8 , for every monomial @xmath in the basis @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Translating this into terms of symmetric shifting, we obtain

###### Corollary 2.1.4

Let @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

As a corollary, we get the following nice equation, proposed by Kalai [
skira ] , for both versions of algebraic shifting (in the symmetric case
assume @xmath ):

###### Corollary 2.1.5

@xmath

@xmath : @xmath iff (by Corollaries 2.1.3 , 2.1.4 ) @xmath iff (by
Proposition 1.2.5 and its symmetric analogue) @xmath iff (by Corollaries
2.1.3 , 2.1.4 ) @xmath . @xmath
Remarks : (1) Above a high enough dimension (to be specified) all faces
of the shifting of a union are determined by the shifting of its
components: Let @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath determine all faces of
@xmath of dimension @xmath , by applying Corollary 2.1.5 to the
subcomplex of @xmath spanned by the vertices @xmath , and using the
basic properties Theorem 1.2.9 (3,8).

(2) Let @xmath be a @xmath generic block matrix, with an upper block of
size @xmath and a lower block of size @xmath . Although we defined the
shifting operator @xmath with respect to a generic matrix @xmath , the
definition makes sense for any nonsingular matrix (but in that case the
resulting complex may not be shifted). Let @xmath and @xmath . Corollary
2.1.5 can be formulated as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath (on the right hand side of the equation the vertices of
the two shifted complexes are considered as two disjoint sets). However,
there are simplicial complexes @xmath on @xmath vertices , for which
@xmath . For example, let @xmath and take the graph @xmath of the
octahedron @xmath . Then @xmath over @xmath , for both versions of
shifting.

(3) By induction, we get from Corollary 2.1.5 that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any positive integer @xmath and disjoint simplicial complexes @xmath
.

#### 2.1.3 How to shift a union over a simplex?

In the case where @xmath is a simplex and all of its subsets, we also
get a formula for @xmath in terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This
case corresponds to the topological operation called connected sum; see
Example 2.1.8 .

###### Theorem 2.1.6

Let @xmath and @xmath be two simplicial complexes, where @xmath is the
simplicial complex consisting of the set @xmath and all of its subsets.
For every @xmath and every subset @xmath of the set of vertices @xmath ,
the following additive formula holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This theorem gives an explicit combinatorial description of @xmath in
terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In particular, any gluing of
@xmath and @xmath along a @xmath -simplex results in the same shifted
complex @xmath , depending only on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Corollary 2.1.7

Let @xmath and @xmath be simplicial complexes where @xmath is a complete
simplicial complex. Let @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : Put @xmath and @xmath in Theorem 2.1.6 , and by Proposition
1.2.4 (valid for the symmetric case as well) we are done. @xmath

###### Example 2.1.8

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional stacked sphere on @xmath vertices.
Then @xmath where @xmath means taking the closure under the product
partial order @xmath and under inclusion.

@xmath : Let @xmath be the @xmath -simplex and @xmath its boundary.
Clearly @xmath , hence the case @xmath follows. Proceed by induction on
@xmath : use Corollary 2.1.7 to determine the shifting of the union
@xmath over a common facet. To obtain @xmath one needs to delete from it
one facet. This must be @xmath , which represent the extra top homology.
@xmath

Remark : A more complicated proof of Example 2.1.8 was given very
recently by Murai [ MuraiCyclic ] .
@xmath : For a simplicial complex @xmath , let @xmath denote the
complete simplicial complex @xmath .

Exterior case : The inclusions @xmath for @xmath induce a morphism from
the commutative diagram ( 2.1 ) of @xmath and @xmath into the analogous
commutative diagram @xmath of @xmath and @xmath . By functoriality of
the sequence of the snake lemma, we obtain the following commutative
diagram:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the bars indicate that ( @xmath ) is obtained from ( 2.1 ) by
putting bars over all the complexes and renaming the maps by adding a
bar over each map. Thus, if @xmath then also @xmath , which, as we have
seen, implies ( 2.3 ). The fact that @xmath completes the proof.

We show now that @xmath . To simplify notation, assume that @xmath and
@xmath are complete complexes whose intersection is @xmath (which is a
complete complex). Consider ( 2.1 ) with @xmath . (It is enough to prove
Theorem 2.1.6 for @xmath as for every @xmath , @xmath and @xmath a
simplicial complex on @xmath , @xmath .) Let @xmath where @xmath . By
commutativity of the middle right square of ( 2.1 ), @xmath . If we show
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

then there exists @xmath such that @xmath , hence @xmath (where @xmath
denotes the image of @xmath under the projection onto @xmath ) i.e.
@xmath . ( 2.8 ) follows from the intrinsic characterization of the
image of the maps it involves, given in Proposition 2.1.9 . By
Proposition 2.1.9 , the right hand side of ( 2.8 ) consists of all
@xmath that satisfy @xmath and @xmath of Proposition 2.1.9 which are
actually in @xmath . By Proposition 2.1.9 , this is exactly the left
hand side of ( 2.8 ). @xmath

Symmetric case : Repeating the arguments for the exterior case, we need
to show the following analogue of ( 2.8 ) for every monomial @xmath in
the basis @xmath of degree @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This will follow from the intrinsic characterization of the image of the
maps it involves, given in Proposition 2.1.10 . @xmath

The following generalizes a result of Kalai for graphs ( [ 56 ] , Lemma
3.7).

###### Proposition 2.1.9

Let @xmath be a complete simplicial complex with @xmath , and let @xmath
, @xmath . Then @xmath is the set of all @xmath satisfying the
following:

(a) For all pairs @xmath such that @xmath : @xmath .

(b) For all pairs @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath : Denote @xmath and
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the number modulo @xmath of elements between @xmath and
@xmath in the ordered set @xmath .

@xmath : Let us verify first that every element in @xmath satisfies
@xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath , hence @xmath
holds. For @xmath for some @xmath , let @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath then @xmath , hence @xmath holds.

We showed that every element of @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath .
Denote by @xmath the space of all @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath .
It remains to show that @xmath .

Following the proof of Proposition 1.2.3 , @xmath . Let @xmath and
@xmath . Note that @xmath . Counting according to the initial @xmath
-sets, we conclude that in case @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In case @xmath , @xmath .

Now we calculate @xmath . Let us observe that every @xmath is uniquely
determined by its coordinates @xmath such that @xmath : Let @xmath ,
@xmath . Every @xmath gives rise to an equation @xmath for the pair
@xmath and every @xmath gives rise to an equation @xmath for the pair
@xmath . Recall that @xmath is a linear combination of the form @xmath
with scalars @xmath . Thus, we have a system of @xmath equations on the
@xmath variables @xmath of @xmath , with coefficients depending only on
@xmath ’s with @xmath (actually also @xmath ) and on the generic @xmath
’s, @xmath . This system has a unique solution as the @xmath ’s are
generic. By repeating this argument we conclude that @xmath is
determined by the coordinates @xmath such that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the restriction of @xmath to its @xmath coordinates, and
let @xmath . Then @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath be the matrices corresponding to the equation
systems @xmath , @xmath with variables @xmath restricted to the cases
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. @xmath is an @xmath matrix and @xmath
is a @xmath matrix.

We observe that the row spaces of @xmath and @xmath have a zero
intersection. Indeed, for a fixed @xmath , the row space of the
restriction of @xmath to the @xmath columns of @xmath is in @xmath
(recall that @xmath is the obvious projection of @xmath on the
coordinates @xmath ), and the row space of the restriction of @xmath to
the @xmath columns of @xmath is in @xmath . But as the @xmath ’s, @xmath
, are generic, @xmath . Hence @xmath . We conclude that the row spaces
of @xmath and @xmath have a zero intersection.

@xmath is a diagonal block matrix whose blocks are generic of size
@xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

in case @xmath .

Now we compute @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath , let us consider the pairs
in @xmath whose union is @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are such pairs,
and @xmath , then @xmath is also such a pair. In addition, if @xmath are
different (the union of each two of them is @xmath ) then the three rows
in @xmath indexed by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are dependent; the
difference between the first two equals the third. Thus, the row space
of all pairs @xmath with @xmath is spanned by the rows indexed @xmath
where @xmath .

We verify now that the rows @xmath of @xmath are independent. Suppose
that we have a nontrivial linear dependence among these rows. Let @xmath
be the lexicographically maximal element in the set of all @xmath ’s
appearing in the rows @xmath with nonzero coefficient in that
dependence. There are at most @xmath rows with nonzero coefficient whose
restriction to their @xmath columns of @xmath is nonzero (they
correspond to @xmath ’s with @xmath where @xmath ). Again, as the @xmath
’s are generic, this means that the restriction of the linear dependence
to the @xmath columns of @xmath is nonzero, a contradiction. Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Note that indeed @xmath implies @xmath as @xmath .)

For @xmath , @xmath , which by ( 2.1.3 ), ( 2.11 ) and ( 2.1.3 ) equals
@xmath . For @xmath , @xmath . This completes the proof. @xmath

For symmetric shifting, the following analogous assertion holds:

###### Proposition 2.1.10

Let @xmath be a complete simplicial complex with @xmath , and let @xmath
be a monomial of degree @xmath in the generic basis @xmath of @xmath .
Then @xmath is the set of all @xmath satisfying the following:

(*) For all pairs of monomials in @xmath @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath has degree @xmath , denote @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath .

@xmath : For every monomial @xmath and @xmath as in (*), indeed @xmath
hence all elements in @xmath satisfy (*).

For the converse implication, let us compute the dimensions of both
@xmath -vector spaces. Denote for a monomial @xmath of degree @xmath in
the basis @xmath , @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath denote the space of elements @xmath satisfying (*). Note that
if @xmath then the coordinate @xmath is determined by the coordinates
@xmath via the equations (*) for the pairs @xmath . Iterating this
argument shows that the elements in @xmath are determined by their
coordinates which are supported on @xmath . Some of the equations in (*)
are dependent, let us find them a basis: consider the equations indexed
by pairs @xmath where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , as the rows of a
matrix. We now show that they are independent: assume by contradiction
the existence of a dependency, with all coefficients being nonzero, and
let @xmath be the lexicographically maximal @xmath in the pairs @xmath
which index it. Restrict the dependency to the @xmath coordinates, and
to the @xmath columns indexed by @xmath . In the matrix that these
columns form there are at most @xmath nonzero rows, corresponding to
pairs with @xmath where @xmath , @xmath , and they create a generic
block, hence the coefficients of these rows equal zero, a contradiction.
We conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As @xmath , combining with Equation ( 2.1.3 ) we conclude @xmath .
@xmath

### 2.2 Shifting near cones

A simplicial complex @xmath is called a near cone with respect to a
vertex @xmath if for every @xmath also @xmath . We prove a decomposition
theorem for the shifted complex of a near cone, from which the formula
for shifting a cone Corollary 2.2.4 follows. As a preparatory step we
introduce the Sarkaria map, modified for homology.

#### 2.2.1 The Sarkaria map

Let @xmath be a near cone with respect to a vertex @xmath . Let @xmath
and let @xmath be a linear combination of the @xmath ’s such that @xmath
for every @xmath . Imitating the Sarkaria maps for cohomology [
SarkariaPanjab ] , we get for homology the following linear maps:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined as follows: for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is justified to write @xmath as all the @xmath ’s are non zero.

###### Proposition 2.2.1

The maps @xmath and @xmath are isomorphisms of chain complexes. In
addition they satisfy the following ’grading preserving’ property: if
@xmath , @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : The check is straight forward. First we check that @xmath and
@xmath are chain maps. Denote @xmath . For every @xmath where @xmath ,
@xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath : if @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last equation holds because @xmath . Further,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the last line, the left sum is zero as @xmath , and for the same
reason the right sum can be written as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , the @xmath coefficient equals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath for every @xmath . By linearity of @xmath and @xmath (and
of the boundary maps), we have that @xmath are chain maps. To show that
@xmath are onto, it is enough to show that each @xmath , where @xmath ,
is in their image. This is obvious for @xmath . For @xmath : if @xmath
then @xmath , otherwise @xmath , which is a linear combination of
elements in @xmath , so @xmath as well. Comparing dimensions, @xmath and
@xmath are also 1-1.

We now show that @xmath ’preserves grading’ in the described above sense
(for @xmath it is clear). For disjoint subsets of @xmath define @xmath .
Let @xmath be disjoint sets such that @xmath . By @xmath we mean the
ordered union of @xmath and @xmath (and similarly for other set unions).

case 1: @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the middle equation uses the fact that @xmath , which leads to the
following sign calculation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

case 2: @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

case 3: @xmath . A similar calculation to the one for case 2 holds.
@xmath
Remark : The ’grading preserving’ property of @xmath and @xmath extends
to the case where @xmath ( @xmath ), but we won’t use it here. One has
to check that in this case (where clearly @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.2.2 Shifting a near cone: exterior case.

###### Theorem 2.2.2

Let @xmath be a near cone on a vertex set @xmath with respect to a
vertex @xmath . Let @xmath be some basis of @xmath such that @xmath has
no zero coefficients as a linear combination of some given basis
elements @xmath ’s of @xmath , and such that for @xmath , @xmath is a
linearly independent set. Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath : Clearly for every @xmath : @xmath and @xmath . Using the
Sarkaria map @xmath , we get that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath and is
contained, because of ’grading preserving’, in a sub-exterior-algebra
generated by the elements @xmath , @xmath (see Proposition 2.2.1 ). Let
@xmath . Recall that @xmath . Now we are prepared to shift.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which by the Sarkaria map is isomorphic to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Denote by @xmath the natural projection @xmath , and by @xmath the
matrix @xmath where @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the matrix @xmath , where @xmath . Then @xmath is obtained
from @xmath by performing the following operations: multiplying rows by
nonzero scalars and adding to a row multiples of lexicographically
smaller rows. Thus, restricting to the first @xmath rows of each of
these two matrices we get matrices of equal rank, for every @xmath . In
particular, @xmath . Hence, using the proof of Proposition 1.2.2 (note
that the proof of Proposition 1.2.2 can be applied to non-generic
shifting as well), by putting @xmath in @xmath we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the left summand in the right hand side is a constant independent of
@xmath , it is canceled when applying the last part of Proposition 1.2.2
, and we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we get the claimed decomposition of @xmath . @xmath

As a corollary we get the following decomposition theorem for the
generic shifted complex of a near cone.

###### Theorem 2.2.3

Let @xmath be a near cone with respect to a vertex @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set @xmath .

@xmath : Apply Theorem 2.2.2 for the case where @xmath is generic. In
this case, @xmath is also generic, and the theorem follows . @xmath

As a corollary we get the following property [ skira ] :

###### Corollary 2.2.4

@xmath

@xmath : Consider a cone over @xmath : @xmath . By Theorem 2.2.3 ,
@xmath , but those two simplicial complexes have equal @xmath -vectors,
and hence, @xmath . @xmath
Remarks : (1) Note that by associativity of the join operation, we get
by Corollary 2.2.4 : @xmath for every @xmath , where @xmath is the
complete simplicial complex on @xmath vertices.
(2) Using the notation in Theorem 2.2.2 we get: @xmath
(3) Recently, it was shown in [ Babson-Novik-Thomas-Cone ] that @xmath
where the field is of characteristic zero, as was claimed by Kalai in [
skira ] .

###### Definition 2.2.5

@xmath is an @xmath if there exists a sequence of simplicial complexes
@xmath such that for every @xmath there is a vertex @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath is a near cone w.r.t. @xmath .

Remark : An equivalent formulation is that there exists a permutation
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is more compact but less convenient for the proof of the following
generalization of Theorem 2.2.3 :

###### Corollary 2.2.6

Let @xmath be an i-near cone. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

@xmath : The case @xmath is Theorem 2.2.3 . By induction hypothesis,
@xmath where @xmath . We have to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath with @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

By repeated application of Proposition 1.2.1 , for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, ( 2.17 ) equals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Let @xmath .

By repeated application of the Sarkaria map, we get that @xmath as
graded chain complexes. Now we will show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be the Sarkaria isomorphism, and let @xmath be generic w.r.t.
the basis @xmath of @xmath . Then @xmath is generic w.r.t. the basis
@xmath of @xmath . We can choose a generic @xmath w.r.t. @xmath such
that @xmath for every @xmath . Actually, we can do so for @xmath generic
@xmath ’s simultaneously (as multiplying a nonsingular matrix over a
field by a generic matrix over the same field results in a generic
matrix over that field). We get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As both the @xmath ’s and the @xmath ’s are generic, @xmath and ( 2.18 )
follows. By applying Theorem 2.2.3 to the near cone @xmath , we see that
( 2.16 ) is true, which completes the proof. @xmath

From our last corollary we obtain a new proof of a well known property
of algebraic shifting, proved by Kalai [ Kalai-SymmMatroids ] :

###### Corollary 2.2.7

@xmath

@xmath : For every simplicial complex @xmath with @xmath vertices,
@xmath is shifted, (hence an @xmath -near cone), and so are all the
@xmath ’s associated to it. By induction on the number of vertices,
@xmath for all @xmath . Thus, applying Corollary 2.2.6 to the @xmath
-near cone @xmath , we get @xmath . @xmath

### 2.3 Shifting join of simplicial complexes

Let @xmath be two disjoint simplicial complexes (they include the empty
set). Recall that their join is the simplicial complex @xmath . Using
the Künneth theorem with field coefficients (see [ Munkres ] , Theorem
58.8 and ex.3 on p.373) we can describe its homology in terms of the
homologies of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling that @xmath ( [ BK ] for exterior case, [ Herzog ] for
symmetric case), we get a description of the number of faces in @xmath
which after union with @xmath are not in @xmath , in terms of numbers of
faces of that type in @xmath and @xmath . In particular, if the
dimensions of @xmath and @xmath are strictly greater than @xmath , the
Künneth theorem implies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now show that more can be said about the faces of maximal size in
@xmath that represents homology of @xmath :

###### Theorem 2.3.1

Let @xmath . For every @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath : For a generic @xmath decompose @xmath with supports in @xmath
and @xmath respectively. Denote @xmath , so @xmath . Observe that @xmath
. Denote by @xmath the corresponding generic boundary operation on
@xmath , and similarly for @xmath . Looking at @xmath as a tensor
product @xmath we see that @xmath equals @xmath , and also @xmath , and
similarly when changing the roles of @xmath and @xmath . Hence, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the first @xmath generic @xmath ’s, by the same argument, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Propositions 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 we get the claimed assertion. @xmath

For symmetric shifting, the analogous assertion to Theorem 2.3.1 is
false:

###### Example 2.3.2

Let each of @xmath and @xmath consist of three points. Thus, @xmath is
the complete bipartite graph with @xmath vertices on each side. By
Theorem 2.3.1 , @xmath , but @xmath .

We now deal with the conjecture ( [ skira ] , Problem @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We give a counterexample showing that it is false even if we assume that
one of the complexes @xmath or @xmath is shifted. Denote by @xmath the
suspension of @xmath , i.e. the join of @xmath with the (shifted)
simplicial complex consisting of two points.

###### Example 2.3.3

Let @xmath be the graph consisting of two disjoint edges. In this case
@xmath and @xmath for both versions of shifting. Surprisingly, we even
get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the lexicographic partial order on simplicial complexes is defined
(as in [ skira ] ) by: @xmath iff for all @xmath the lexicographically
first @xmath -face in @xmath (if exists) belongs to @xmath .

###### Conjecture 2.3.4

For any two simplicial complexes @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Very recently Satoshi Murai announced a proof of Conjecture 2.3.4 for
the exterior case [ Murai-Join ] .

###### Conjecture 2.3.5

(Topological invariance.) Let @xmath and @xmath be triangulations of the
same topological space. Then @xmath iff @xmath .

It would be interesting to find out when equation ( 2.19 ) holds. If
both @xmath and @xmath are shifted, it trivially holds as @xmath . By
the remark to Corollary 2.2.4 it also holds if @xmath , say, is a
complete simplicial complex.

### 2.4 Open problems

1.  (Special case of Problem 2.1.1 .) Let @xmath be a subcomplex of
    @xmath . What are the relations between @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ?

2.  Characterize the (face,Betti)-vectors of quadruples @xmath (by using
    shifting).

    Some necessary conditions on such vectors are given by the (f,
    @xmath )-vector characterization for chains of complexes w.r.t.
    inclusion (Björner and Kalai [ BK ] , Duval [ Duval30 ] ), others
    (linear inequalities) are given by the Mayer-Vietoris exact
    sequence.

3.  Prove equation ( 2.3 ) is the symmetric case:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for every simplicial complexes @xmath and all sets @xmath and
    positive integers @xmath .

4.  Prove Künneth theorem with field coefficients using shifting.

5.  Can one recover (part of) the cohomology ring of @xmath by knowing
    the shifting of suitable complexes related to @xmath ?

6.  ( [ skira ] , Problem 15) Is algebraic shifting a functor? (onto a
    category with a useful set of maps).

## Chapter 3 Algebraic Shifting and Rigidity of Graphs

### 3.1 Basics of rigidity theory of graphs

Asimov and Roth introduced the concept of generic rigidity of graphs [
Asi-Roth1 , Asi-Roth2 ] . The presentation of rigidity here is based
mainly on the one in Kalai [ Kalai-LBT ] .

Let @xmath be a simple graph. A map @xmath is called a @xmath -
embedding . It is rigid if any small enough perturbation of it which
preserves the lengths of the edges is induced by an isometry of @xmath .
Formally, @xmath is called rigid if there exists an @xmath such that if
@xmath satisfies @xmath for every @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath ,
then @xmath for every @xmath (where @xmath denotes the Euclidean
distance between the points @xmath and @xmath ).

@xmath is called generically d-rigid if the set of its rigid @xmath
-embeddings is open and dense in the topological vector space of all of
its @xmath -embeddings.

Given a @xmath -embedding @xmath , a stress w.r.t. @xmath is a function
@xmath such that for every vertex @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is called generically d-stress free if the set of its @xmath
-embeddings which have a unique stress ( @xmath ) is open and dense in
the space of all of its @xmath -embeddings.

Rigidity and stress freeness can be related as follows: Let @xmath , and
let @xmath be the @xmath matrix associated with a @xmath -embedding
@xmath of @xmath defined as follows: for its column corresponding to
@xmath put the vector @xmath (resp. @xmath ) at the entries of the
@xmath rows corresponding to @xmath (resp. @xmath ) and zero otherwise.
@xmath is generically @xmath -stress free if @xmath for a generic @xmath
(i.e. for an open and dense set of embeddings). @xmath is generically
@xmath -rigid if @xmath for a generic @xmath , where @xmath is the
complete graph on @xmath . The dimensions of the kernel and image of
@xmath are independent of the generic @xmath we choose; we call @xmath
the rigidity matrix of @xmath .

@xmath can be described by the following linear equations: @xmath
belongs to @xmath iff

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the all ones vector and @xmath is the vector of the
@xmath -th coordinate of the @xmath ’s, @xmath . From this description
it is clear that @xmath @xmath (see Asimov and Roth [ Asi-Roth1 ] for
more details).

Gluck [ Gluck ] has proven that

###### Theorem 3.1.1

(Gluck) The graph of a triangulated @xmath -sphere is generically @xmath
-rigid. Equivalently, planar graphs are generically @xmath -stress free.

The equivalence follows from the facts that every triangulated @xmath
-sphere with @xmath vertices has exactly @xmath edges (hence it is
generically @xmath -rigid iff it is generically @xmath -stress free),
and that every planar graph is a subgraph of a triangulated @xmath
-sphere. Gluck’s proof is based on two classical theorems: one is
Cauchy’s rigidity theorem (e.g. [ Cromwell-CauchyThm ] ), which states
that any combinatorial isomorphism between two convex @xmath -polytopes
which induces an isometry on their boundaries is actually induced by an
isometry of @xmath ; the other is Steinitz’s theorem [ Steinitz ] ,
which asserts that any polyhedral @xmath -sphere is combinatorially
isomorphic to the boundary complex of some convex @xmath -polytope.
Whiteley [ Wh ] has found a proof of Gluck’s theorem which avoids
convexity, based on vertex splitting. We summarize it below.

###### Lemma 3.1.2

(Whiteley) Let @xmath be obtained from a graph @xmath by contracting an
edge @xmath .

(a)If @xmath have at least @xmath common neighbors and @xmath is
generically @xmath -rigid, then @xmath is generically @xmath -rigid.

(b)If @xmath have at most @xmath common neighbors and @xmath is
generically @xmath -stress free, then @xmath is generically @xmath
-stress free.

Lemma 3.1.2 gives an alternative proof of Gluck’s theorem: starting with
a triangulated @xmath -sphere, repeatedly contract edges with exactly
@xmath common neighbors until the @xmath -skeleton of a tetrahedron is
reached (it is not difficult to show that this is always possible). By
Theorem 3.1.2 (a) it is enough to show that the @xmath -skeleton of a
tetrahedron is generically @xmath -rigid, as is well known. (By
definition, the graph of a simplex is generically @xmath -rigid for
every @xmath , and this is also true if defining rigidity via isometries
of @xmath [ Asi-Roth1 ] ).

We will need the following gluing lemma, due of Asimov and Roth [
Asi-Roth2 ] .

###### Lemma 3.1.3

(Asimov and Roth) (1) Let @xmath and @xmath be generically @xmath -rigid
graphs. If @xmath contains at least @xmath vertices, then @xmath is
generically @xmath -rigid.

(2) Let @xmath be generically @xmath -stress free graphs, @xmath such
that @xmath is generically @xmath -rigid. Then @xmath is generically
@xmath -stress free.

### 3.2 Rigidity and symmetric shifting

Let @xmath be the @xmath -skeleton of a @xmath -dimensional simplicial
complex @xmath with vertex set @xmath . We define @xmath generic
degree-one elements in the polynomial ring @xmath as follows: @xmath
where @xmath is the projection of @xmath on the @xmath -th coordinate,
@xmath . Then the sequence @xmath is an l.s.o.p. for the face ring
@xmath ( @xmath is the ideal in @xmath generated by the monomials whose
support is not an element of @xmath ). Let @xmath where @xmath is the
ideal in @xmath generated by the elements of @xmath and the grading is
induced by the degree grading in @xmath . Consider the multiplication
map @xmath , @xmath where @xmath . Lee [ Lee ] proved that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assume that @xmath is generically @xmath -rigid. Then @xmath . Combining
with ( 3.3 ), the map @xmath is injective, and hence @xmath for @xmath ;
clearly this holds for @xmath as well. Hence @xmath is an @xmath
-sequence, i.e. the Hilbert function of a standard ring - the sequence
counting the dimensions of the graded pieces of the ring by their
degree. To summarize:

###### Theorem 3.2.1

(Lee [ Lee ] ) If a simplicial complex @xmath has a generically @xmath
-rigid @xmath -skeleton, then multiplication by a generic degree @xmath
element @xmath is injective. In particular, @xmath is an @xmath
-sequence.

Note that if the multiplication @xmath is injective, then so is the
multiplication by a generic monomial of degree @xmath , @xmath , and
vice versa. In terms of @xmath , this means that @xmath , equivalently
that @xmath . To summarize, @xmath is generically @xmath -rigid iff
@xmath . Similarly, @xmath is generically @xmath -stress free iff @xmath
(iff @xmath is onto).

### 3.3 Hyperconnectivity and exterior shifting

We will describe now an exterior analogue of rigidity, namely Kalai’s
notion of hyperconnectivity [ 56 ] . We keep the notation from the
previous section and from Chapter 1 , and follow the presentation in [
56 ] .

Consider the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The dimension of its kernel equals @xmath ; it follows from Propositions
1.2.1 (with @xmath a singleton in @xmath ) and 1.2.3 . Kalai [ 56 ]
called a graph @xmath @xmath - hyperconnected if @xmath , and @xmath -
acyclic if @xmath . With this terminology, @xmath is @xmath -acyclic iff
@xmath , and is @xmath -hyperconnected iff @xmath , where @xmath .

We shall prove now an exterior analogue of Lemma 3.1.2 :

###### Lemma 3.3.1

If @xmath is obtained from @xmath by contracting an edge which belongs
to at most @xmath triangles, and @xmath is @xmath -acyclic, then so is
@xmath .

@xmath : Let @xmath be the edge we contract, @xmath . Consider the
@xmath matrix @xmath of the map @xmath w.r.t. the standard basis, where
@xmath , @xmath : for its column corresponding to @xmath put the vector
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) at the entries of the rows corresponding to
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) and zero otherwise.

Now replace in @xmath each @xmath with @xmath to obtain a new matrix
@xmath . It is enough to show that the columns of @xmath are
independent: As the set of @xmath matrices with independent columns is
open (in the Euclidian topology), by perturbing the @xmath ’s in the
places where @xmath differs from @xmath , we may obtain new generic
@xmath ’s forming a matrix with independent columns. As for every
generic choice of @xmath ’s, the map @xmath has the same rank, we would
conclude that the columns of @xmath are independent as well.

Suppose that some linear combination of the columns of @xmath equals
zero. Let @xmath be obtained from @xmath by adding the rows of @xmath to
the corresponding rows of @xmath , and deleting the rows of @xmath .
Thus, a linear combination of the columns of @xmath with the same
coefficients also equals zero. @xmath is obtained from the matrix of
@xmath by adding a zero column (for the edge @xmath ) and doubling the
columns @xmath which correspond to common neighbors @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . As @xmath , apart from the above mentioned columns
the rest have coefficient zero, and pairs of columns we doubled have
opposite sign. Let us look at the submatrix of @xmath consisting of the
’doubled’ columns with vertex @xmath and the column of @xmath ,
restricted to the rows of @xmath : it has generic coefficients, @xmath
rows and at most @xmath columns, hence its columns are independent.
Thus, all coefficients in the above linear combination are zero. @xmath

Similarly,

###### Lemma 3.3.2

If @xmath is obtained from @xmath by contracting an edge which belongs
to at least @xmath triangles, and @xmath is @xmath -hyperconnected, then
so is @xmath . @xmath

We need the following exterior analogue of Lemma 3.1.3 :

###### Lemma 3.3.3

(Kalai [ 56 ] , Theorem 4.4) Let @xmath be @xmath -acyclic graphs,
@xmath such that @xmath is @xmath -hyperconnected. Then @xmath is @xmath
-acyclic.

Similarly, if @xmath are @xmath -hyperconnected graphs, @xmath such that
@xmath , then @xmath is @xmath -hyperconnected.

We will also need the easy fact that the graph of a @xmath -simplex is
@xmath -hyperconnected for every @xmath .

### 3.4 Minimal cycle complexes

We shall need the concept of minimal cycle complexes, introduced by
Fogelsanger [ Fogelsanger ] . We summarize his theory below.

Fix a field @xmath (or more generally, any abelian group) and consider
the formal chain complex on a ground set @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath . Define subchain , minimal d-cycle and minimal d-cycle
complex as follows: @xmath is a subchain of a @xmath -chain @xmath iff
for every such @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . A @xmath -chain @xmath is a
@xmath if @xmath , and is a minimal d-cycle if its only subchains which
are cycles are @xmath and @xmath . A simplicial complex @xmath which is
spanned by the support of a minimal @xmath -cycle is called a minimal
d-cycle complex (over @xmath ), i.e. @xmath for some minimal @xmath
-cycle @xmath as above. For example, triangulations of connected
manifolds without boundary are minimal cycle complexes - fix @xmath and
let the cycle be the sum of all facets.

The following is the main result in Fogelsanger’s thesis [ Fogelsanger ]
.

###### Theorem 3.4.1

(Fogelsanger) For @xmath , every minimal @xmath -cycle complex has a
generically @xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton.

His proof relies on the following three properties of rigidity solely:
Lemmata 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 and the fact that the graph of a @xmath -simplex
is generically @xmath -rigid. As these three properties hold for
hyperconnectivity as well (see Lemmata 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 and the fact that
the graph of a @xmath -simplex is @xmath -hyperconnected), Theorem 3.4.1
holds for hyperconnectivity as well. In terms of algebraic shifting this
means

###### Theorem 3.4.2

For @xmath and every minimal @xmath -cycle complex @xmath on @xmath
vertices, over the field @xmath , @xmath holds for both versions of
algebraic shifting. @xmath

### 3.5 Rigidity and doubly Cohen-Macaulay complexes

###### Definition 3.5.1

A simplicial complex @xmath is doubly Cohen-Macaulay ( @xmath in short)
over a fixed field @xmath , if it is Cohen-Macaulay and for every vertex
@xmath , @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay of the same dimension as @xmath .

Here @xmath is the simplicial complex @xmath . By a theorem of Reisner [
Reisner ] , a simplicial complex @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay over @xmath
iff it is pure and for every face @xmath (including the empty set) and
every @xmath , @xmath .

For example, triangulated spheres are @xmath -CM, triangulated balls are
not. A homology sphere over @xmath is a simplicial complex @xmath such
that for every @xmath and every @xmath @xmath where @xmath is the @xmath
-dimensional sphere. Based on the fact that homology spheres are @xmath
-CM and that the @xmath -vector of some other classes of @xmath -CM
complexes is known to be an @xmath -sequence (e.g. [ Swartz ] ), Björner
and Swartz [ Swartz ] recently suspected that

###### Conjecture 3.5.2

( [ Swartz ] , a weakening of Problem 4.2.) The @xmath -vector of any
@xmath -CM complex is an @xmath -sequence.

We prove a first step in this direction, namely:

###### Theorem 3.5.3

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -CM simplicial complex (over
some field) where @xmath . Then @xmath is an @xmath -sequence.

This theorem follows from the following theorem, combined with Theorem
3.2.1 .

###### Theorem 3.5.4

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -CM simplicial complex (over
some field) where @xmath . Then @xmath has a generically @xmath -rigid
@xmath -skeleton.

Kalai [ Kalai-LBT ] showed that if a simplicial complex @xmath of
dimension @xmath satisfies the following conditions then it satisfies
Barnette’s lower bound inequalities:

(a) @xmath has a generically @xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton.

(b) For each face @xmath of @xmath of codimension @xmath , its link
@xmath has a generically @xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton.

(c) For each face @xmath of @xmath of codimension @xmath , its link
@xmath (which is a graph) has at least as many edges as vertices.

Kalai used this observation to prove that Barnette’s inequalities hold
for a large class of simplicial complexes.

Observe that the link of a vertex in a @xmath -CM simplicial complex is
@xmath -CM, and that a @xmath -CM graph is @xmath -connected. Combining
it with Theorem 3.5.4 and the above result of Kalai we conclude:

###### Corollary 3.5.5

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -CM simplicial complex where
@xmath . For all @xmath @xmath where @xmath is the number of @xmath
-faces in a (equivalently every) stacked @xmath -polytope on @xmath
vertices. (Explicitly, @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .) @xmath

Theorem 3.5.4 is proved by decomposing @xmath into a union of minimal
@xmath -cycle complexes (defined in Section 3.4 ). Each of these pieces
has a generically @xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton by Theorem 3.4.1 , and
the decomposition is such that gluing the pieces together results in a
complex with a generically @xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton. The
decomposition is detailed in Theorem 3.5.8 below. Its proof is by
induction on @xmath . Let us first consider the case where @xmath is
@xmath -dimensional.

A (simple finite) graph is @xmath - connected if after a deletion of any
vertex from it, the remaining graph is connected and non trivial (i.e.
is not a single vertex nor empty). Note that a graph is @xmath -CM iff
it is @xmath -connected.

###### Lemma 3.5.6

A graph @xmath is @xmath -connected iff there exists a decomposition
@xmath such that each @xmath is a simple cycle and for every @xmath ,
@xmath contains an edge.

Moreover, for each @xmath the @xmath ’s can be reordered by a
permutation @xmath such that @xmath and for every @xmath , @xmath
contains an edge.

@xmath : Whitney [ Whitney21 ] showed that a graph @xmath is @xmath
-connected iff it has an open ear decomposition, i.e. there exists a
decomposition @xmath such that each @xmath is a simple open path, @xmath
is an edge, @xmath is a simple cycle and for every @xmath @xmath equals
the @xmath end vertices of @xmath .

Assume that @xmath is @xmath -connected and consider an open ear
decomposition as above. Let @xmath . For @xmath choose a simple path
@xmath in @xmath that connects the @xmath end vertices of @xmath , and
let @xmath . @xmath is the desired decomposition sequence of @xmath .

Let @xmath be the graph whose vertices are the @xmath ’s and two of them
are neighbors iff they have an edge in common. Thus, @xmath is
connected, and hence the ’Moreover’ part of the Lemma is proved.

The other implication, that such a decomposition implies @xmath
-connectivity, will not be used in the sequel, and its proof is omitted.
@xmath

For the induction step we need the following cone lemma. For @xmath a
vertex not in the support of a @xmath -chain @xmath , let @xmath denote
the following @xmath -chain: if @xmath where @xmath for all @xmath ,
then @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.7

Let @xmath be a minimal @xmath -cycle and let @xmath be a minimal @xmath
-chain such that @xmath , i.e. @xmath has no proper subchain @xmath such
that @xmath . For @xmath a vertex not in any face in @xmath ,the support
of @xmath , define @xmath . Then @xmath is a minimal @xmath -cycle.

@xmath : @xmath hence @xmath is a @xmath -cycle. To show that it is
minimal, let @xmath be a subchain of @xmath such that @xmath . Note that
@xmath .
Case 1: @xmath is contained in a face in @xmath . By the minimality of
@xmath , @xmath . Thus, by the minimality of @xmath also @xmath and
hence @xmath .
Case 2: @xmath is not contained in any face in @xmath . Thus, @xmath .
As @xmath then @xmath . The minimality of @xmath implies @xmath . @xmath

###### Theorem 3.5.8

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -CM simplicial complex over a
field @xmath ( @xmath ). Then there exists a decomposition @xmath such
that each @xmath is a minimal @xmath -cycle complex over @xmath and for
every @xmath , @xmath contains a @xmath -face.

Moreover, for each @xmath the @xmath ’s can be reordered by a
permutation @xmath such that @xmath and for every @xmath , @xmath
contains a @xmath -face.

@xmath : The proof is by induction on @xmath . For @xmath , by Lemma
3.5.6 @xmath such that each @xmath is a simple cycle and for every
@xmath @xmath contains an edge. Define @xmath , then @xmath is a minimal
@xmath -cycle (orient the edges properly: @xmath equals @xmath or @xmath
accordingly) whose support spans the simplicial complex @xmath .
Moreover, by Lemma 3.5.6 each @xmath , @xmath , can be chosen to be the
first in such a decomposition sequence.

For @xmath , note that the link of every vertex in a @xmath -CM
simplicial complex is @xmath -CM. For a vertex @xmath , as @xmath is
@xmath -CM then by the induction hypothesis @xmath such that each @xmath
is a minimal @xmath -cycle complex and for every @xmath @xmath contains
a @xmath -face. Let @xmath be a minimal @xmath -cycle whose support
spans @xmath . As @xmath is CM of dimension @xmath , @xmath . Hence
there exists a @xmath -chain @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

Take @xmath to be such a chain with a support of minimal cardinality. By
Lemma 3.5.7 , @xmath is a minimal @xmath -cycle. Let @xmath by the
simplicial complex spanned by @xmath ; it is a minimal @xmath -cycle
complex. By the induction hypothesis, for every @xmath @xmath contains a
@xmath -face (containing @xmath ). Thus, @xmath has the desired
decomposition for every @xmath . @xmath as @xmath for every @xmath .

Let @xmath be any vertex of @xmath . Since the @xmath -skeleton of
@xmath is connected, we can order the vertices of @xmath such that
@xmath and for every @xmath @xmath is a neighbor of some @xmath where
@xmath . Let @xmath be such a neighbor of @xmath . By the induction
hypothesis we can order the @xmath ’s such that @xmath will contain
@xmath , and hence, as @xmath is pure, will contain a @xmath -face which
appears in @xmath (this face contains the edge @xmath ). The resulting
decomposition sequence @xmath is as desired.

Moreover, every @xmath where @xmath and @xmath can be chosen to be the
first in such a decomposition sequence. Indeed, by the induction
hypothesis @xmath can be the first in the decomposition sequence of
@xmath , and as mentioned before, the connectivity of the @xmath
-skeleton of @xmath guarantees that each such prefix @xmath can be
completed to a decomposition sequence of @xmath on the same @xmath ’s.
@xmath
@xmath : Consider a decomposition sequence of @xmath as guaranteed by
Theorem 3.5.8 , @xmath . By Theorem 3.4.1 each @xmath has a generically
@xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton. By Lemma 3.1.3 for all @xmath @xmath has
a generically @xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton, in particular @xmath has a
generically @xmath -rigid @xmath -skeleton ( @xmath ). @xmath

Theorem 3.5.4 follows also from the following corollary combined with
Theorem 3.4.1 .

###### Corollary 3.5.9

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -CM simplicial complex over a
field @xmath ( @xmath ). Then @xmath is a minimal cycle complex over the
Abelian group @xmath whose elements are finite linear combinations of
the (variables) @xmath ’s with coefficients in @xmath .

@xmath : Consider a decomposition @xmath as guaranteed by Theorem 3.5.8
, where @xmath , the closure w.r.t. inclusion of @xmath , for some
minimal @xmath -cycle @xmath over @xmath . Define @xmath , thus @xmath
is a minimal cycle over @xmath . Define @xmath . Clearly @xmath is a
cycle over @xmath whose support spans @xmath . It remains to show that
@xmath is minimal. Let @xmath be a subchain of @xmath which is a cycle,
@xmath . We need to show that @xmath . Denote by @xmath ( @xmath ) the
coefficient of the set @xmath in @xmath ( @xmath ) and by @xmath the
coefficient of the set @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath then for every
@xmath such that @xmath , the minimality of @xmath implies that @xmath
whenever @xmath . By assumption, there exists a set @xmath such that
@xmath . In particular, there exists an index @xmath such that @xmath ,
hence @xmath whenever @xmath . As @xmath contains a @xmath -face in case
@xmath , repeated application of the above argument implies @xmath
whenever @xmath . Repeated application of the fact that @xmath contains
a @xmath -face for @xmath and of the above argument shows that @xmath
whenever @xmath for some @xmath , i.e. @xmath . @xmath

A pure simplicial complex has a nowhere zero flow if there is an
assignment of integer non-zero wights to all of its facets which forms a
@xmath -cycle. This generalizes the definition of a nowhere zero flow
for graphs (e.g. [ SeymourNowhereZeroFlow ] for a survey).

###### Corollary 3.5.10

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -CM simplicial complex over
@xmath ( @xmath ). Then @xmath has a nowhere zero flow.

@xmath : Consider a decomposition @xmath as guaranteed by Theorem 3.5.8
. Multiplying by a common denominator, we may assume that each @xmath
for some minimal @xmath -cycle @xmath over @xmath (instead of just over
@xmath ). Let @xmath be the maximal @xmath over all nonzero coefficients
@xmath of the @xmath ’s, @xmath . Let @xmath . @xmath is a nowhere zero
flow for @xmath ; we omit the details. @xmath

### 3.6 Shifting and minors of graphs

#### 3.6.1 Shifting can tell minors

Inspired by Lemma 3.1.2 , we will show now how shifting can tell graph
minors.

###### Theorem 3.6.1

The following holds for symmetric and exterior shifting: for every
@xmath and every graph @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath has a @xmath
minor.

Note that the case @xmath strengthens Gluck’s Theorem 3.1.1 , via the
interpretation of rigidity in terms of symmetric shifting (see Section
3.2 ).

The proof is by induction on the number of vertices, based on
contracting edges satisfying the conditions of Lemma 3.1.2 . We make an
essential use of Mader’s theorem [ Mader ] which gives an upper bound
@xmath @xmath on the number of edges in a @xmath -minor free graph with
@xmath vertices, for @xmath . Indeed, Theorem 3.6.1 can be regarded as a
strengthening of Mader’s theorem, as @xmath implies having at most
@xmath @xmath edges, as is clear from the facts @xmath and @xmath (as it
is shifted). This also shows that Theorem 3.6.1 fails for @xmath , as is
demonstrated for @xmath by @xmath , and for @xmath by repeatedly coning
over the resulted graph for a smaller @xmath (e.g. [ Song ] ). It would
be interesting to find a proof of Theorem 3.6.1 that avoids using
Mader’s theorem, and derive Mader’s theorem as a corollary.

A graph is linklessly embeddable if there exists an embedding of it in
@xmath (where vertices and edges have disjoint images) such that every
two disjoint cycles of it are unlinked closed curves in @xmath . As such
graph is @xmath -minor free (e.g. [ SeymourLinkless ] , [
Lovasz-Schrijver ] ), combining with Theorem 3.6.1 we conclude:

###### Corollary 3.6.2

Linklessly embeddable graphs are generically @xmath -stress free.

Let @xmath denote the Colin de Verdière’s parameter of a graph @xmath [
Colin1 ] . Colin de Verdière [ Colin1 ] proved that a graph @xmath is
planar iff @xmath ; Lovász and Schrijver [ Lovasz-Schrijver ] proved
that @xmath is linklessly embeddable iff @xmath . While we have seen
that Theorem 3.6.1 fails for @xmath , we conjecture that Theorem 3.1.1
and Corollary 3.6.2 extend to:

###### Conjecture 3.6.3

Let @xmath be a graph and let @xmath be a positive integer. If @xmath
then @xmath is generically @xmath -stress free.

For @xmath this is true: Colin de Verdière [ Colin1 ] showed that the
family @xmath is closed under taking minors for every @xmath . Note that
@xmath . By Theorem 3.6.1 , Conjecture 3.6.3 holds for @xmath .
Conjecture 3.6.3 implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(where @xmath and @xmath are the numbers of edges and vertices in @xmath
, respectively) which is not known either.

Now we give a proof of Theorem 3.6.1 which relies on results about graph
minors which are developed in the next subsection, 3.6.2 .
Proof of Theorem 3.6.1 : For @xmath the assertion of the theorem is
trivial. Suppose @xmath , and contract edges belonging to at most @xmath
triangles as long as it is possible. Denote the resulted graph by @xmath
. Repeated application of Lemmata 3.1.2 and 3.3.1 asserts that if @xmath
is generically @xmath -stress free / @xmath -hyperconnected, then so is
@xmath . In case @xmath has no edges, it is trivially @xmath -stress
free / hyperconnected. Otherwise, @xmath has an edge, and each edge
belongs to at least @xmath triangles. For @xmath , by Proposition 3.6.5
@xmath has a @xmath minor, hence so has @xmath , a contradiction. For
@xmath , by Proposition 3.6.6 @xmath either has a @xmath minor which
leads to a contradiction, or @xmath is a clique sum over @xmath for some
@xmath . In the later case, denote @xmath , @xmath . As the graph of a
simplex is @xmath -rigid/hyperconnected for any @xmath , by Lemmata
3.1.3 and 3.3.3 it is enough to show that each @xmath is generically
@xmath -stress free / @xmath -acyclic, which follows from induction
hypothesis on the number of vertices. @xmath
Remark : We can prove the case @xmath avoiding Mader’s theorem, by using
Wagner’s structure theorem for @xmath -minor free graphs ( [ Diestel ] ,
Theorem 8.3.4) and Lemmata 3.1.3 and 3.3.3 . Using Wagner’s structure
theorem for @xmath -minor free graphs ( [ Diestel ] , ex.20 on p.185)
and Lemmata 3.1.3 and 3.3.3 , we conclude that @xmath -minor free graphs
are generically @xmath -stress free / @xmath -acyclic.

#### 3.6.2 Minors

All graphs we consider are simple, i.e. with no loops and no multiple
edges. Let @xmath be an edge in a graph @xmath . By contracting @xmath
we mean identifying the vertices @xmath and @xmath and deleting the loop
and one copy of each double edge created by this identification, to
obtain a new (simple) graph. A graph @xmath is called a minor of a graph
@xmath , denoted @xmath , if by repeated contraction of edges we can
obtain @xmath from a subgraph of @xmath . In the sequel we shall make an
essential use of the following Theorem of Mader [ Mader ] :

###### Theorem 3.6.4

(Mader) For @xmath , if a graph @xmath on @xmath vertices has no @xmath
minor then it has at most @xmath @xmath edges.

###### Proposition 3.6.5

For @xmath : If @xmath has an edge and each edge belongs to at least
@xmath triangles, then @xmath has a @xmath minor.

@xmath : For @xmath @xmath actually contains @xmath as a subgraph. Let
@xmath have @xmath vertices and @xmath edges. Assume (by contradiction)
that @xmath . W.l.o.g. @xmath is connected.

For @xmath , by Theorem 3.6.4 @xmath hence there is a vertex @xmath with
degree @xmath . Denote by @xmath the induced subgraph on the neighbors
of @xmath . For every @xmath , the edge @xmath belongs to at least two
triangles, hence @xmath is a triangle, and together with @xmath we
obtain a @xmath as a subgraph of @xmath , a contradiction.

For @xmath , by Theorem 3.6.4 @xmath hence there is a vertex @xmath with
degree @xmath . Also @xmath (as @xmath is not an isolated vertex). If
@xmath then the induced subgraph on @xmath is @xmath , a contradiction.
Otherwise, @xmath . Every @xmath has degree at least @xmath in @xmath ,
hence @xmath . But @xmath , hence @xmath , a contradiction. @xmath

###### Proposition 3.6.6

If @xmath has an edge and each edge belongs to at least @xmath
triangles, then either @xmath has a @xmath minor, or @xmath is a clique
sum over @xmath for some @xmath (i.e. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ).

@xmath : We proceed as in the proof of Proposition 3.6.5 : Assume that
@xmath . W.l.o.g. @xmath is connected. By Theorem 3.6.4 @xmath hence
there is a vertex @xmath with degree @xmath , also @xmath . If @xmath
then @xmath , a contradiction. Actually, @xmath is planar: since @xmath
has at most @xmath vertices, each of degree at least @xmath , if @xmath
were not @xmath -connected, it must have exactly @xmath vertices and two
disjoint edges such that each of their @xmath vertices is adjacent to
the remaining @xmath vertices of @xmath (whose removal disconnect @xmath
); but such graph has a @xmath minor. As @xmath , @xmath is @xmath
-connected. Now Wagner’s structure theorem for @xmath -minor free graphs
( [ Diestel ] , Theorem 8.3.4) asserts that @xmath is planar.

If @xmath , then @xmath hence @xmath is a triangulation of the @xmath
-sphere @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath . We will show now that @xmath
cannot have @xmath edges, hence it is a triangulation of @xmath : Assume
that @xmath has @xmath edges, so each of its vertices has degree @xmath
, and @xmath is a triangulation of @xmath minus an edge. Let us look to
the unique square (in a planar embedding) and denote its vertices by
@xmath . The number of edges between @xmath and @xmath is @xmath .
Together with the @xmath edges in the subgraph induced by @xmath ,
leaves two edges for the subgraph induced by @xmath ; let @xmath be
their common vertex. We now look at the neighborhood of @xmath in a
planar embedding (it is a @xmath -cycle): @xmath must be opposite in
this square as @xmath is missing. Hence for @xmath we get that @xmath
has degree @xmath , a contradiction.

Now we are left to deal with the case where @xmath is a triangulation of
@xmath , and hence a maximal @xmath -minor free graph. If @xmath is the
cone over @xmath with apex @xmath , then every edge in @xmath belongs to
at least @xmath triangles in @xmath . By Proposition 3.6.5 , @xmath has
a @xmath minor, a contradiction. Hence there exists a vertex @xmath ,
@xmath . Denote by @xmath the set of all vertices in @xmath connected to
@xmath by a path disjoint from @xmath . Denote by @xmath the induced
graph on the vertices in @xmath that are neighbors of some vertex in
@xmath . If @xmath is not a clique, there are two non-neighbors @xmath ,
and a path through vertices of @xmath connecting them. This path
together with the cone over @xmath with apex @xmath form a subgraph of
@xmath with a @xmath minor, a contradiction.

Suppose @xmath is a clique (it has at most @xmath vertices, as @xmath is
planar). Then @xmath is a clique sum of two graphs that strictly contain
@xmath : Let @xmath be the induced graph on @xmath and let @xmath be the
induced graph on @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . @xmath
Remark : In view of Theorem 3.6.4 for the case @xmath , we may expect
the following to be true:

###### Problem 3.6.7

If @xmath has an edge and each edge belongs to at least @xmath
triangles, then either @xmath has a @xmath minor, or @xmath is a clique
sum over @xmath for some @xmath .

If true, it extends the assertion of Theorem 3.6.1 to the case @xmath .
We could show only the weaker assertion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is @xmath minus an edge, by using similar arguments to
those used in this section.

#### 3.6.3 Shifting and embedding into @xmath-manifolds

Theorem 3.1.1 may be extended to other @xmath -manifolds as follows:

###### Theorem 3.6.8

Let @xmath be a compact connected @xmath -manifold without boundary, and
let @xmath be a graph. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath can not be
embedded in @xmath . Then @xmath can not be embedded in @xmath .

@xmath : Let @xmath be the genus of @xmath , then @xmath (e.g. the torus
has genus 1, the projective plane has genus 1/2). Assume by
contradiction that @xmath embeds in @xmath . By looking at the rigidity
matrix we note that deleting from @xmath a vertex of degree at most
@xmath preserves the existence of @xmath in the shifted graph. Deletion
preserves embeddability in @xmath as well. Thus we may assume that
@xmath has minimal degree @xmath . By Euler formula @xmath (where @xmath
and @xmath are the numbers of edges and vertices in @xmath
respectively). Also @xmath , hence @xmath . Thus @xmath which implies
@xmath . As @xmath can not be embedded in @xmath , by Ringel and Youngs
[ Ringel ] proof of Heawood’s map-coloring conjecture @xmath , a
contradiction. @xmath
Remark : For any compact connected @xmath -manifold without boundary of
positive genus, @xmath , if @xmath is embedded in @xmath two linked
simple closed curves on it exist. One may ask whether the graph of any
triangulated such @xmath is always not linkless.

For the projective plane this is true. It follows from the fact that the
two minimal triangulations of the projective plane (w.r.t. edge
contraction), determined by Barnette [ BarnetteRP2triang ] , have a
minor from the Petersen family, and hence are not linkless, by the
result of Robertson, Seymour and Thomas [ SeymourLinkless ] . Moreover,
the graph of any polyhedral map of the projective plane is not linkless,
as its @xmath minimal polyhedral maps (w.r.t. edge contraction),
determined by Barnette [ BarnetteRP2polyhed ] , have graphs equal to
@xmath of the members in Petersen family.

Examining the @xmath minimal triangulations of the torus, see
Lavrenchenko [ Lavrenchenko ] , we note that @xmath of them have a
@xmath minor, and hence are not linkless, but the last one is linkless,
see Figure 4.1 (one checks that it contains no minor from Petersen’s
family). Taking connected sums of this triangulation, we obtain linkless
graphs triangulating any oriented surface of positive genus. By
performing stellar operations we obtain linkless graphs with arbitrarily
many vertices triangulating any oriented surface of positive genus.

### 3.7 Open problems

1.  Can the @xmath ’s in Theorem 3.5.8 be taken to be homology spheres?

2.  Can the intersections in Theorem 3.5.8 be guaranteed to be CM?

    In view of Proposition 4.3.1 , if the intersections @xmath in
    Theorem 3.5.8 can be taken to be CM, and the @xmath ’s can be taken
    to be homology spheres, then Conjecture 3.5.2 would be reduced to
    the conjecture that homology spheres have the weak-Lefschetz
    property; see Conjecture 4.1.2 (2).

3.  Must a graph with a generic @xmath -stress contain a subdivision of
    @xmath for @xmath ?

    The answer is positive for @xmath as in this case @xmath has a
    @xmath minor iff @xmath contains a subdivision of @xmath ( [ Diestel
    ] , Proposition 1.7.2). Mader proved that every graph on @xmath
    vertices with more than @xmath edges contains a subdivision of
    @xmath [ Mader2 ] . A positive answer in the case @xmath would
    strengthen this result.

4.  Let @xmath be a graph and let @xmath be a positive integer. Show
    that @xmath implies that @xmath is generically @xmath -stress free.

5.  Assume that @xmath has an edge and each edge belongs to at least
    @xmath triangles. Show that either @xmath has a @xmath minor, or
    @xmath is a clique sum over @xmath for some @xmath .

    If true, it implies that @xmath forces a @xmath minor in @xmath .

6.  Is the graph of a triangulated non orientable @xmath -manifold
    always not linkless?

7.  Prove Charney-Davis conjecture [ Charney-Davis ] for clique @xmath
    -spheres using rigidity (shifting) arguments in order to give a
    simpler proof than in [ Davis-Okun ] . We repeat their conjecture:
    Let @xmath be a @xmath dimensional clique (homology) sphere (that
    is, all its missing faces are @xmath dimensional), where @xmath is
    even. Show that @xmath . Equivalently, @xmath . In case @xmath , the
    conjecture reads @xmath (to be compared with the LBT for spheres:
    @xmath ).

## Chapter 4 Lefschetz Properties and Basic Constructions on Simplicial
Spheres

### 4.1 Basics of Lefschetz properties

Our motivating problem is the following well known McMullen’s @xmath
-conjecture for spheres. Recall that by homology sphere (or Gorenstein
@xmath complex ) we mean a pure simplicial complex @xmath such that for
every face @xmath (including the empty set), @xmath has the same
homology (say with integer coefficients) as of a @xmath -sphere.

###### Conjecture 4.1.1

(McMullen [ McMullen-g-conj ] ) Let @xmath be a homology sphere, then
its @xmath -vector is an @xmath -sequence.

An algebraic approach to this problem is to associate with @xmath a
standard ring whose Hilbert function is @xmath , the @xmath -vector of
@xmath . This was worked out successfully by Stanley [ St ] in his
celebrated proof of Conjecture 4.1.1 for the case where @xmath is the
boundary complex of a simplicial polytope. The hard-Lefschetz theorem
for toric varieties associated with rational polytopes, translates in
this case to the following property of face rings, called hard-Lefschetz
.

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex on the vertex set @xmath . Let @xmath
be the polynomial ring, each variable has degree one. Recall that the
face ring of @xmath is @xmath where @xmath is the ideal in @xmath
generated by the monomials whose support is not an element of @xmath .
Let @xmath be an l.s.o.p. of @xmath - it exists, e.g. [ StanleyGreenBook
] , Lemma 5.2, and generic 1-forms @xmath from the basis @xmath of
@xmath (recall from subsection 1.2.2 ) will do. Denote @xmath where the
grading is induced by the degree grading in @xmath , and @xmath is the
ideal in @xmath generated by the images of the elements of @xmath under
the projection @xmath . @xmath is called Cohen-Macaulay (CM for short)
over @xmath if for an (equivalently, every) l.s.o.p. @xmath , @xmath is
a free @xmath -module. If @xmath is CM then @xmath . (The converse is
also true: @xmath is an @xmath -vector iff @xmath for some CM complex
@xmath [ StanleyGreenBook ] , Theorem 3.3.) For @xmath a CM simplicial
complex with symmetric @xmath -vector, if there exists an l.s.o.p.
@xmath and an element @xmath such that the multiplication maps @xmath ,
@xmath , are isomorphisms for every @xmath , we say that @xmath has the
hard-Lefschetz property , or that @xmath is HL.

As was shown by Stanley [ St ] , for @xmath the boundary complex of a
simplicial @xmath -polytope @xmath , the l.s.o.p @xmath induced by the
embedding of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath demonstrate that @xmath is HL;
hence so do generic @xmath . In terms of @xmath this is equivalent to
requiring that non of the monomials @xmath are in @xmath , where @xmath
. Indeed, these monomials are not in @xmath iff the maps @xmath are
onto, and when @xmath is symmetric this happens iff these maps are
isomorphisms.

Let us translate the hard-Lefschetz property from terms of @xmath into
terms of symmetric shifting, as in [ skira ] . Let @xmath be the pure
@xmath -dimensional simplicial complex with set of vertices @xmath and
facets @xmath . Equivalently, @xmath is the maximal pure @xmath
-dimensional simplicial complex with vertex set @xmath which does not
contain any of the sets @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath , and define @xmath . Kalai refers to the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the shifting theoretic upper bound theorem . Using the map from
@xmath to @xmath , we have just seen that for CM @xmath -dimensional
complexes with symmetric @xmath -vector, @xmath is equivalent to @xmath
being HL.

To justify the terminology in ( 4.2 ), note that the boundary complex of
the cyclic @xmath -polytope on @xmath vertices, denoted by @xmath ,
satisfies @xmath . This follows from the fact that @xmath is HL.
Recently Murai [ MuraiCyclic ] proved that also @xmath , as was
conjectured by Kalai [ skira ] . It follows that if @xmath has @xmath
vertices and ( 4.2 ) holds, then the @xmath -vectors satisfy @xmath
componentwise.

For @xmath as above, weaker than the hard-Lefschetz property is to
require only that multiplications @xmath are injective for @xmath and
surjective for @xmath , called here unimodal weak-Lefschetz property
(sometimes it is called weak-Lefschetz in the literature). Even weaker
is just to require that multiplications @xmath are injective for @xmath
, which we refer to as the weak-Lefschetz property , and say that @xmath
is WL. (Injectivity for @xmath in the case of Gorenstein @xmath
complexes implies also surjective maps for @xmath ; see the proof of
Theorem 4.5.2 below.) This is equivalent to the following, in the case
of symmetric shifting [ BK-homology ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Condition (1) holds when @xmath is CM, and condition (2) holds iff
@xmath is WL. As was noticed in [ BK-homology ] , ( 4.1 ) is implied by
requiring that @xmath is pure and every @xmath of size less than @xmath
is contained in at least @xmath facets of @xmath .

Note that if @xmath is a homology sphere, it is in particular CM with a
symmetric @xmath -vector. If in addition it has the weak-Lefschetz
property, then in the standard ring @xmath the following holds: @xmath
for all @xmath , and Conjecture 4.1.1 holds for @xmath .

We summarize the discussion above in the following hierarchy of
conjectures, where assertion @xmath implies assertion @xmath :

###### Conjecture 4.1.2

Let @xmath be a homology @xmath -sphere. Then:

(1) If @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

This is equivalent to @xmath , and in the symmetric case this is
equivalent to @xmath being HL.

(2) If @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then @xmath . In the symmetric case
this is equivalent to @xmath being WL.

(3) @xmath is an @xmath -vector.

### 4.2 Hard Lefschetz and join

Let @xmath be a Cohen-Macaulay @xmath -simplicial complex over a field
@xmath . If there exists a degree one element @xmath such that
multiplication

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is an isomorphism (for some l.s.o.p.) we say that @xmath is @xmath
-Lefschetz and that @xmath is an @xmath -Lefschetz element of @xmath .
If ( 4.4 ) holds for every @xmath then @xmath is HL and @xmath is an
HL-element of @xmath .

Let us recall a few ring theoretic terms, see e.g. [ StanleyGreenBook ]
for details. Let @xmath . An @xmath -module @xmath of dimension @xmath
is Cohen-Macaulay (CM) if for generic (i.e., for some algebraically
independent) @xmath @xmath is a free module over the subring @xmath . If
in addition @xmath where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the obvious ideal
in @xmath , then @xmath is Gorenstein . Note that Gorenstein @xmath
complexes have Gorenstein face rings (as @xmath -modules).

###### Lemma 4.2.1

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional Gorenstein module over the
polynomial ring @xmath , with an l.s.o.p. @xmath . Denote @xmath . Then
for every @xmath the pairing @xmath , @xmath is non-degenerated under
any fixed isomorphism @xmath .

@xmath : @xmath is Gorenstein, so, by definition, @xmath . As @xmath is
@xmath -dimensional, @xmath , but @xmath , thus @xmath . As @xmath is
generated by @xmath , we get that for every @xmath and @xmath there
exists @xmath such that @xmath , and inductively there exists a monomial
@xmath of degree @xmath such that @xmath , thus the pairing is
non-degenerated. @xmath

###### Lemma 4.2.2

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional Gorenstein @xmath complex with an
l.s.o.p. @xmath and an HL element @xmath over the reals. Let @xmath and
fix an isomorphism @xmath . Then for every @xmath there is an induced
non degenerated bilinear form on @xmath given by @xmath .

@xmath : Clearly @xmath is bilinear and symmetric. For @xmath , by
assumption @xmath , and by Lemma 4.2.1 there exists @xmath such that
@xmath , hence @xmath is not degenerated. @xmath

###### Lemma 4.2.3

Under the assumptions of Lemma 4.2.2 , @xmath decomposes into a direct
sum of @xmath -invariant spaces, each is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath of degree @xmath for some @xmath .

@xmath : @xmath ( @xmath ) is an @xmath -invariant space which contain
@xmath . Assume that for @xmath we have already constructed a direct sum
of @xmath -invariant spaces, @xmath , which contains @xmath , in which
each @xmath contains some nonzero element of @xmath . We now extend the
construction to have these properties w.r.t. @xmath . By assumption
@xmath . Let @xmath form a basis to the subspace of @xmath orthogonal to
@xmath w.r.t. the inner product from Lemma 4.2.2 . Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We first show that each @xmath is @xmath -invariant, i.e. that @xmath
for @xmath . By Lemma 4.2.1 it is enough to show that for every @xmath
@xmath . As @xmath indeed it equals zero.

Next we show that the sum in ( 4.5 ) is direct. As @xmath are linearly
independent and @xmath is injective, then the sum @xmath is direct. To
show that @xmath , we check that for every @xmath @xmath (for @xmath and
for @xmath @xmath ). Indeed, an element in the intersection is of the
form @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath .
Injectivity of @xmath implies @xmath , which equals zero by
orthogonality.

As the @xmath -vector of @xmath is symmetric, @xmath , giving the
desired decomposition. @xmath
Remark : Even if @xmath is not HL we still get a decomposition into a
direct sum of irreducible @xmath -invariant spaces @xmath , but no
longer @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.2.4

(With Eric Babson) Let @xmath and @xmath be Gorenstein @xmath complexes
on disjoint sets of vertices, of dimensions @xmath , with l.s.o.p’s
@xmath and HL elements @xmath respectively; over the reals. Then:

(0) @xmath has a symmetric @xmath -vector and dimension @xmath .

(1) @xmath is an l.s.o.p for @xmath (over @xmath ).

(2) @xmath is an HL element of @xmath .

@xmath The @xmath -polynomials satisfy @xmath , hence the symmetry of
@xmath follows from that of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a set @xmath let @xmath be a polynomial ring. The isomorphism @xmath
, @xmath induces a structure of an @xmath module on @xmath , isomorphic
to @xmath , by @xmath and @xmath . (E.g. @xmath acts like @xmath on
@xmath . )

The above isomorphism induces an isomorphism of @xmath -modules

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

proving (1). Actually, @xmath is both a finitely generated and free
@xmath -module, by Cohen-Macaulayness.

By Lemma 4.2.3 , @xmath decomposes into a direct sum of @xmath
-invariant spaces, each is of the form @xmath for @xmath of degree
@xmath for some @xmath ; and similarly for @xmath .

The @xmath -module @xmath is isomorphic to the @xmath -module @xmath by
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -simplex, @xmath is an
l.s.o.p. induced by the positions of the vertices in an embedding of
@xmath as a full dimensional geometric simplex in @xmath with the origin
in its interior, and @xmath is an HL element for @xmath . Thus, to prove
(2) it is enough to prove it for the join of boundaries of two simplices
with l.s.o.p.’s as above and the HL elements having weight @xmath on
each vertex of the ground set.

Note that the join @xmath is combinatorially isomorphic to the boundary
of the polytope @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are embedded in
orthogonal spaces and intersect only in the origin which is in the
relative interior of both. McMullen’s proof of the @xmath -theorem for
simplicial polytopes [ McMullen-g-proof1 , McMullen-g-proof2 ] states
that @xmath is indeed an HL element of @xmath where @xmath is the
l.s.o.p. induced by the positions of the vertices in the polytope @xmath
. By the definition of @xmath , @xmath . Thus (2) is proved. @xmath
Remark : As a nonzero multiple of an HL element is again HL, then in
Theorem 4.2.4 (2) any element @xmath where @xmath , @xmath , will do.

###### Corollary 4.2.5

Let @xmath and @xmath be HL simplicial/homology/piecewise linear spheres
of dimensions @xmath respectively. Then their join @xmath is an HL
@xmath -simplicial/homology/piecewise linear sphere.

@xmath As simplicial/homology/piecewise linear spheres are Gorenstein
@xmath , the corollary follows at once from Theorem 4.2.4 and the fact
that join of simplicial/homology/piecewise linear spheres is again a
simplicial/homology/piecewise linear sphere of appropriate dimension.
@xmath

### 4.3 Weak Lefschetz and gluing

The proof of the following proposition is similar to the proof that pure
shellable complexes are Cohen-Macaulay due to Stanley [
Stanley-ShellableCM ] ; see also [ Bruns-Herzog ] , Theorem 5.1.13.

###### Proposition 4.3.1

(with Yhonatan Iron) Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be simplicial
complexes of the same dimension @xmath . Assume that @xmath and @xmath
are weak-Lefschetz. If @xmath is CM then @xmath is weak-Lefschetz.

@xmath For any two complexes @xmath with @xmath the inclusions @xmath
induce a short exact sequence of @xmath modules

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

(maps are given by projections). The above four complexes have the same
dimension, hence they have a common l.s.o.p. @xmath (as intersection of
finitely many nonempty Zariski open sets is nonempty). As the functor
@xmath is right exact, we obtain the following commutative diagram of
exact sequences for each @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the horizontal arrows preserve grading and the vertical arrows are
multiplication by a generic @xmath , i.e. @xmath is a WL element for
both @xmath and @xmath . (For the middle terms we used distributivity of
@xmath and @xmath .)

In order to show that @xmath is injective, it is enough to show that
@xmath , which of course holds if @xmath . Note that for an @xmath
-module @xmath @xmath . As @xmath is CM, it is a free @xmath -module,
hence @xmath for every @xmath . @xmath
Remarks: (1) Note that the above proof provides an even more general
condition on @xmath which already guarantees that @xmath is WL.

(2) Compare Proposition 4.3.1 to [ Swartz ] , remark after proof of
Theorem 3.9: there the gluing corresponds to an ear decomposition of
homology spheres and balls.

### 4.4 Lefschetz properties and connected sum

Let @xmath and @xmath be pure simplicial complexes which intersect in a
common facet @xmath . Their connected sum over @xmath is @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.4.1

Let @xmath and @xmath be Gorenstein @xmath complexes over @xmath which
intersect in a common facet @xmath , of dimension @xmath . Let @xmath .
Then:

(0) @xmath is Gorenstein @xmath of dimension @xmath ; in particular its
@xmath -vector is symmetric.

(1) Let @xmath be a common l.s.o.p for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath over @xmath (it exists) and assume that @xmath is an HL element
for both @xmath and @xmath w.r.t. @xmath . Then @xmath is an @xmath
-Lefschetz element of @xmath for @xmath .

(2) @xmath is HL.

@xmath : A straightforward Mayer-Vietoris and Euler characteristic
argument shows that @xmath is Gorenstein @xmath , and hence has a
symmetric @xmath -vector. It is also easy to compute directly that
@xmath , a sum of symmetric vectors, and hence is symmetric; also @xmath
.

For a simplicial complex @xmath let @xmath be an @xmath module defined
by @xmath . Note that @xmath as @xmath -modules.

Then the following is an exact sequence of @xmath -modules:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s denote the obvious inclusions. As a finite
intersection of Zariski nonempty open sets is nonempty, @xmath as in (1)
exists (see Lemma 4.5.1 ). When we mod out @xmath from ( 4.9 ), which is
the same as tensor ( 4.9 ) with @xmath , we obtain an exact sequence:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where in the middle term we used distributivity of @xmath and @xmath .
Note that @xmath is concentrated in degree @xmath and that @xmath .
Thus, for @xmath we obtain the following commutative diagram:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the right vertical arrow is an isomorphism by assumption. Hence,
the left vertical arrow is an isomorphism as well, meaning that @xmath
is an @xmath -Lefschetz element of @xmath for @xmath .

For @xmath , as @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay with l.s.o.p. @xmath and @xmath
, then there exists a @xmath -Lefschetz element @xmath (i.e. @xmath .
This is equivalent to @xmath , which reflects the fact that @xmath has
non-vanishing top homology.). By Lemma 4.5.1 the sets of @xmath
-Lefschetz elements and of @xmath -Lefschetz elements are Zariski open.
The fact that they are nonempty implies that so is their intersection,
i.e. @xmath is HL. @xmath
Remark : (2) follows also from the symmetric case of Corollary 2.1.7 .
The proof given here in our ’special case’ is simpler.

###### Corollary 4.4.2

Let @xmath and @xmath be HL simplicial spheres of the same dimension
@xmath . Then their connected sum @xmath is also an HL @xmath -sphere.
@xmath

###### Corollary 4.4.3

Let @xmath and @xmath be WL spheres of the same dimension, which
intersect in a common facet @xmath . Then @xmath is WL.

@xmath : Imitate the proof of Theorem 4.4.1 . @xmath

### 4.5 Swartz lifting theorem and beyond

In this section we show that for proving Conjecture 4.1.1 it suffices to
show that @xmath is an isomorphism for @xmath a homology @xmath -sphere
with @xmath odd and generic l.s.o.p. @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We
end this section by stating a stronger conjecture about the structure of
the set of pairs @xmath of an l.s.o.p. and a @xmath -Lefschetz element
(stronger than being nonempty), which hopefully would be easier to
prove.

Consider the multiplication maps @xmath , @xmath where @xmath . Let
@xmath . Denote by @xmath the set of all @xmath such that @xmath is an
l.s.o.p. of @xmath , @xmath is a free @xmath -module, and @xmath is
injective for @xmath and surjective for @xmath . Denote by @xmath the
set of all @xmath such that @xmath is an l.s.o.p. of @xmath , @xmath is
a free @xmath -module, and @xmath is injective ( @xmath ). For @xmath
odd @xmath , which we simply denote by @xmath .

The following was proved by Swartz [ Swartz ] , Proposition 3.6 for
@xmath ; similar arguments can be used to prove the same conclusion for
@xmath .

###### Lemma 4.5.1

(Swartz) For every simplicial complex @xmath and for every @xmath ,
@xmath is a Zariski open set. For @xmath , @xmath is a Zariski open set.
(They may be empty, e.g. if @xmath is not pure.)

###### Theorem 4.5.2

(Swartz) Let @xmath . If for every homology @xmath -sphere @xmath ,
@xmath is nonempty, then for every @xmath and for every homology @xmath
-sphere @xmath , @xmath is nonempty for every @xmath .

@xmath : By [ Swartz-SpheresToManifolds ] , Theorem 4.26 and induction
on @xmath , @xmath is nonempty, i.e. multiplication @xmath is surjective
for a generic @xmath . As the ring @xmath is standard, @xmath is
nonempty for every @xmath . Hence, for the canonical module @xmath ,
multiplication by a generic degree @xmath element @xmath is injective in
the first @xmath degrees. As @xmath is a homology sphere, @xmath , hence
@xmath is nonempty for every @xmath . @xmath

For more information about canonical modules we refer to [
StanleyGreenBook ] .

Combined with Lemma 4.5.1 , and the fact that a finite intersection of
Zariski nonempty open sets is nonempty, if the conditions of Theorem
4.5.2 are met for every @xmath then every homology sphere is unimodal
WL, and hence Conjecture 4.1.1 follows.

We wish to show further, that if ’all’ even dimensional spheres satisfy
the condition in Theorem 4.5.2 then ’all’ spheres are HL. By ’all’ we
mean a family of Gorenstein @xmath simplicial complexes which contains
all boundaries of simplices and which is closed under joins and links
(e.g. homology /simplicial /PL spheres). The following lemma provides a
step in this direction.

###### Lemma 4.5.3

Let @xmath be a Gorenstein @xmath simplicial complex with an l.s.o.p.
@xmath over @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath -Lefschetz but not HL then
there exists a simplex @xmath such that @xmath is of even dimension
@xmath , and for every l.s.o.p. @xmath of @xmath , @xmath has no @xmath
-Lefschetz element; in particular @xmath is not unimodal WL. (We would
like to obtain this conclusion for every l.s.o.p. of @xmath !)

@xmath Denote the dimension of @xmath by @xmath and recall that @xmath .
By Lemma 4.5.1 @xmath is a Zariski open set for every @xmath . The
assumption that @xmath is not HL (but is @xmath -Lefschetz) implies that
there exists @xmath such that @xmath (as a finite intersection of
Zariski nonempty open sets is nonempty). Hence, for the fixed l.s.o.p.
@xmath and every @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath .

Let @xmath where @xmath is the @xmath -simplex. Note that @xmath (as
@xmath is @xmath -Lefschetz), hence @xmath . Then @xmath is of even
dimension @xmath . We have seen (Theorem 4.2.4 ) that for any l.s.o.p.
@xmath of @xmath , @xmath is an l.s.o.p. of @xmath . Every @xmath has a
unique expansion @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . Recall the isomorphism
( 4.6 ) of @xmath -modules @xmath . Let @xmath be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the sum @xmath is telescopic, thus @xmath . For a generic
@xmath , the projection of @xmath on @xmath is nonzero, hence so is the
projection of @xmath , and we get that @xmath . Thus, Zariski topology
tells us that for every @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath .
@xmath

We conjecture that the following stronger property holds for @xmath :

###### Conjecture 4.5.4

Let @xmath be a homology @xmath -sphere ( @xmath ) on @xmath vertices.
Then @xmath intersects every hyperplane in the vector space @xmath .

For @xmath the boundary of a simplex, the complement of @xmath is the
set of all @xmath such that @xmath . As @xmath is an irreducible
polynomial, in particular it has no linear factor, hence @xmath
intersects every hyperplane. By an unpublished argument of Swartz, it
follows that if @xmath is obtained from @xmath by a bistellar move, and
@xmath intersects every hyperplane then @xmath is nonempty. We need to
show that @xmath intersects every hyperplane, in order to conclude that
the @xmath -conjecture holds for PL-spheres. ’Unfortunately’, @xmath may
not be connected, as its complement is a codimension one algebraic
variety.

### 4.6 Lefschetz properties and Stellar subdivisions

Roughly speaking, we will show that Stellar subdivisions preserve the HL
property.

###### Proposition 4.6.1

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex. Let @xmath be obtained from @xmath
by identifying two distinct vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , i.e.
@xmath . Let @xmath . Assume that @xmath and that @xmath . Then @xmath .
(Shifting is over @xmath .)

Remark : The case @xmath and @xmath follows from Lemmata 3.1.2
(symmetric case) and 3.3.1 (exterior case).
Proof for symmetric shifting : (with Eric Babson) Let @xmath be a
generic embedding, i.e. all minors of the representing matrix w.r.t. a
fixed basis are nonzero. It induces the following map:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath equals @xmath if @xmath and @xmath otherwise.

Recall that @xmath iff @xmath , where @xmath is a generic basis for
@xmath , @xmath . By Lee [ Lee ] Theorems 10,12,15 and Tay, White and
Whiteley [ TayWhiteWhiteley-skel1 ] Proposition 5.2, @xmath iff @xmath
for some @xmath (equivalently, every @xmath in some Zariski non-empty
open set of embeddings).

Consider the following degenerating map: for @xmath let @xmath be
defined by @xmath for every @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath , and @xmath
. Let @xmath .

Let @xmath be the map induced by @xmath ; thus @xmath . Denote @xmath .
Assume for a moment that @xmath is injective. Then for a small enough
perturbation of the entries of a representing matrix of @xmath , the
columns of the resulted matrix would be independent, i.e. the
corresponding linear transformation would be injective. In particular,
there would exist an @xmath such that for every @xmath , @xmath , and
hence for every @xmath in some Zariski non-empty open set of embeddings,
@xmath . Thus, the following Lemma 4.6.2 completes the proof. @xmath

###### Lemma 4.6.2

@xmath is injective for a non-empty Zariski open set of embeddings
@xmath .

@xmath For every @xmath and every @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath , and
hence in the range of @xmath we mod out by @xmath for summands with such
@xmath . For summands of @xmath , we mod out by @xmath . Note that for
@xmath such that @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a linear transformation @xmath , denote by @xmath its representing
matrix w.r.t. given bases. In @xmath bases are indexed by sets as in (
4.6 ). First add rows @xmath to rows @xmath , then delete the rows
@xmath containing @xmath , to obtain a matrix @xmath , of a linear
transformation @xmath . In particular, we delete all rows @xmath such
that @xmath .

Note that @xmath , thus, for the obvious bases, @xmath is obtained from
@xmath by doubling the columns indexed by @xmath where both @xmath , and
by adding a zero column for every @xmath . For short, denote @xmath .
More precisely, the linear maps @xmath and @xmath are related as
follows: they have the same range. The domain of @xmath is @xmath where
@xmath ,
@xmath ,
@xmath .
For a base element @xmath of @xmath , let @xmath be obtained from @xmath
by replacing @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath ; thus @xmath . For a base
element @xmath of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

Assume we have a linear dependency @xmath . By assumption, @xmath ,
hence @xmath , thus @xmath for every base element @xmath except possibly
for @xmath and for @xmath , where @xmath .

Let @xmath be the restriction of @xmath to the subspace spanned by the
base elements @xmath such that @xmath and for which it is (yet) not
known that @xmath , followed by projection into the subspace spanned by
the @xmath coordinates where @xmath - just forget the other coordinates.
As @xmath whenever @xmath , if @xmath is injective, then @xmath for all
@xmath . Thus, the Lemma 4.6.3 below completes the proof. @xmath

###### Lemma 4.6.3

@xmath is injective for a non-empty Zariski open set of embeddings
@xmath .

@xmath Let @xmath . Note that @xmath appears in the index set of every
row and every column of @xmath . Omitting @xmath from the indices of
both of the bases used to define @xmath , we notice that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath equals @xmath if @xmath and @xmath otherwise, and @xmath is
the image of @xmath in the quotient space @xmath .

Consider the projection @xmath . Let @xmath , and @xmath be the induced
map as defined in ( 4.6 ). Then @xmath induces @xmath .

By assumption, @xmath . As symmetric shifting commutes with constructing
a cone (Kalai [ skira ] Theorem 2.2.8, and Babson, Novik and Thomas [
Babson-Novik-Thomas-Cone ] Theorem 3.7), @xmath . Hence @xmath , and by
Lee [ Lee ] , @xmath for a generic @xmath . Thus, all liftings @xmath
such that @xmath satisfy @xmath , and this set of liftings is a
non-empty Zariski open set. @xmath
Remark : Clearly the set of all @xmath such that @xmath is injective is
Zariski open. We exhibited conditions under which it is non-empty.
Proof for exterior shifting : The proof is similar to the proof for the
symmetric case. We indicate the differences. @xmath defines the first
@xmath generic @xmath ’s w.r.t. the @xmath ’s basis of @xmath and
induces the following map:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

By Proposition 1.2.1 , @xmath , hence, by shiftedness, @xmath .

Replacing @xmath by @xmath induces a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By perturbation, if @xmath then @xmath for generic @xmath .

Let @xmath be obtained from the matrix @xmath by adding the rows @xmath
to the corresponding rows @xmath and deleting the rows @xmath with
@xmath . The domain of @xmath is @xmath as for @xmath in the symmetric
case. For a base element @xmath of @xmath , let @xmath be obtained from
@xmath by replacing @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath ; thus @xmath . For
a base element @xmath of @xmath , @xmath , and as we may number @xmath
then @xmath (the rows of @xmath and of @xmath have opposite sign in
@xmath ). Now we can repeat the arguments showing that @xmath by
considering @xmath in the symmetric case, to show that @xmath by
considering @xmath . @xmath

###### Corollary 4.6.4

Let @xmath be a @xmath -sphere for some @xmath , and let @xmath be two
vertices which satisfy the Link Condition , i.e that @xmath . Let @xmath
be obtained from @xmath by contracting @xmath . Then:

(1) @xmath is a @xmath -sphere, PL homeomorphic to @xmath (see Theorem
5.4.1 ).

(2) If @xmath is @xmath -Lefschetz and @xmath is @xmath -Lefschetz, then
@xmath is @xmath -Lefschetz (by Proposition 4.6.1 ). @xmath

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex. Its Stellar subdivision at a face
@xmath is the operation @xmath where @xmath , where @xmath is a vertex
not in @xmath . Note that for @xmath , @xmath satisfy the Link Condition
and their identification results in @xmath . Further, @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.6.5

Let @xmath be a homology sphere and @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are HL
then @xmath is HL.

@xmath Let @xmath , denote its dimension by @xmath , and assume by
contradiction that @xmath is not HL. As we have seen in the proof of
Lemma 4.5.3 , there exists @xmath such that @xmath . First we show that
@xmath : for @xmath even this is obvious. For @xmath odd, note that for
@xmath the contraction @xmath in @xmath results in @xmath , which is
@xmath -Lefschetz. Further, the @xmath -sphere @xmath is HL by Theorem
4.2.4 , and in particular is @xmath -Lefschetz. Thus, by Corollary 4.6.4
@xmath is @xmath -Lefschetz, and hence @xmath .

Let @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -simplex (then @xmath has even
dimension @xmath ). By Lemma 4.5.3 , for any two l.s.o.p.’s @xmath and
@xmath of @xmath and @xmath respectively, @xmath has no @xmath
-Lefschetz element.

On the other hand, we shall now prove the existence of such l.s.o.p.’s
and a @xmath -Lefschetz element, to reach a contradiction. This requires
a close look on the proof of Proposition 4.6.1 .

Note that @xmath , and that for @xmath the contraction @xmath in @xmath
results in @xmath . Further, @xmath .

Applying Zariski topology considerations to subspaces of the space of
embeddings @xmath , we now show that there exists an embedding @xmath
such that the following three properties hold simultaneously :

(1) @xmath and induces an l.s.o.p. @xmath of @xmath and an HL element
@xmath of @xmath ; @xmath and induces an l.s.o.p. @xmath of @xmath and
an HL element @xmath of @xmath . By Theorem 4.2.4 , @xmath is an HL
element of @xmath .

In matrix language, the first @xmath columns of @xmath form an l.s.o.p.
of @xmath , and its last column is the corresponding HL element.

(2) @xmath induces a map @xmath such that @xmath induces an element in
@xmath for @xmath .

To see this, consider e.g. an embedding @xmath with @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath vanishes on the first two coordinates for any @xmath and in
addition @xmath vanishes on all entries on which we required in (1) that
@xmath vanishes. By Theorem 4.2.4 there exists such @xmath so that its
composition with the projection @xmath induces a pair @xmath of an
l.s.o.p. and an HL element for @xmath . By adding @xmath to this
l.s.o.p. we obtain an l.s.o.p. for @xmath where @xmath is injective. Now
perturb @xmath to obtain @xmath for which property (2) hold.

The restriction of maps @xmath with property (2) to @xmath is a nonempty
Zariski open set in the space of embeddings @xmath . The restriction of
maps @xmath with property (1) to @xmath is a nonempty Zariski open set
in the space of embeddings @xmath . Hence, their projections on the
linear subspace @xmath are nonempty Zariski open sets (in this
subspace). The intersection of these projections is again a nonempty
Zariski open set, thus there are maps @xmath for which both properties
(1) and (2) hold.

(3) @xmath and the first @xmath columns of @xmath induce an l.s.o.p.
@xmath of @xmath .

The set of restrictions @xmath of maps @xmath with property (3) is
nonempty Zariski open in the subspace @xmath ; hence, so is its
projection on the linear subspace @xmath . By similar considerations to
the above, there are maps @xmath for which all the properties (1), (2)
and (3) hold.

The proof of Proposition 4.6.1 together with properties (1) and (2) tell
us that for small enough @xmath , the map @xmath defined by @xmath and
@xmath for every other vertex @xmath , satisfy @xmath (see equation (
4.6 ) for the definition of this map). As a nonempty Zariski open set is
dense, by looking on the subspace @xmath , we can take @xmath and @xmath
such that @xmath satisfies property (3) as well.

Thus, the first @xmath columns of @xmath induce an l.s.o.p. @xmath of
@xmath , the next @xmath columns induce an l.s.o.p. @xmath of @xmath ,
and the last column of @xmath is a @xmath -Lefschetz element of @xmath .
This contradicts our earlier conclusion, which was based on assuming
that the assertion of this theorem is incorrect. @xmath

###### Corollary 4.6.6

Let @xmath be a family of homology spheres which is closed under taking
links and such that all of its elements are HL. Let @xmath be the family
obtained from @xmath by taking the closure under the operations: (0)
taking links; (1) join; (2) Stellar subdivisions. Then every element in
@xmath is HL.

@xmath We prove by double induction - on dimension, and on the sequence
of operations of type (0),(1) and (2) which define @xmath - that @xmath
and all its face links are HL. Let us call @xmath with this property
hereditary HL .

Note that every @xmath , every boundary of a simplex, and every
(homology) sphere of dimension @xmath , is hereditary HL. This provides
the base of the induction.

Clearly if @xmath is hereditary HL, then so are all of its links, as
@xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are hereditary HL then by Theorem 4.2.4 so
is @xmath (here we note that every @xmath is of the form @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath , and that @xmath ). We are left to show that if
@xmath and @xmath is hereditary HL, then so is @xmath . Assume @xmath ,
otherwise there is nothing to prove. First we note that by the induction
hypothesis for every @xmath , @xmath is hereditary HL:
Case @xmath : @xmath is hereditary HL by Theorem 4.2.4 , as argued
above.
Case @xmath : @xmath is hereditary HL by the induction hypothesis on the
dimension.
Case @xmath , @xmath and @xmath : @xmath is hereditary HL by the
induction hypothesis on the dimension.
Otherwise: @xmath is hereditary HL.

We are left to show that @xmath is HL: @xmath is HL, and for @xmath
@xmath is HL by Theorem 4.2.4 . Thus, by Theorem 4.6.5 @xmath is HL, and
together with the above, @xmath is hereditary HL. @xmath
Remark : The barycentric subdivision of a simplicial complex @xmath can
be obtained by a sequence of Stellar subdivisions: order the faces of
@xmath of dimension @xmath by weakly decreasing size, and perform
Stellar subdivisions at those faces according to this order; the
barycentric subdivision of @xmath is obtained. Brenti and Welker [
Brenti-Welker ] , Corollary 3.5, showed that the @xmath -polynomial of
the barycentric subdivision of a Cohen-Macaulay complex has only simple
and real roots, and hence is unimodal. In particular, barycentric
subdivision preserves non-negativity of the @xmath -vector for spheres
with all links being HL. The above corollary shows that the hereditary
HL property itself is preserved.

### 4.7 Open problems

1.  Show that for any @xmath and any homology @xmath -sphere @xmath ,
    @xmath intersects every hyperplane in the vector space @xmath of
    @xmath degree one forms.

    In Theorem 4.5.2 we have seen that to conclude the @xmath
    -conjecture @xmath is enough, but this stronger conjecture may be
    easier to prove in the PL case, by using bistellar moves. It tries
    to correct an unpublished argument of Swartz.

2.  Shifting theoretic lower bound relation: In Example 2.1.8 we
    computed the algebraic shifting of a stacked @xmath -sphere on
    @xmath vertices, denoted @xmath . Prove that if @xmath is a homology
    @xmath -sphere on @xmath vertices then @xmath .

    This conjecture immediately implies Barnette’s lower bound theorem
    for triangulated spheres. The symmetric case of this conjecture is
    equivalent to the claim that the multiplication map @xmath , is an
    isomorphism. Rigidity theory only tells us that @xmath is injective.

3.  Is the join of a unimodal WL complex with an HL complex always
    unimodal WL?

4.  Is @xmath from Theorem 4.4.1 an HL element for @xmath ?

5.  Let @xmath be a family of simplicial complexes which is closed under
    links and joins and contains all boundaries of simplices (e.g.
    simplicial spheres, homology spheres, PL-spheres). Prove that if all
    elements of @xmath are unimodal WL then all of them are HL.

## Chapter 5 Algebraic Shifting and the @xmath-Conjecture: a Topological
Approach

### 5.1 Kalai-Sarkaria conjecture

As we have seen in Section 4.1 , if a simplicial @xmath -sphere @xmath
satisfies @xmath then @xmath is an @xmath -sequence. A stronger
conjecture was stated, independently, by Kalai and Sarkaria [ skira ] ,
Conjecture 27:

###### Conjecture 5.1.1

(Kalai, Sarkaria) If @xmath is a simplicial complex with @xmath vertices
and @xmath can be embedded is the @xmath -sphere, then @xmath .
Equivalently, @xmath for every @xmath (see equation ( 4.1 )).

Note that by Swartz lifting theorem, Theorem 4.5.2 , to conclude
Conjecture 4.1.1 for simplicial spheres it is enough to show that for
@xmath odd @xmath . The later conjecture trivially holds for @xmath , as
@xmath points cannot be embedded into @xmath points. It holds for @xmath
by Theorem 3.6.1 , as @xmath implies that the graph of @xmath has a
@xmath -minor, hence @xmath does not embed in @xmath . It is open for
@xmath .

Sarkaria suggested to relate the Van-Kampen obstruction to embeddability
of @xmath to that of @xmath . We recall this obstruction in the next
section, and later relate it to a notion of minors for simplicial
complexes, and to a combinatorial problem which would imply Conjecture
5.1.1 .

### 5.2 Van Kampen’s Obstruction

#### 5.2.1 Deleted join and @xmath coefficients

The presentation here is based on work of Sarkaria [ SarkariaMax ,
SarkariaUnpub ] who attributes it to Wu [ Wu ] and all the way back to
Van Kampen [ VanKampen ] . It is a Smith theoretic interpretation of Van
Kampen’s obstructions.

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex. The join @xmath is the simplicial
complex @xmath (the superscript indicates two disjoint copies of @xmath
). The deleted join @xmath is the subcomplex @xmath . The restriction of
the involution @xmath , @xmath to @xmath is into @xmath . It induces a
@xmath -action on the cochain complex @xmath . For a simplicial cochain
complex @xmath over @xmath with a @xmath -action @xmath , let @xmath be
its subcomplex of symmetric cochains , @xmath . Restriction induces an
action of @xmath as the identity map on @xmath . Note that the following
sequence is exact in dimensions @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the trivial injection. (The only part of this statement
that may be untrue for a non-free simplicial cochain complex @xmath over
@xmath with a @xmath -action @xmath , is that @xmath is surjective.)
Thus, there is an induced long exact sequence in cohomology

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Composing the connecting homomorphism @xmath @xmath times we obtain a
map @xmath . For the fundamental @xmath -cocycle @xmath , i.e. the one
which maps @xmath , let @xmath denotes its image in @xmath . @xmath is
called the @xmath -th Smith characteristic class of @xmath , denoted
also as @xmath .

For any positive integer @xmath let @xmath be the @xmath -skeleton of
the @xmath -dimensional simplex. A well known result by Van Kampen and
Flores [ Flores , VanKampen ] asserts that the Van Kampen obstruction
with @xmath coefficients (see the next subsection) of @xmath in
dimension @xmath does not vanish, and hence @xmath is not embeddable in
the @xmath -sphere (note that the case @xmath is part of the easier
direction of Kuratowski’s theorem). Here are the analogous statements
for @xmath coefficients.

###### Theorem 5.2.1

(Sarkaria [ SarkariaUnpub ] Theorem 6.5, see also Wu [ Wu ] pp.114-118.)
For every @xmath , @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.2.2

(Sarkaria [ SarkariaUnpub ] Theorem 6.4 and [ SarkariaMax ] p.6) If a
simplicial complex @xmath embeds in @xmath (or in the @xmath -sphere)
then @xmath .

@xmath : The definition of Smith class makes sense for singular homology
as well; the obvious map from the simplicial chain complex to the
singular one induces an isomorphism between the corresponding Smith
classes. The definition of deleted join makes sense for subspaces of a
Euclidean space as well (see e.g. [ Matousek-BU ] , 5.5); thus an
embedding @xmath of @xmath into @xmath induces a continuous @xmath -map
from @xmath into the join of @xmath with itself minus the diagonal,
which is @xmath -homotopic to the antipodal @xmath -sphere, @xmath . The
equivariant cohomology of @xmath over @xmath is isomorphic to the
ordinary cohomology of @xmath over @xmath , which vanishes in dimension
@xmath . We get that @xmath maps to @xmath and hence the later equals to
zero as well. But @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -homotopic, hence @xmath
. @xmath

#### 5.2.2 Deleted product and @xmath coefficients

More commonly in the literature, Van Kampen’s obstruction is defined via
deleted products and with @xmath coefficients, where, except for @xmath
-simplicial complexes, its vanishing is also sufficient for embedding of
the complex in a Euclidean space of double its dimension.

The presentation of the background on the obstruction here is based on
the ones in [ NovikVanKampen ] , [ Wu ] and [ Ummel ] .

Let @xmath be a finite simplicial complex. Its deleted product is @xmath
, employed with a fixed-point free @xmath -action @xmath . It @xmath
-deformation retracts into @xmath , with which we associate a cell chain
complex over @xmath : @xmath with a boundary map @xmath , where @xmath
is a @xmath -chain. The dual cochain complex consists of the @xmath
-cochains @xmath for every @xmath .

There is a @xmath -action on @xmath defined by @xmath . As it commutes
with the coboundary map, by restriction of the coboundary map we obtain
the subcomplexes of symmetric cochains @xmath and of antisymmetric
cochains @xmath . Their cohomology rings are denoted by @xmath and
@xmath respectively. Let @xmath be @xmath for @xmath even and @xmath for
@xmath odd.

For every finite simplicial complex @xmath there is a unique @xmath
-map, up to @xmath -homotopy, into the infinite dimensional sphere
@xmath , and hence a uniquely defined map @xmath . For @xmath a
generator of @xmath call @xmath the Van Kampen obstruction; it is
uniquely defined up to a sign. It turns out to have the following
explicit description: fix a total order @xmath on the vertices of @xmath
. It evaluates elementary symmetric chains of even dimension @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and evaluates elementary antisymmetric chains of odd dimension @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s are elements of @xmath and the @xmath ’s are
elements of @xmath . Its importance to embeddability is given in the
following classical result:

###### Theorem 5.2.3

[ VanKampen , Shapiro , Wu ] If a simplicial complex @xmath embeds in
@xmath then @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath -dimensional and @xmath then
@xmath implies that @xmath embeds in @xmath .

### 5.3 Relation to minors of simplicial complexes

#### 5.3.1 Definition of minors and statement of results

The concept of graph minors has proved be to very fruitful. A famous
result by Kuratowski asserts that a graph can be embedded into a @xmath
-sphere if and only if it contains neither of the graphs @xmath and
@xmath as minors. We wish to generalize the notion of graph minors to
all (finite) simplicial complexes in a way that would produce analogous
statements for embeddability of higher dimensional complexes in higher
dimensional spheres. We hope that these higher minors will be of
interest in future research, and indicate some results and problems to
support this hope.
Let @xmath and @xmath be simplicial complexes. @xmath is called a
deletion if @xmath is a subcomplex of @xmath . @xmath is called an
admissible contraction if @xmath is obtained from @xmath by identifying
two distinct vertices of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath
and @xmath are not contained in any missing face of @xmath of dimension
@xmath . (A set @xmath is called a missing face of @xmath if it is not
an element of @xmath while all its proper subsets are.) Specifically,
@xmath . An equivalent formulation of the condition for admissible
contractions is that the following holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath a graph, ( 5.3 ) just means that @xmath is an edge in @xmath
.

We say that a simplicial complex @xmath is a minor of @xmath , and
denote it by @xmath , if @xmath can be obtained from @xmath by a
sequence of admissible contractions and deletions (the relation @xmath
is a partial order). Note that for graphs this is the usual notion of a
minor.
Remarks : (1) In equation ( 5.3 ), the restriction to the skeleton of
dimension at most @xmath can be relaxed by restriction to the skeleton
of dimension at most @xmath , making the condition for admissible
contraction local , and weaker. All the results and proofs in this
section hold verbatim for this notion of a minor as well.

(2) In the definition of a minor, without loss of generality we may
replace the local condition from the remark above by the following
stronger local condition, called the Link Condition for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

To see this, let @xmath be an admissible contraction which is obtained
by identifying the vertices @xmath and @xmath where @xmath . Delete from
@xmath all the faces @xmath such that @xmath is a missing face of
dimension @xmath , to obtain a simplicial complex @xmath . Note that
@xmath satisfies the Link Condition in @xmath , and the identification
of @xmath with @xmath in @xmath results in @xmath . I thank an anonymous
referee for this remark.

We first relate this minor notion to Van Kampen’s obstruction with
@xmath coefficients.

###### Theorem 5.3.1

Let @xmath and @xmath be simplicial complexes. If @xmath and @xmath then
@xmath .

###### Corollary 5.3.2

For every @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath is not embeddable in the @xmath
-sphere. @xmath

Remark : Corollary 5.3.2 would also follow from the following
conjecture:

###### Conjecture 5.3.3

If @xmath and @xmath is embeddable in the @xmath -sphere then @xmath is
embeddable in the @xmath -sphere.

The analogue of Theorem 5.3.1 with @xmath coefficients holds:

###### Theorem 5.3.4

Let @xmath and @xmath be simplicial complexes. If @xmath and @xmath then
@xmath .

From Theorems 5.3.4 and 5.2.3 it follows that Conjecture 5.3.3 is true
when @xmath (and, trivially, when @xmath ).

In view of Theorems 5.3.1 , 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 , to conclude Conjecture
5.1.1 in the symmetric case @xmath where @xmath odd, and hence also the
@xmath -conjecture for simplicial spheres Conjecture 4.1.1 , it suffices
to prove the following combinatorial conjecture:

###### Conjecture 5.3.5

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex. For every @xmath , if @xmath then
@xmath .

This conjecture holds for @xmath and is otherwise open. Assume that
@xmath is the minimal @xmath for which Conjecture 5.3.5 fails, and let
@xmath be a minimal counterexample w.r.t. the number of vertices.
W.l.o.g. @xmath . Then @xmath but @xmath . We may assume further that

(1) (Maximality) For every missing face @xmath of @xmath of dimension
@xmath , @xmath .

(2) (Links) For every two distinct vertices @xmath such that @xmath is
not contained in any missing face of @xmath of dimension @xmath , @xmath
.

(1) follows from the fact that if @xmath then @xmath . (2) follows from
the minimality and from Proposition 4.6.1 . Indeed, if @xmath then
@xmath and as @xmath we obtain that the contraction of @xmath results in
@xmath for which @xmath and @xmath , contradicting the minimality of
@xmath .

This led us to suspect that counterexamples for @xmath may be provided
by the following complexes. Let @xmath be the vertex transitive
neighborly @xmath -sphere on @xmath vertices @xmath found by Frank Lutz
[ Lutz ] . Note that every edge in @xmath is contained in a missing
triangle. Let @xmath be the @xmath -skeleton of @xmath union with a
missing triangle. It is easy to find triangles such that every edge in
@xmath is contained in a missing triangle. As @xmath is neighborly, by
counting and the fact that @xmath is shifted, we conclude that @xmath ,
hence @xmath . Is @xmath ? Note that deletions must be performed before
any contraction is possible.

#### 5.3.2 Proof of Theorem 5.3.1

The idea is to define an injective chain map @xmath which induces @xmath
for every @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.3.6

Let @xmath be an admissible contraction. Then it induces an injective
chain map @xmath .

@xmath : Fix a labeling of the vertices of @xmath , @xmath , such that
@xmath is obtained from @xmath by identifying @xmath where @xmath .

Let @xmath . If @xmath , define @xmath . If @xmath , define @xmath .
Note that if @xmath then @xmath and @xmath , so the sum above is
nonzero. Extend linearly to obtain a map @xmath .

First, let us check that @xmath is a chain map, i.e. that it commutes
with the boundary maps @xmath . It is enough to verify this for the
basis elements @xmath where @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath , hence
@xmath . If @xmath then @xmath , and as we work over @xmath , this
equals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand @xmath and as we work over @xmath , this equals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It suffices to show that in equations ( 5.5 ) and ( 5.6 ) the left
summands on the RHSs are equal, as well as the right summands on the
RHSs. This follows from observation 5.3.7 below. Thus @xmath is a chain
map.

Second, let us check that @xmath is injective. Let @xmath be the
restriction map @xmath , @xmath . Similarly, let @xmath be the
restriction map @xmath . Note that for a chain @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Assume that @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath , and @xmath
. Note that if @xmath then @xmath and if @xmath then @xmath . Hence also
@xmath . Thus @xmath . @xmath

###### Observation 5.3.7

Let @xmath be an admissible contraction with @xmath . Let @xmath and
@xmath . Then @xmath if and only if @xmath .

@xmath : Assume @xmath . As @xmath we only need to check the case @xmath
. We proceed by induction on @xmath . As @xmath whenever @xmath (and
whenever @xmath , if we use the weaker local condition for admissible
contractions), the case @xmath is clear. (If @xmath there is nothing to
prove. For the weaker local condition for admissible contractions, if
@xmath then there is nothing to prove.) By the induction hypothesis we
may assume that all the proper subsets of @xmath are in @xmath . Also
@xmath . The admissibility of the contraction implies that @xmath . The
other direction is trivial. @xmath

###### Lemma 5.3.8

Let @xmath be the injective chain map defined in the proof of Lemma
5.3.6 for an admissible contraction @xmath . Then for every @xmath ,
@xmath for the induced map @xmath .

@xmath : For two simplicial complexes @xmath and @xmath and a field
@xmath , the following map is an isomorphism of chain complexes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is extended linearly. In case @xmath (in the
definition of join we think of @xmath and @xmath as two disjoint copies
of @xmath ) and @xmath is understood we denote @xmath .

Thus there is an induced chain map @xmath , @xmath where @xmath is
defined by @xmath (which this is a chain map).

Consider the subcomplex @xmath . We now verify that every @xmath
satisfies @xmath . It is enough to check this for chains of the form
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath . For a collection of sets @xmath let
@xmath . Clearly if the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is satisfied then we are done. If @xmath , then @xmath and ( 5.7 )
holds. If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath condition ( 5.7 )
holds. By symmetry, ( 5.7 ) holds when @xmath as well.

With abuse of notation (which we will repeat) we denote the above chain
map by @xmath , @xmath . For a simplicial complex @xmath , the
involution @xmath , @xmath induces a @xmath -action on @xmath . It is
immediate to check that @xmath and @xmath commute with these @xmath
-actions, and hence so does their composition, @xmath . Thus, we have
proved that @xmath is a @xmath -chain map.

Therefore, there is an induced map on the symmetric cohomology rings
@xmath which commutes with the connecting homomorphisms @xmath for
@xmath .

Let us check that for the fundamental @xmath -cocycles @xmath holds. A
representing cochain is @xmath , @xmath . As @xmath (w.r.t. the obvious
injection @xmath ), for every @xmath @xmath , thus @xmath .

As @xmath commutes with the Smith connecting homomorphisms, for every
@xmath , @xmath . @xmath

###### Theorem 5.3.9

Let @xmath and @xmath be simplicial complexes. If @xmath then there
exists an injective chain map @xmath which induces @xmath for every
@xmath .

@xmath : Let the sequence @xmath demonstrate the fact that @xmath . If
@xmath is an admissible contraction, then by Lemmas 5.3.6 and 5.3.8 it
induces an injective chain map @xmath which in turn induces @xmath for
every @xmath . If @xmath is a deletion - take @xmath to be the map
induced by inclusion, to obtain the same conclusions. Thus, the
composition @xmath is as desired. @xmath
Proof of Theorem 5.3.1 : By Theorem 5.3.9 @xmath . Thus if @xmath then
@xmath . @xmath
Remark : The conclusion of Theorem 5.3.1 would fail if we allow
arbitrary identifications of vertices. For example, let @xmath and let
@xmath be obtained from @xmath by splitting a vertex @xmath into two new
vertices @xmath , and connecting @xmath to a non-empty proper subset of
@xmath , denoted by @xmath , and connecting @xmath to @xmath . As @xmath
embeds into the @xmath -sphere, @xmath . By identifying @xmath with
@xmath we obtain @xmath , but @xmath . To obtain from this example an
example where the edge @xmath is present, let @xmath , and let @xmath be
the complex obtained form @xmath by identifying @xmath with @xmath .
Then @xmath while @xmath .

###### Example 5.3.10

Let @xmath be the simplicial complex spanned by the following collection
of @xmath -simplices: @xmath .

@xmath is not a subdivision of @xmath , and its geometric realization
even does not contain a subspace homeomorphic to @xmath (as there are no
@xmath points in @xmath , each with a neighborhood whose boundary
contains a subspace which is homeomorphic to @xmath ). Nevertheless,
contraction of the edge @xmath is admissible and results in @xmath . By
Theorem 5.3.1 @xmath has a non-vanishing Van Kampen’s obstruction in
dimension @xmath , and hence is not embeddable in the @xmath -sphere.

###### Example 5.3.11

Let @xmath be a missing @xmath -face in the cyclic @xmath -polytope on
@xmath vertices, denoted by @xmath , and let @xmath . Then @xmath and
@xmath is not embeddable in the @xmath -sphere.

Proof - sketch : As @xmath is shifted, by counting the number of faces
not greater or equal @xmath in the product partial order on @xmath
-tuples of @xmath we get @xmath .

By Gale evenness condition (see e.g. [ Grunbaum ] , [ Ziegler ] ),
@xmath is of the form @xmath where @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath .
Let @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In @xmath we can admissibly
contract @xmath for @xmath for @xmath and similarly @xmath for @xmath ;
to get a simplicial complex @xmath with the same description as @xmath
but on one vertex less, i.e. that its missing faces are the @xmath
-tuples of pairwise non-adjacent vertices bigger than the smallest
vertex and smaller than the largest vertex except for one such set -
@xmath . Successive application of these contractions results in @xmath
as a minor of @xmath , hence by Theorems 5.3.1 , 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 ,
@xmath is not embeddable in the @xmath -sphere. @xmath

Example 5.3.11 is a special case of the following conjecture, a work in
progress of Uli Wagner and the author.

###### Conjecture 5.3.12

Let @xmath be a triangulated @xmath -sphere and let @xmath be a missing
@xmath -face in @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath does not embed in
@xmath .

#### 5.3.3 Proof of Theorem 5.3.4

Fix a total order on the vertices of @xmath , @xmath and consider an
admissible contraction @xmath where @xmath is obtained from @xmath by
identifying @xmath (shortly this will be shown to be without loss of
generality). Define a map @xmath as follows: for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Extend linearly to obtain an injective @xmath -chain map
@xmath . (The check that this map is indeed an injective @xmath -chain
map is similar to the proof of Lemma 5.3.6 .) In case we contract a
general @xmath , for the signs to work out consider the map @xmath
rather than @xmath , where @xmath is induced by a permutation on the
vertices which maps @xmath . Then @xmath is an injective @xmath -chain
map.

As @xmath commutes with the @xmath action and with the boundary map on
the chain complex of the deleted product, @xmath induces a map @xmath .
It satisfies @xmath for all @xmath . The checks are straightforward (for
proving the last statement, choose a total order with contraction which
identifies the minimal two elements @xmath , and show equality on the
level of cochains). We omit the details.

If @xmath is a deletion, consider the injection @xmath to obtain again
an induced map with @xmath .

Let the sequence @xmath demonstrate the fact that @xmath . By composing
the corresponding maps as above we obtain a map @xmath with @xmath and
the result follows. @xmath

### 5.4 Topology preserving edge contractions

#### 5.4.1 PL manifolds

The following theorem answers in the affirmative a question asked by Dey
et. al. [ Dey ] , who already proved the dimension @xmath case.

###### Theorem 5.4.1

Given an edge in a triangulation of a compact PL (piecewise
linear)-manifold without boundary, its contraction results in a
PL-homeomorphic space if and only if it satisfies the Link Condition (
5.4 ).

@xmath : Let @xmath be a PL-triangulation of a compact @xmath -manifold
without boundary. Let @xmath be an edge of @xmath and let @xmath be
obtained from @xmath by contracting @xmath . We will prove that if the
Link Condition ( 5.4 ) holds for @xmath then @xmath and @xmath are
PL-homeomorphic, and otherwise they are not homeomorphic (not even
’locally homologic’). For @xmath the assertion is clear. Assume @xmath .

Denote @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath . As @xmath is a PL-manifold
without boundary, @xmath is a @xmath -PL-sphere (see e.g. [ Hudson ] ,
Corollary 1.16). By Newman’s theorem (e.g. [ Hudson ] , Theorem 1.26)
@xmath is a @xmath -PL-ball. Thus @xmath is a @xmath -PL-ball. Observe
that @xmath .

The identity map on @xmath is a PL-homeomorphism @xmath , hence it
extends to a PL-homeomorphism @xmath (see e.g. [ Hudson ] , Lemma 1.21).

Note that @xmath .

If @xmath (in @xmath ) then @xmath , hence gluing together the maps
@xmath and the identity map on @xmath results in a PL-homeomorphism from
@xmath to @xmath .

If @xmath (in @xmath ) then @xmath . The case @xmath implies that @xmath
and hence @xmath has a nonempty boundary, showing it is not homeomorphic
to @xmath . A small punctured neighborhood of a point in the boundary of
@xmath has trivial homology while all small punctured neighborhoods of
points in @xmath has non vanishing @xmath -th homology. This is what we
mean by ’not even locally homologic’: @xmath and @xmath have
homologically different sets of small punctured neighborhoods.

We are left to deal with the case @xmath . As @xmath is closed there
exists a point @xmath with a small punctured neighborhood @xmath which
is not contained in @xmath . For a subspace @xmath of @xmath denote by
@xmath the neighborhood in @xmath @xmath . Thus @xmath . We get a
Mayer-Vietoris exact sequence in reduced homology:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath and @xmath are homotopic to their boundaries which are
@xmath -spheres. Note further that @xmath is homotopic to a proper
subset @xmath of @xmath such that the pair @xmath is triangulated. By
Alexander duality @xmath . Thus, ( 5.9 ) simplifies to the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath , hence @xmath and @xmath are not locally homologic, and in
particular are not homeomorphic. @xmath
Remarks : (1) Omitting the assumption in Theorem 5.4.1 that the boundary
is empty makes both implications incorrect. Contracting an edge to a
point shows that the Link Condition is not sufficient. Contracting an
edge on the boundary of a cone over an empty triangle shows that the
Link Condition is not necessary.

(2) The necessity of the Link Condition holds also in the topological
category (and not only in the PL category), as the proof of Theorem
5.4.1 shows. Indeed, for this part we only used the fact that @xmath is
a pseudo manifold with boundary @xmath (not that it is a ball); taking
the point @xmath to belong to exactly two facets of @xmath . For
sufficiency of the Link Condition in the topological category, see
Problem 3 in Section 5.5 below.

Walkup [ Walkup ] mentioned, without details, the necessity of the Link
Condition for contractions in topological manifolds, as well as the
sufficiency of the Link Condition for the @xmath dimensional case (where
the category of PL-manifolds coincides with the topological one); see [
Walkup ] , p.82-83.

#### 5.4.2 PL spheres

###### Definition 5.4.2

Boundary complexes of simplices are strongly edge decomposable and,
recursively, a triangulated PL-manifold @xmath is strongly edge
decomposable if it has an edge which satisfies the Link Condition ( 5.4
) such that both its link and its contraction are strongly edge
decomposable.

By Theorem 5.4.1 the complexes in Definition 5.4.2 are all triangulated
PL-spheres. Note that every @xmath -sphere is strongly edge
decomposable.

Let @xmath be an edge in a simplicial complex @xmath which satisfies the
Link Condition, whose contraction @xmath results in the simplicial
complex @xmath . Note that the @xmath -polynomials satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence the @xmath -polynomials satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We conclude the following:

###### Corollary 5.4.3

The @xmath -vector of strongly edge decomposable triangulated spheres is
non negative. @xmath

Is it also an @xmath -vector? Compare with Theorem 4.6.5 . The strongly
edge decomposable spheres (strictly) include the family of triangulated
spheres which can be obtained from the boundary of a simplex by repeated
Stellar subdivisions (at any face); the later are polytopal, hence their
@xmath -vector is an @xmath -sequence. For the case of subdividing only
at edges ( 5.10 ) was considered by Gal ( [ Gal ] , Proposition 2.4.3).

### 5.5 Open problems

1.  Prove that if @xmath and @xmath is embeddable in the @xmath -sphere
    then @xmath is embeddable in the @xmath -sphere.

2.  Let @xmath be a triangulated @xmath -sphere and let @xmath be a
    missing @xmath -face in @xmath . Let @xmath . Show that @xmath does
    not embed in @xmath .

3.  Given an edge in a triangulation of a compact manifold without
    boundary which satisfies the Link Condition, is it true that its
    contraction results in a homeomorphic space? Or at least in a space
    of the same homotopic or homological type?

    A Mayer-Vietoris argument shows that such topological manifolds
    @xmath and @xmath have the same Betti numbers; both @xmath and
    @xmath are cones and hence their reduced homology vanishes.

    A candidate for a counterexample for Problem 3 may be the join
    @xmath where @xmath is the boundary of a triangle and @xmath a
    triangulation of Poincaré homology @xmath -sphere, where an edge
    with one vertex in @xmath and the other in @xmath satisfies the Link
    Condition. By the double-suspension theorem (Edwards [ Edwards ] and
    Cannon [ Cannon ] ) @xmath is a topological @xmath -sphere.

4.  Show that the @xmath -vector of strongly edge decomposable
    triangulated spheres is an @xmath -vector.

## Chapter 6 Face Rings for Graded Posets

### 6.1 Some classic @xmath-vector results for graded posets

Let us review the characterization of @xmath -vectors of finite
simplicial complexes, known as the Schützenberger-Kruskal-Katona theorem
(see [ Bollobas ] for a proof and for references). For any two integers
@xmath there exists a unique expansion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that @xmath (details in [ Bollobas ] ). Define the function @xmath
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 6.1.1 (Schützenberger-Kruskal-Katona)

@xmath is the @xmath -vector of some simplicial complex iff @xmath
ultimately vanishes and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a ranked meet semi-lattice @xmath , finite at every rank, let @xmath
be the number of elements with rank @xmath in @xmath , and set @xmath
where @xmath is the minimum of @xmath . The @xmath -vector of @xmath is
@xmath .

@xmath has the diamond property if for every @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath there exist at least two elements in the open interval @xmath .
The closed interval is denoted by @xmath .

We identify a simplicial complex with the poset of its faces ordered by
inclusion. The following generalization of Theorem 6.1.1 is due to
Wegner [ Wegner ] .

###### Theorem 6.1.2 (Wegner)

Let @xmath be a finite ranked meet semi-lattice with the diamond
property. Then its @xmath -vector ultimately vanishes and satisfies (
6.2 ).

For @xmath define @xmath and let @xmath denote @xmath covers @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.1.3

For a ranked meet semi-lattice @xmath , the diamond property is
equivalent to satisfying the following condition:

( * ) For every @xmath , @xmath which covers @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

A multicomplex (on a finite ground set) can be considered as an order
ideal of monomials @xmath (i.e. if @xmath then also @xmath ) on a finite
set of variables. Its @xmath -vector is defined by @xmath (again @xmath
). Define the function @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

w.r.t the expansion ( 6.1 ).

###### Theorem 6.1.4 (Macaulay)

(simpler proofs in [ CL , Stanley-Hilbert ] ) @xmath is the @xmath
-vector of some multicomplex iff @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition 6.1.5

(Parallelogram property) A ranked poset @xmath is said to have the
parallelogram property if the following condition holds:

( ** ) For every @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath , if the chain
@xmath equals the closed interval @xmath ( @xmath ) and is maximal
w.r.t. inclusion such that @xmath (the rank of @xmath in the poset
@xmath ), and if @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath , then there exists
@xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath interpret
@xmath as: @xmath is not a chain.

See Figure 6.1 for an illustration of the parallelogram property. Note
that condition ( * ) of Lemma 6.1.3 implies condition ( ** ) of
Definition 6.1.5 (with @xmath being the only possible value of @xmath ).
Posets of multicomplexes, polyhedral complexes, and rooted trees,
satisfy the parallelogram property.

We identify a multicomplex with the poset of its monomials ordered by
division. We now generalize Theorem 6.1.4 ; the proof is combinatorial.

###### Theorem 6.1.6 ([Nevo-GeneralizedMacaulay], Theorem 1.6)

Let @xmath be a ranked meet semi-lattice, finite at every rank, with the
parallelogram property. Then its @xmath -vector satisfies ( 6.3 ) and
@xmath .

For generalizations of Macaulay’s theorem in a different direction
(’compression’), see e.g. [ CL , WW ] .

In Section 1.2 we presented the symmetric and exterior face rings of a
simplicial complex, to which we applied the shifting operator. The
graded components of the face ring have dimensions corresponding to the
@xmath -vector. Shifting changes the bases of these components, hence
preserves the @xmath -vector, and results in a shifted complex, for
which e.g. the inequalities @xmath are easier to prove.

Analogous algebraic object and operator for more general graded posets
are desirable in order to prove @xmath -vector theorems for them. An
algebraic object that will correspond to Macaulay inequalities, may help
to settle the following well known conjecture:

###### Conjecture 6.1.7

The toric @xmath -vector of a (non-simplicial) polytope is an @xmath
-sequence, i.e. it satisfies Macaulay inequalities ( 6.3 ).

Recently Karu [ Karu ] proved that the toric @xmath -vector of a
polytope is nonnegative, using a (complicated) graded module. Can we
shift this structure, in order to prove Conjecture 6.1.7 ? A problem is
that Karu’s structure is a module over the polynomial ring with @xmath
(=dimension) variables, and not with @xmath (=number of vertices)
variables.

In the next two sections we make initial steps in this program.

### 6.2 Algebraic shifting for geometric meet semi-lattices

We will associate an analogue of the exterior face ring to geometric
ranked meet semi-lattices, which coincides with the usual construction
for the case of simplicial complexes. Applying algebraic shifting we
construct a canonically defined shifted simplicial complex, having the
same @xmath -vector as its geometric meet semi-lattice.

Let @xmath be a ranked atomic meet semi-lattice with @xmath the set of
its elements, @xmath the partial order relation and @xmath its rank
function. We denote it in short by @xmath . @xmath is called @xmath if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for every @xmath such that @xmath exists. For example, the intersections
of a finite collection of hyperplanes in a vector space form a geometric
meet semi-lattice w.r.t. the reverse inclusion order and the codimension
rank. Face posets of simplicial complexes are important examples of
geometric meet semi-lattices, where ( 6.4 ) holds with equality.

Adding a maximum to a ranked meet semi-lattice makes it a lattice,
denoted by @xmath , but the maximum may not have a rank. Denote by
@xmath the minimum and maximum of @xmath , respectively, and by @xmath
the set of rank @xmath elements in @xmath . @xmath .

We now define the algebra @xmath over a field @xmath with characteristic
@xmath . Let @xmath be a vector space over @xmath with basis @xmath .
Let @xmath be the ideal in the exterior algebra @xmath defined as
follows. Choose a total ordering of @xmath , and denote by @xmath the
wedge product @xmath where @xmath . Define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

(As @xmath , @xmath is independent of the ordering of the elements in
@xmath and in @xmath .) Let @xmath . As @xmath is generated by
homogeneous elements, @xmath inherits a grading from @xmath . Let @xmath
be its graded dimensions vector, i.e. @xmath is the dimension of the
degree @xmath component of @xmath .
Remark : If @xmath is the poset of a simplicial complex, then @xmath and
@xmath is the classic exterior face ring of @xmath , as in [ 55 ] .

The following proposition will be used for showing that @xmath and
@xmath have the same @xmath -vector. Its easy proof by induction on the
rank is omitted.

###### Proposition 6.2.1

Let @xmath be a geometric ranked meet semi-lattice. Let @xmath and let
@xmath be a minimal set of atoms such that @xmath , i.e. if @xmath then
@xmath . Then @xmath . @xmath

Remark : The converse of Proposition 6.2.1 is also true: Let @xmath be a
ranked atomic meet semi-lattice such that every @xmath and every minimal
set of atoms @xmath such that @xmath satisfy @xmath . Then @xmath is
geometric.

###### Proposition 6.2.2

@xmath .

@xmath : Denote by @xmath the projection of @xmath on @xmath . We will
show that picking @xmath such that @xmath for each @xmath gives a basis
over @xmath of @xmath , @xmath .

As @xmath is a basis of @xmath , it is clear from the definition of
@xmath that @xmath spans @xmath . To show that @xmath is independent, we
will prove first that the generators of @xmath as an ideal, that are
specified in ( 6.6 ), ( 6.5 ) and ( 6.7 ), actually span it as a vector
space over @xmath .

As @xmath for all @xmath , the generators of @xmath that are specified
in ( 6.5 ) span it as a @xmath -vector space. Next, we show that the
generators of @xmath and @xmath that are specified in ( 6.6 ) and in (
6.5 ) respectively, span @xmath as a @xmath -vector space: if @xmath is
such a generator of @xmath and @xmath then either @xmath (if @xmath or
if @xmath ) or else, by Proposition 6.2.1 , @xmath and hence @xmath is
also such a generator of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a generator of @xmath as specified in ( 6.7 ) and let
@xmath . If @xmath then @xmath and @xmath is either zero (if @xmath ) or
else a generator of @xmath , by Proposition 6.2.1 ; and similarly when
@xmath . If @xmath then @xmath and @xmath . Hence, if @xmath is not the
obvious difference of two generators of @xmath or of @xmath as specified
in ( 6.5 ) and ( 6.6 ), then it is a generator of @xmath as specified in
( 6.7 ). We conclude that these generators of @xmath as an ideal span it
as a vector space over @xmath .

Assume that @xmath , i.e. @xmath where @xmath for all @xmath . By the
discussion above, @xmath is in the span (over @xmath ) of the generators
of @xmath that are specified in ( 6.7 ). But for every @xmath and every
such generator @xmath of @xmath , if @xmath ( @xmath for all @xmath )
then @xmath . Hence @xmath for every @xmath . Thus @xmath is a basis of
@xmath , hence @xmath . @xmath

Now let us shift. Note that exterior algebraic shifting, which was
defined for the exterior face ring, can be applied to any graded
exterior algebra finitely generated by degree @xmath elements. It
results in a simplicial complex with an @xmath -vector that is equal to
the vector of graded dimensions of the algebra. This shows that any such
graded algebra satisfies Kruskal-Katona inequalities! We apply this
construction to @xmath :

Let @xmath be a basis of @xmath . Then @xmath spans @xmath . Choosing a
basis from this set in the greedy way w.r.t. the lexicographic order
@xmath on equal sized sets, defines a collection of sets:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is a simplicial complex, and by Proposition 6.2.2 @xmath . For a
generic @xmath , @xmath is shifted. Moreover, the construction is
canonical, i.e. is independent both of the chosen ordering of @xmath and
of the generically chosen basis @xmath . It is also independent of the
characteristic @xmath field that we picked. We denote @xmath for a
generic @xmath . For proofs of the above statements we refer to Björner
and Kalai [ BK ] (they proved for the case where @xmath is a simplicial
complex, but the proofs remain valid for any graded exterior algebra
finitely generated by degree @xmath elements).

We summarize the above discussion in the following theorem:

###### Theorem 6.2.3

Let @xmath be a geometric meet semi-lattice, and let @xmath be a field
of characteristic @xmath . There exists a canonically defined shifted
simplicial complex @xmath associated with @xmath , with @xmath . @xmath

Remarks : (1) The fact that @xmath satisfies Kruskal-Katona inequalities
follows also without using our algebraic construction, from the fact
that it satisfies the diamond property and applying Theorem 6.1.2 . The
diamond property is easily seen to hold for all ranked atomic meet
semi-lattices.

(2) A different operation, which does depend on the ordering of @xmath
and results in a simplicial complex with the same @xmath -vector, was
described by Björner [ Bj-MatroidApplications ] , Chapter 7, Problem
7.25: totally order @xmath . For each @xmath choose the
lexicographically least subset @xmath such that @xmath ( @xmath ).
Define @xmath . Then @xmath is a simplicial complex with the same @xmath
-vector as @xmath . An advantage in our operation is that it is
canonical (and results in a shifted simplicial complex). To see that
these two operations are indeed different, let @xmath be the face poset
of a simplicial complex. Then for any total ordering of @xmath , @xmath
. But if the simplicial complex is not shifted (e.g. a @xmath -cycle),
then @xmath .

### 6.3 Algebraic shifting for generalized multicomplexes

We will associate an analogue of the symmetric (Stanley-Reisner) face
ring with a common generalization of multicomplexes and geometric meet
semi-lattices. Applying an algebraic shifting operation, we construct a
multicomplex having the same @xmath -vector as the original poset.

Let @xmath be the following family of posets: to construct @xmath start
with a geometric meet semi-lattice @xmath . Associate with each @xmath
the (square free) monomial @xmath , and equip it with rank @xmath .
Denote this collection of monomials by @xmath . Now repeat the following
procedure finitely or countably many times to construct @xmath : Choose
@xmath and @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath such that
@xmath , and @xmath . @xmath is obtained from @xmath by adding @xmath ,
setting its rank to be @xmath and let it cover all the elements @xmath
where @xmath such that @xmath . Define @xmath .

Note that the posets in @xmath are ranked (not necessarily atomic) meet
semi-lattices with the parallelogram property, and that @xmath includes
all multicomplexes (start with @xmath , a simplicial complex) and
geometric meet semi-lattices ( @xmath ).

For @xmath define the following analogue of the Stanley-Reisner ring:
Assume for a moment that @xmath is finite. Fix a field @xmath , and
denote @xmath . Let @xmath be a polynomial ring. For @xmath such that
@xmath let @xmath be the minimal integer number such that @xmath does
not divide any of the monomials @xmath . Note that each @xmath of rank
@xmath belongs to a unique maximal interval which is a chain; whose top
element is @xmath . By abuse of notation, we identify the elements in
such intervals with their corresponding monomials in @xmath .

We add a maximum @xmath to @xmath to obtain @xmath and define the
following ideals in @xmath :

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

Define @xmath . As @xmath is homogeneous, @xmath inherits a grading from
@xmath . Let @xmath where @xmath ( @xmath ).

The proof of the following proposition is similar to the proof of
Proposition 6.2.2 , and is omitted.

###### Proposition 6.3.1

@xmath . @xmath

Denote by @xmath the projection of @xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath be a
basis of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an order ideal of monomials with an @xmath -vector @xmath . (The
lexicographic order on monomials of equal degree is defined by @xmath
iff there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath and @xmath .) To prove
this, we reproduce the argument of Stanley for proving Macaulay’s
theorem ( [ St ] , Theorem 2.1): as the projections of the elements in
@xmath form a @xmath -basis of @xmath , then by Proposition 6.3.1 @xmath
. If @xmath then @xmath , hence for any monomial @xmath @xmath . But
@xmath and @xmath for these @xmath ’s, hence @xmath , thus @xmath is an
order ideal of monomials.
Remark : For @xmath a generic basis the construction is canonical in the
same sense as defined for the exterior case.

Combining Proposition 6.3.1 with Theorem 6.1.4 we obtain

###### Corollary 6.3.2

Every @xmath satisfies Macaulay inequalities ( 6.3 ). @xmath

Remark : If @xmath is infinite, let @xmath and construct @xmath for each
@xmath . Then @xmath for every @xmath , and @xmath is an order ideal of
monomials with @xmath -vector @xmath . Hence, Corollary 6.3.2 holds in
this case too.

### 6.4 Open problems

1.  The Kruskal-Katona inequalities hold for any meet semi lattice with
    the diamond property (Theorem 6.1.2 ). Can an algebraic proof be
    given?

2.  Similarly, can Theorem 6.1.6 be proved algebraically?

3.  Prove Conjecture 6.1.7 by applying shifting to a suitable algebraic
    object.