##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Thermal field theory
    -    2.1 Basic thermodynamics of quantum fields
        -    2.1.1 Renormalization
    -    2.2 Dimensional reduction
        -    2.2.1 Effective Lagrangians in general
        -    2.2.2 Three-dimensional effective theory at high
            temperature
-    3 Pressure of the standard model
    -    3.1 Perturbative evaluation of the pressure
    -    3.2 Pressure near the phase transition
    -    3.3 Numerical results
-    4 Mesonic correlation lengths
    -    4.1 Linear response theory and screening phenomena
    -    4.2 Mesonic screening states at high temperatures
    -    4.3 Effective theory for the lowest fermionic modes
    -    4.4 Solving the screening states
    -    4.5 Comparison with other results
        -    4.5.1 Definition of the screening mass at nonzero density
-    5 Review and outlook

{fmffile}

diagrams

## Chapter 1 Introduction

The physics of interactions between elementary particles is described to
an amazing accuracy by the standard model of particle physics. It ties
three of the four fundamental interactions, namely the electromagnetic,
weak and strong interactions, together under the conceptual framework of
relativistic quantum field theory. Scattering processes and bound states
involving few particles are well described by the model, although many
open questions, mostly related to strongly interacting states, remain.
In the energy region currently accessible to experiments we have
therefore full reason to believe that this theory is correct.

When matter is heated high above everyday temperatures, its neutral
constituents are torn apart into an interacting plasma of elementary
particles. At temperatures of the same order or higher than the particle
masses this necessitates combining quantum statistical mechanics with
relativistic field theory. The interactions between individual particles
are still governed by the standard model interactions, but the effects
of hot medium change their long-distance behavior and give rise to
many-particle collective modes.

Experimentally such extreme conditions are accessible in relativistic
heavy ion collisions currently produced at the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider (RHIC) in Brookhaven, and, starting this year, also at Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. In these experiments two heavy nuclei
collide against each other, forming a finite volume of extremely hot
matter. The matter described by the theory of strong interactions,
quantum chromodynamics (QCD), goes through a phase transition to a
deconfined phase of color-charged particles forming a quark-gluon
plasma, which then rapidly cools as it expands. This kind of
temperatures were also present in the very early universe, whose
expansion is sensitive to the equation of state of both QCD and
electroweak matter.

The formalism for finite temperature quantum field theory arises
naturally from the path integral quantization of field theories. The
time coordinate is extended to complex values to account for varying the
fields over statistical ensemble, and the functional integral is over
all field configurations periodic or antiperiodic in the imaginary time.
When temperature is larger than any other scale in the process, the
excitations in the imaginary time can be integrated out and the physics
of static quantities is described by a three-dimensional effective
theory. This is known as dimensional reduction [ 5 , *Appelquist:1981vg
] . The effective theory can be systematically derived, and it exhibits
the same infrared behavior as the full theory. At finite temperatures
the main advantage in using a dimensionally reduced effective theory in
perturbative computations is the ability to systematically treat the
various infrared divergences, as well as the resummations needed to cure
them, in a simpler setting.

Dimensional reduction has been successfully applied over the years to
compute many bosonic quantities both perturbatively and in combination
with lattice simulations. In the QCD sector, the three-dimensional
formulation known as EQCD has made it possible to perturbatively compute
the pressure up to the last perturbative order @xmath [ 7 , *Chin:1978gj
, 9 , 10 , 11 , *Arnold:1995eb , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] , and the result
has also been extended to nonzero chemical potentials [ 17 ] . Lattice
implementations of EQCD have been used to compute the static correlation
lengths of various gluonic operators [ 18 , *Karkkainen:1992jh ,
*Karkkainen:1993wu , 21 , 22 , *Laine:1999hh , 24 , 25 , 26 ] . There
are also recent developments in formulating an effective theory
preserving the spontaneously broken @xmath symmetry of the deconfined
phase [ 27 ] , which is explicitly broken in EQCD [ 28 ] . Besides QCD,
the electroweak symmetry breaking has also been solved in detail using
lattice simulations in dimensionally reduced effective theory [ 29 , 30
, 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] , motivated by the possibility of a first order
electroweak phase transition being the origin of the observed baryon
asymmetry in the universe.

There are only few applications of dimensional reduction to fermionic
observables, because the fermion fields are integrated out from the
three-dimensional effective theory. This simplifies the computation of
bosonic quantities tremendously, but the accessible fermionic
observables are then limited to those that can be inferred from vacuum
or bosonic ones, such as quark number susceptibilities @xmath [ 35 ] .
Systematic application of dimensional reduction to fermionic operators
was developed in [ 36 ] , inspired by the progress in heavy quark
effective theories.

The use of dimensional reduction is restricted to time-independent
quantities. It should be mentioned here that for real-time computations
there exists another scheme of resumming the light particle self-energy
corrections to regulate some of the infrared divergences, namely the
hard thermal loop (HTL) approximation [ 37 , *Braaten:1990az , 39 ] .
Both schemes succesfully resum the one-loop infrared divergences, but in
general the HTL Green’s functions are more complicated, since they carry
the full analytic structure of the original theory. It is also very hard
to systematically improve the HTL approximation beyond the leading
order.

In this thesis we study two applications of dimensional reduction to the
standard model, the perturbative evaluation of the electroweak pressure
and the next-to-leading order correction to screening masses of mesonic
operators. The thesis is organized as follows. In chapter 2 we first
review the formalism of thermal quantum field theory, and then discuss
dimensional reduction in the context of general effective theories in
section 2.2 . In chapter 3 we go through the computation of the
electroweak theory pressure, with special attention given to the
behavior near the phase transition. We combine the result with the
previously known QCD pressure in section 3.3 and study the convergence
of the series and the deviation from the ideal gas for physical values
of parameters. Results for a simpler, weakly coupled SU(2) + Higgs
theory are also shown for comparison.

In chapter 4 we review our work on meson correlators. After a short
motivation using linear response theory, we compute the leading order
correlators at zero and finite density. Then we proceed to derive a
dimensionally reduced effective theory for the lowest fermionic modes
and solve the @xmath corrections to screening masses. Finally, we
compare with recent lattice determinations of the masses and discuss the
differences. Chapter 5 contains our conclusions.

## Chapter 2 Thermal field theory

In this chapter we will first review how the thermodynamical treatment
of quantum field theory can be formulated in terms of Euclidean path
integrals. We then proceed to discuss dimensional reduction, which is
the underlying effective theory method used in all the research papers
included in this thesis.

### 2.1 Basic thermodynamics of quantum fields

The statistical properties of relativistic quantum field theory are most
naturally described using the grand canonical ensemble. Since particles
can be spontaneously created and annihilated, the microcanonical or
canonical ensembles with fixed particle numbers cannot be built, but
instead one would have to use the conserved quantities like electric
charge. To avoid this kind of complicated constraints on field
configurations, it is generally easier to fix the mean values of energy
and conserved commuting number operators using the Lagrange multipliers
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. This is the grand canonical ensemble.

The thermodynamical properties of the system are given by the partition
function and its derivatives. In quantum mechanics the partition
function is defined as the trace of the density matrix @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Hamiltonian and conserved number
operators, respectively. The thermal average of an operator is then
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the usual thermodynamic quantities like pressure, entropy, energy
and particle numbers are given by the partial derivatives

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

In quantum mechanics the evaluation of the trace in Eq. ( 2.1 ) is
simple, one just takes any complete orthonormal basis @xmath ,
preferably eigenstates of @xmath if these are known, and sums over
@xmath . The same procedure can in principle be applied to field theory,
where the sum over basis vectors is replaced by a functional integral in
the space of field configurations.

Field theories are usually defined in the Lagrangian formalism, and
finding the Hamiltonian function required for computation of the
partition function in Eq. ( 2.1 ) can be quite involved, in particular
in the context of gauge theories. One has to fix the gauge and then
carefully separate the canonical variables from auxiliary ones depending
on the chosen gauge [ 40 ] . In addition to the usual canonical
equations of motion, the fields are constrained by the gauge condition
and the field equation for the auxiliary field, which can be interpreted
as the Gauss’ law.

Once the Hamiltonian has been found, we can insert a complete set of
eigenstates @xmath of the field operator @xmath in the Heisenberg
picture to compute the partition function. This gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the integration is over all canonical variables. From the
time-dependence of the field operator it follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eq. ( 2.4 ) can then be viewed as the transition amplitude for the field
to return to the same state after an imaginary time @xmath , when the
time-development is given by the Hamiltonian @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Dividing the time interval into infinitesimally small pieces and
inserting at every point a complete set of position and momentum
eigenstates this can be cast into a path integral form (for details see
e.g. [ 41 , 42 ] )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Hamiltonian and number densities,
respectively, and @xmath . When @xmath is at most quadratic in canonical
momenta, the momentum integration can be done. In gauge theory it is
useful to first reintroduce the Gauss’ law by treating the temporal
gauge field component @xmath as an independent variable, which, when
integrated over, would be replaced by the stationary value satisfying
Gauss’ law.

Performing the momentum integrations, we get back to the Lagrangian
formulation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the integration is now over both canonical and auxiliary fields.
The Lagrangian @xmath usually differs from the one we started with. In
particular, the momenta in Eq. ( 2.7 ) must be replaced with the values
solved from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that in the end we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, in a gauge theory one usually includes an additional gauge
fixing term into the Lagrangian using Grassmannian ghost fields in order
to have less constraints on the integration variables.

As can be seen in Eq. ( 2.6 ), the partition function is computed as an
integral over amplitudes with the same field configuration at both end
points, @xmath . For fermionic variables it follows from the
anticommutation properties of Grassmann variables that the trace has to
be computed with antiperiodic condition @xmath instead. Both boundary
conditions can be verified by inspecting the two-point function, taking
into account the correct time ordering of the fields [ 41 ] .

When extending the time coordinate to complex values, the integration
path is no longer unique. It can be chosen to fit the problem in
question, with some minor restrictions. The time arguments of the
operators whose thermal averages we are computing should obviously lie
on the integration path. Also, the imaginary part of @xmath should be
nonincreasing in order to have a well-defined propagator. There are two
conventional choices for the path, leading to two different ways of
computing at finite temperatures.

First, one can choose to include the whole real axis by first
integrating from @xmath to @xmath , then down to @xmath , with @xmath ,
back to @xmath and finally down to @xmath , in the end letting @xmath
(see e.g. [ 43 ] ). This approach leads to the so-called real-time
formalism, which has the advantage that one can directly compute
real-time quantities without having to analytically continue the final
results to Minkowski space. However, in this formalism the number of
degrees of freedom is doubled, with unphysical fields living on the
lower horizontal part of the integration path and mixing with the
physical ones. This in turn requires the propagators to be extended to
@xmath matrices, leading to complicated perturbation theory. We will not
use the real-time formalism in this thesis.

A simpler choice is to integrate down the vertical line @xmath , @xmath
, which leads to the so-called imaginary time formalism. The choice of
@xmath does not affect the results, so one can choose @xmath and replace
the time coordinate in Eq. ( 2.8 ) by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functional integral is over periodic or antiperiodic fields as
described above, and the Euclidean Lagrangian @xmath is the same as in
Eq. ( 2.10 ), rotated to Euclidean space with the replacements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ‘E’ and ‘M’ stand for Euclidean and Minkowski space quantities,
respectively. In the following we will always work in Euclidean space
unless otherwise mentioned, and drop the ‘E’ superscripts. In the above
equation, @xmath represents any four-vector, in particular the gauge
field components. There is no doubling of degrees of freedom in this
formalism, and for static quantities, such as the free energy or
screening masses, it is usually simpler to compute in imaginary time.
Other results have to be analytically continued to real time arguments,
and while in principle this can be done with some mild regularity
assumptions [ 44 ] , in practice some additional model assumptions are
required to carry out the continuation.

Because the fields are required to be periodic, the imaginary time
direction can be viewed as a closed circle with circumference @xmath .
The momentum component in a compact dimension is quantized, so the
fields can be decomposed in the momentum space as Fourier series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are referred to as Matsubara frequencies [ 45 ] . From the
gauge transformation rule for the gauge field components

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is easy to see that the gauge transformation functions @xmath have to
be periodic as well, so the ghost fields will have bosonic Matsubara
frequencies despite of their anticommuting nature.

#### 2.1.1 Renormalization

The thermal environment changes the boundary conditions and the
propagators from their zero-temperature forms. Fortunately, this does
not introduce any new ultraviolet divergences, but the usual
renormalization procedure remains unchanged and the counterterms have
precisely the same values as at @xmath (depending on the scheme).
Intuitively this is easy to understand, since only the excitations with
wavelengths @xmath can see the periodicity of the time direction, while
the renormalization is only concerned with divergences related to the
short distance behavior of Green’s functions. The divergence structure
is then precisely the same as in the zero-temperature theory and one can
choose a @xmath -independent renormalization scheme such as the @xmath
scheme.

To see this in some more detail, we note that the free propagator at
finite temperature can be viewed as an explicitly periodic combination
of zero-temperature Euclidean propagators [ 43 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The zero-temperature ultraviolet divergences requiring renormalization
arise from the short-distance singularities at @xmath . The only term in
the above sum where we can have @xmath is the @xmath term, which does
not depend on temperature. The divergences of the thermal propagator are
therefore correctly removed by the @xmath counterterms. At higher order
diagrams these divergences are multiplied by @xmath -dependent finite
parts of the diagram, so the general proof of renormalizability and
@xmath -independence of counterterms is somewhat more involved, but it
follows from a similar decomposition of propagator into a singular
@xmath part and an analytic @xmath -dependent part [ 46 ] .

As the parameters of the theory are renormalized, they also run with the
scale according to the renormalization group equations. The actual
equations are again the same as in @xmath theory, but the choice of
renormalization point is complicated by the appearance of new scales
@xmath and @xmath in addition to the external scales present in the
problem, as well as the the scales @xmath , @xmath generated dynamically
by interactions. If these scales are very different, removing the large
logarithms by a suitable choice of scale may prove difficult, and a
careful analysis of the scale hierarchy is required to construct a good
perturbative expansion.

While the ultraviolet divergences are unaffected by the finite
temperature, at the infrared end the situation is very different. The
finite extent of the temporal direction causes the field components with
wavelengths @xmath to see the space effectively as three-dimensional,
and this gives rise to many new infrared divergences. These will be
treated in more detail in the following section.

### 2.2 Dimensional reduction

In this section we will review the rationale for dimensional reduction
in the more general context of low-energy effective field theories. We
will also discuss the finite-temperature infrared divergences and the
resummations needed to get rid of them.

#### 2.2.1 Effective Lagrangians in general

One of the fundamental properties of physics is that phenomena at some
specific distance scale can be effectively described by a theory which
does not depend on the physics at much shorter scales. This is
fortunate, for otherwise we would not even be able to describe the
trajectory of a thrown ball without knowledge of beyond the standard
model physics. The same behavior, known as decoupling, is also present
in quantum field theory, where it is by no means obvious that the heavy
particles inevitably occurring as internal legs in Feynman diagrams can
be neglected. The proof that the high-energy modes only contribute to
long-distance phenomena by renormalization of the parameters and by
corrections suppressed by inverse powers of the heavy masses is
contained in the celebrated theorem of Appelquist and Carazzone [ 47 ] .
From this point of view, every physical theory can be viewed as an
effective theory, equivalent to the underlying more fundamental theory
in some finite energy range.

Formally, if the underlying theory is known, the effective theory for
light modes @xmath can be written as a path integral over the heavy
modes @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the effective action @xmath is in general a non-local functional
of the light fields. Analytically the path integral can only be computed
in the Gaussian approximation around some given field configuration
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Choosing @xmath to be a saddle point of the action, @xmath , the
integration over @xmath gives the effective action (for bosonic @xmath )
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last term depends on @xmath both directly through @xmath and
through the saddle point condition which makes @xmath a functional of
@xmath . The Gaussian approximation corresponds to the one-loop level in
heavy-loop expansion; if we want to go beyond that the path integral can
no longer be computed analytically, but we have to resort to
perturbation theory or some other approximation.

While the heavy fields can be integrated out as shown above, the
resulting effective action is generally a complicated nonlocal
functional of the light modes and cannot be cast in the form of an
effective local Lagrangian density without some additional
approximations. An often used method is the derivative expansion, where
the non-local terms are expanded in the light field momenta @xmath over
the heavy field mass @xmath , leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represent operators suppressed by powers of the heavy mass.
In terms of Feynman diagrams this means that the effective action is
computed with only heavy fields on the internal lines, since the action
is made local in the light fields. The form of Eq. ( 2.19 ) is precisely
what should be expected based on the decoupling theorem: parameter
renormalizations and heavy mass suppressed operators. There is a twist,
however, since the light particle momenta need not be small when the
non-local operator is embedded in a multi-loop graph and interacts with
heavy fields, and the derivative expansion may then fail. For example,
in the large-mass expansion at zero temperature [ 46 , 48 ] it is well
known that one needs to take into account also the diagrams with light
internal lines in order to get the correct low-energy effective
Lagrangian. This will also be the case in the dimensionally reduced
effective theory at high temperatures, as we will show later on.

As an illuminating example, consider a theory with two scalar fields [
49 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the limit @xmath . This is similar to the situation at finite
temperature where @xmath can be thought as the static ( @xmath )
Matsubara mode, while the heavy field mass is of the order @xmath . In
this model the dependence on the heavy field is quadratic, so we can
exactly integrate out @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last step we have dropped a @xmath -independent term and
expanded in the small coupling @xmath . The first term in the sum (
@xmath ) is represented by Fig. 2.1 (a) and contributes by a local term
to the mass renormalization,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used dimensional regularization to control the ultraviolet
divergence in the momentum integration, with the conventions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the (arbitrary) dimensional regularization scale,
modified to include the constants typical of the @xmath scheme.

The @xmath -term, however, already shows where the derivative expansion
causes problems. A straightforward computation of the diagram in Fig.
2.1 (b) gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first two @xmath -independent terms contribute to the
renormalization of the 4-point vertex. The remaining logarithm is a
non-local operator connecting two @xmath products at different points.
For small @xmath the integrand can be expanded in @xmath , leading to a
series of local four-point derivative couplings of the form @xmath .
However, when this operator is part of a larger diagram there is no
guarantee that @xmath is small.

For example, the diagram in Fig. 2.1 (c) with one light and two heavy
internal lines is not produced by the effective theory expanded this
way. All loop momenta can be large, and therefore the expansion in
@xmath is not reliable. Computing this diagram is rather nontrivial [ 50
] , but one can show that if the ultraviolet divergences are removed in
the @xmath scheme, the diagram does not vanish in the limit @xmath . To
have an explicit decoupling where all graphs containing heavy internal
lines are suppressed one should use a renormalization scheme where the
counterterm is the negative of the graph expanded in the light masses
and momenta [ 46 ] . At finite temperatures this may be difficult
because of the additional infrared divergences. Moreover, we would
prefer to use the @xmath scheme where the counterterms are already known
to high order and have a simple structure.

Because of the difficulties in integrating out the heavy fields as
described above, at higher orders it is usually safer to construct the
effective Lagrangian explicitly by matching the Green’s functions. The
decoupling theorem states that in a renormalizable theory the parameters
in the effective theory can be chosen in such way that the Green’s
functions of light fields differ from those computed in the full theory
by terms suppressed by powers of the heavy mass,

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (2.25)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the masses and couplings in terms involving
heavy fields, while those for terms with only light fields are labeled
@xmath . The corresponding effective theory parameters are @xmath and
@xmath . We can use this information directly and write down the most
general light mode Lagrangian which respects the symmetries of the
original theory, and then compute a number of @xmath -point functions
(usually @xmath is enough) in both theories at some conveniently chosen
external momenta to fix the parameters. We will see more detailed
examples of this procedure in the following section.

#### 2.2.2 Three-dimensional effective theory at high temperature

Field theories at finite temperature contain many new mass scales in
addition to those given by the parameters of the zero-temperature
Lagrangian. Besides the temperature itself there are dynamically
generated scales related to collective modes and screening phenomena,
and the particle masses are modified by thermal effects as well.
Renormalizing the theory in the minimal subtraction scheme gives rise to
logarithms of the type @xmath , where @xmath can be any of the different
scales in the theory. In particular, large scales do not decouple but
instead give contributions that grow logarithmically with the scale.
This seems to make perturbation theory useless in theories with vastly
different mass scales, since we cannot choose a renormalization scale
that simultaneously makes all the logarithms small. As a result, terms
in the perturbative expansion contain powers of large logarithms in
addition to small coupling and need not decrease at higher orders.

To be more specific, in gauge theory the electric and magnetic screening
scales are of order @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and thus there is
a clear hierarchy of scales in the small coupling region where we would
want to use perturbation theory. The solution is, as discussed above,
either to use a more complicated renormalization scheme or to formulate
an effective theory and continue using the @xmath scheme [ 51 ] . As it
turns out, it is simpler to carry out the computations using the
effective theory. We will mostly concentrate on gauge theories in what
follows, in particular on QCD and electroweak theory.

In the imaginary time formalism we can write the four-dimensional theory
in terms of the Matsubara modes of Eq. ( 2.13 ). For generic bosonic and
fermionic fields the free part of the action (without any chemical
potentials, although they could easily be included) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which can be viewed as a three-dimensional Euclidean theory of an
infinite set of fields with masses @xmath . If the temperature is much
higher than the particle masses, we can use the arguments of the
previous section and try to formulate an effective theory for the light
modes with @xmath , or the bosonic zero-modes since they are the only
modes with @xmath . This theory loses all dependence on the (imaginary)
time coordinate, so we have effectively reduced the number of dimensions
to three. From the point of view of modes with wavelengths much larger
than @xmath the finite temporal direction of length @xmath has shrunk to
a point.

While the dimensionally reduced theory cannot give any information about
the time dependence of the theory, for static Green’s functions the
effective theory gives correct results up to corrections of order @xmath
, where @xmath is any of the light masses. Note in particular that at
high enough temperatures the highest unintegrated mass scales are the
dynamically generated scales @xmath , so the corrections to the
effective theory are comparable with the higher orders of perturbation
theory and both have to be taken into account to get a consistent
perturbative expansion. To gain control over which operators to include,
power counting rules have to be established for given momentum region.
At higher orders it will be necessary to include nonrenormalizable
operators into the effective theory, especially if one wishes to have a
theory that produces all static Green’s functions to given order. In
many cases, like when computing the free energy, it is sufficient to use
only the couplings present already in the original theory, in which case
the effective theory is super-renormalizable because of the lower
dimensionality.

The main advantage in using an effective theory at high temperatures is
in the infrared physics. In general, if the theory contains massless
bosonic fields one expects more severe infrared singularities when going
to finite temperature, since the Bose–Einstein factor in real-time
propagators behaves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be also understood in the imaginary time formalism, where the
zero Matsubara mode behaves like a massless particle in three
dimensions, and lower dimensionality generally makes the infrared
behavior worse. It is well known that in Yang–Mills theories
perturbation theory at finite temperatures suffers from many infrared
problems, becoming finally completely non-perturbative at @xmath [ 52 ,
53 ] . These problems are related to massless particles, in particular
to the gauge fields, whose screening by medium effects is not correctly
reproduced by the naïve perturbation theory. By definition, the
dimensionally reduced theory has the same infrared limit as the original
theory, while being computationally simpler. The leading order
contribution coming from scales of order @xmath can be included in the
parameters of the effective theory via the matching procedure, which is
infrared safe, and the infrared peculiarities can then be studied in a
simpler setting. In particular, the dimensionally reduced effective
theory does not contain any fermionic fields, which makes it easier to
study non-perturbatively using lattice simulations.

The electric screening effects can be included by reorganizing the
perturbative expansion. Computing the one-loop self-energy of a
zero-mode gauge field component @xmath , we find that in the limit of
vanishing momentum it behaves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The temporal component develops a thermal mass of order @xmath , while
the other components remain massless. In the soft limit where @xmath it
is not consistent to treat this self-energy as perturbation, but it
should be included in the propagator instead. This means that we should
sum all diagrams with an arbitrary number of self-energy insertions on
the temporal gluon line to get consistent @xmath results, which is often
referred to as resummation. In four dimensions one has to be careful not
count any diagram twice because of this summation; usually this is done
by adding and subtracting a term containing the self-energy in the
Lagrangian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and treating the subtracted term as an interaction. In the dimensionally
reduced theory the resummation is simpler, since the thermal mass for
@xmath comes out naturally from the matching procedure. Moreover, there
is no risk of double counting diagrams, since the thermal mass is only
created by @xmath and fermionic modes (the mass can be computed in the
@xmath limit, and the dimensionless graphs vanish in dimensional
regularization), which are not present in the effective theory. Note
that the electric mass does not break the remaining gauge invariance,
since when restricting to bosonic zero modes only we are also forced to
only consider @xmath -independent gauge transformations. The
transformation rule in Eq. ( 2.14 ) then boils down to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

so in the three-dimensional theory @xmath becomes a massive scalar
transforming in the adjoint representation of the gauge group. The
remaining gauge invariance in three dimensions prevents the spatial
gauge field components from developing a mass term.

In the magnetic sector there are infinitely many diagrams that all
contribute at order @xmath , and, unlike for the electric mass, they
appear with so different and complex topologies that they cannot be
resummed in a simple way to tame the infrared singularities. In fact,
there is no gauge-invariant magnetic mass term that could be included in
the Lagrangian for perturbatively computing beyond @xmath , but instead
the magnetic screening has to be treated non-perturbatively. In the very
low momentum region the fields with thermal masses @xmath can be
integrated out as well, leaving a three-dimensional pure gauge theory
with coupling @xmath , which is the only dimensionful parameter in the
Lagrangian. In this theory there is no small dimensionless parameter to
do perturbation theory with, but the infrared dynamics of nonabelian
gauge theory is inherently nonperturbative.

To see how the matching of parameters in the dimensionally reduced
theory goes in practice, we will take a closer look at the mass
parameters, following to some extent [ 29 , 14 ] . The masses can be
found by comparing the static two-point functions computed in both
theories. For simplicity, we will use a scalar particle with a small
zero-temperature mass @xmath as an example and work to order @xmath ,
which is sufficient for many computations, in particular for determining
the free energy to order @xmath as in [ 2 , 3 ] .

In the full theory the inverse propagator can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath includes the diagrams with at least one heavy internal
line, while @xmath is the contribution of @xmath modes only. In the
effective theory the same function reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contribution coming from the non-static modes, @xmath , is of order
@xmath , and the matching has to carried out in the region where the
effective theory is valid, @xmath . Since integration over massive modes
is infrared safe, the renormalized self-energy @xmath has no infrared
divergence and can be expanded in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the terms left out are of order @xmath . Further expanding each
term in loop expansion with coupling @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

the inverse propagator in Eq. ( 2.31 ) reads, including terms up to
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The massive modes correspond to poles in the propagator, or the zeros of
the inverse propagator, so we set the expressions in Eqs. ( 2.32 ),(
2.35 ) equal to zero and solve for @xmath . Equating the pole locations
in both theories, we find the matching condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

By construction, the infrared behavior contained in the soft
self-energies @xmath and @xmath is the same in both theories, so this
relation is infrared safe. The difference is of order @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

so, working at order @xmath , we can drop all terms containing @xmath
from the matching condition. We are then left with an equation for the
three-dimensional mass parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a by-product we also found the field normalization factor to order
@xmath , since from looking at the coefficients of @xmath in both
propagators we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath here stems from the overall factor @xmath in Eq. (
LABEL:eq:free_3d_action ), which is conventionally absorbed into the
fields and couplings of the 3d theory.

It should be noted that Eq. ( 2.38 ) only contains contributions from
the heavy scale @xmath , whereas the infrared sensitive parts @xmath and
@xmath drop out. The mass parameter @xmath regulates the infrared
behavior of the dimensionally reduced theory, but it is a completely
perturbative quantity and should not be confused with the actual
screening lengths that are sensitive to infrared physics. In particular,
the thermal mass of the adjoint scalar @xmath in the dimensionally
reduced theory agrees with the electric screening mass @xmath only at
order @xmath , beyond which @xmath becomes sensitive to the magnetic
screening [ 54 ] , while @xmath on its part is given to @xmath by the
completely perturbative expression in Eq. ( 2.38 ).

Apart from the gauge fields, the only other elementary boson in the
standard model is the Higgs field, which has a negative mass parameter
@xmath in the phase of unbroken @xmath symmetry. Near the electroweak
phase transition the Higgs field mass is a special case in the power
counting, since the @xmath mass parameter and the thermal corrections
almost cancel each other, giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or smaller, depending on how close to the phase transition we choose to
work. To have a better separation of scales, it is necessary to
integrate out the fields with masses @xmath when computing close to the
electroweak phase transition, as we did in [ 3 ] . This leads to a
theory containing only the Higgs field and spatial gluons. The thermal
mass @xmath is the leading term in the Higgs field effective potential,
which drives the phase transition.

The above matching computation gives another example of how the
expansion in loops and momenta can be identified when the the correct
momentum region is known. At high temperatures, the mass parameters can
be estimated as @xmath and the momenta at most of the same magnitude, in
the region where dimensional reduction is valid. The required level of
matching is determined by the problem in question and the accuracy goal
one wants to reach. For example, for computing the free energy to order
@xmath we needed the couplings only at tree-level, but the mass
parameters to two-loop ( @xmath ) order.

A more general analysis given in [ 29 ] states that in order to have a
theory which gives the same light field Green’s functions as the full
theory up to corrections of order @xmath , we need to match the
parameters at least to this order. To be more precise, the coupling
constants are required to one-loop level @xmath and adjoint scalar
(temporal gauge field component) masses to two-loop accuracy @xmath . If
the theory contains a light scalar field such as the Higgs field, its
thermal mass should be computed to three-loop level @xmath , since the
first terms cancel each other, and the mass is of order @xmath close to
the phase transition. The same analysis shows that beyond @xmath it is
necessary to include non-renormalizable 6-dimensional operators into the
effective theory.

Apart from the simple power counting, the importance of the higher order
operators inevitably resulting from the reduction step is difficult to
estimate. In [ 55 , 29 ] it is noted that in both abelian and SU(2)
Higgs models these operators are further suppressed by small numerical
coefficients in addition to powers of the coupling constant, and thus
give only very small contributions. The operators following from the
second reduction step, where the scales @xmath are integrated out to
give a pure gauge theory, can be consistently treated as perturbations
with respect to the tree-level Lagrangian, as discussed in [ 56 ] .

For matching purposes we still need to compute some Green’s functions in
the full theory, but using the effective theory this only has to be done
once, after which the computations can be carried out in the simpler
effective theory. For both QCD [ 11 , *Arnold:1995eb , 14 ] and
electroweak theory [ 29 ] the matching has been carried out explicitly
to order @xmath , and for a generic theory containing scalars, fermions
and gauge fields the rules given in [ 29 ] can be used to find the
parameters of the effective theory. The QCD coupling has even been
matched to two-loop [ @xmath ] level in [ 57 ] .

While the effective theory approach saves us from computing multiple
complicated sum-integrals, at finite temperatures the main advantages of
dimensional reduction lie in the easy way to organize the resummations
and separating the contributions of different scales. Eventually
non-perturbative methods such as lattice simulations are needed to
handle the infrared limit, but the dimensional reduction methods allow
us to work out the parameters with completely perturbative methods, and
then apply the computationally intensive methods to the simpler
three-dimensional theory. Lattice simulations in the dimensionally
reduced theory are easier because there is one spatial dimension less,
no fermions and the shortest scales @xmath have been integrated out.

## Chapter 3 Pressure of the standard model

At high temperatures the local @xmath gauge symmetry of electroweak
theory is restored. The phase transition is driven by the Higgs field,
whose effective potential is modified by thermal corrections in such way
that the vacuum expectation value of the field vanishes when the
temperature is raised. Because of the possibility of the phase
transition being strongly first order and contributing to the baryon
number asymmetry, the effective potential has been extensively studied
both by 1-loop [ 58 , 59 , 60 ] and 2-loop [ 61 , 62 , 63 ] perturbative
calculations and by dimensional reduction [ 29 ] combined with lattice
simulations [ 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] . In those works it was shown
that in the standard model the electroweak phase transition is a
crossover for realistic Higgs masses.

Apart from the effective potential computations, the thermodynamics of
electroweak theory has not been studied in detail. In [ 2 , 3 ] we
computed the most fundamental thermodynamic quantity, the free energy,
for electroweak theory at high temperatures. This computation is very
similar to the evaluation of the free energy in QCD, with the main
differences coming from the presence of a light scalar field driving the
phase transition and the multitude of scales and couplings leading to a
very complicated general structure. Together with the QCD result and the
few terms mixing the strong and electroweak couplings, this computation
gives us the free energy of the full standard model.

Partial derivatives of the free energy give the basic thermodynamical
quantities as in Eq. ( 2.3 ). It should be noted here that we are
computing in the grand canonical ensemble, whose partition function
gives the grand potential @xmath , but at zero chemical potentials this
can be identified with the free energy @xmath . In the thermodynamical
limit @xmath the free energy density equals the pressure, @xmath , so
for simplicity we will we talking about pressure from now on.

The energy density and pressure are particularly interesting, since they
control the expansion of the universe at its very early stages.
Temperatures higher than the electroweak crossover cannot be reached
experimentally, but they were present in the early universe. The relic
densities of particles decoupling from the ordinary matter are sensitive
to the evolution of the universe, which in turn is governed by the
equation of state. Recent measurements of the cosmic microwave
background suggest a sizeable amount of cold dark matter, which could be
explained by weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) (see [ 64 ]
for a review). Given a theory describing WIMPs, we need to know the
evolution of the universe at the time of their decoupling as well as at
later times to make predictions of the present situation. In [ 65 ] it
is estimated that a 10% change in the equation of state leads to 1%
difference in relic densities, which is visible in future microwave
observations.

### 3.1 Perturbative evaluation of the pressure

The electroweak sector of the standard model is given by the Euclidean
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the field strengths of the weak and
hypercharge interactions, @xmath is the Higgs field and the covariant
derivatives act on the chiral fermion fields and the Higgs field as
usual (for details, see Eq. (2.3) of [ 2 ] ). We only include the Yukawa
coupling for the top quark, since for other particles the Yukawa
couplings (which are proportional to particle masses in the broken
symmetry phase) are orders of magnitude smaller.

When the Euclidean action is given, the pressure can be computed as the
logarithm of the partition function,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the path integral is over all fields in the Lagrangian. As
described in the previous chapter, a straightforward perturbative
evaluation of the path integral Eq. ( 3.2 ) fails because of infrared
divergences. The solution is to resum a class of diagrams by means of an
effective theory, using dimensional reduction.

In the first level of dimensional reduction all non-static modes, in
particular all fermions, are integrated out. This leads to an effective
theory @xmath , whose parameters are matched by perturbative
computations in the full theory with no resummations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note in particular the appearance of parameter @xmath , which is the
contribution of the non-static modes, or scales @xmath , to the
pressure. This parameter can be also viewed as the matching coefficient
of the unit operator by looking at the (unnormalized) expectation value
of unit operator in both theories,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Since the matching is infrared safe, all parameters of
@xmath and also @xmath are series in @xmath . In addition to curing some
of the infrared problems, this approach makes full use of the scale
hierarchy @xmath by separating the contribution from each scale into
successive effective theories, whose contributions enter at different
levels of perturbation theory. For example, it is easy to see that the
dimensionally reduced theory @xmath in Eq. ( 3.3 ) starts to contribute
at level @xmath .

The effective theory @xmath still contains two different scales @xmath
and @xmath , the latter of which is related to non-perturbative magnetic
screening effects. If one wishes to go further using perturbation
theory, it is useful to integrate out the electric scales @xmath as
well, giving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath only contains the spatial gauge fields. Close to the phase
transition this step is more complicated because the scalar mass is very
light, and deserves a separate discussion in section 3.2 . The only
dimensional parameter in @xmath is the gauge coupling @xmath , so this
theory begins to contribute at order @xmath , this term being completely
non-perturbative. We have only kept terms of order @xmath in our
calculation of the pressure, so this non-perturbative contribution can
be dropped. The purpose of this second reduction step is that the
computation of @xmath in the first effective theory @xmath can be
considered as a matching computation, without having to worry about the
resummations needed for spatial gauge fields.

The electroweak theory contains many dimensionless coupling constants,
and we need to establish a power counting between them in order to
determine which terms to include in the perturbative expansion. We have
decided to use the weak gauge coupling as reference, and, denoting the
strong and hypercharge couplings by @xmath and @xmath , respectively,
make the simple choice

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which corresponds to three-loop expansion in all couplings. Numerically
this is not the best choice, since the strong and Yukawa couplings are
large compared to electroweak couplings, and we underestimate their
importance. However, trying to incorporate higher orders of @xmath would
require four-loop sum-integrals, which we do not know how to perform.
The strong coupling is even harder, since the @xmath order suffers from
the same infrared problems as any nonabelian gauge theory. In [ 29 ] the
rule @xmath is used, but there is no danger and practically no extra
work in keeping terms of order @xmath as well. It should be also kept in
mind that the one-loop renormalization group running of the couplings is
such that @xmath grows with temperature, whereas @xmath decreases.

After all the preparations are done, it remains to actually compute the
pressure. We start by evaluating @xmath to three-loop order. At the 4d
full theory level the Higgs mass parameter @xmath is treated as a
perturbation, so we expand the propagators in @xmath . This is possible
since the matching procedure is infrared safe. The resulting massless
sum-integrals can be evaluated using the methods developed in [ 11 ,
*Arnold:1995eb ] and can be conveniently read from the Appendix A of [
14 ] . The largest work lies in writing down all the required diagrams
with correct symmetry and group theory factors, reducing them to
integrals given in [ 14 ] and summing everything together. Note that the
diagrams with only static modes do not have to explicitly subtracted,
since they vanish in the dimensional regularization due to lack of
dimensionful parameter.

Schematically, the generic form of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the summation is over @xmath and the values of all nonzero
coefficients (all combinations except @xmath , and @xmath since we
exclude the pure QCD terms) can be found in the Appendix A of [ 2 ] . To
keep track of different contributions they are given in terms of the
group theory constants, which for SU(2) read @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .

We have normalized the pressure so that (the real part of) the pressure
at the symmetric phase vanishes at zero temperature, @xmath , in order
to exclude the large vacuum energy contribution and the related
divergences. This normalization is already taken into account in Eq. (
3.7 ), where we have subtracted a term proportional to @xmath computed
at zero temperature. The @xmath computation differs from the
high-temperature expansion in Eq. ( 3.7 ), and the difference is
contained in the remaining coefficient @xmath .

The renormalization of the 4d parameters does not remove all
divergences, but @xmath terms can be found in most of the coefficients
of @xmath terms, corresponding to infrared divergences that cancel
against similar terms in @xmath . Having stated above that the matching
computation is infrared safe, we should elaborate on the nature of these
divergences and their cancellation a bit more. Dimensional
regularization simultaneously handles both the infrared and ultraviolet
limit, and it is not easy to tell the divergences apart.

The electroweak theory is known to be renormalizable. The computation of
@xmath cannot thus contain any ultraviolet divergences, since they are
removed by the counterterms. However, there are diagrams that are both
ultraviolet and infrared divergent and vanish in dimensional
regularization. We can see how they behave through the following simple
example. Consider the logarithmically divergent integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which vanishes in dimensional regularization. This can be written as a
sum of two integrals, one divergent at the ultraviolet and the other at
the infrared momenta,

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath                        (3.9)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------

The renormalization counterterms remove the ultraviolet divergence
@xmath here, leaving the infrared divergent part @xmath . The vanishing
diagram therefore contributes with an infrared divergence when
renormalized.

The scaleless diagrams at finite temperature are precisely those with
only static modes, and no summations over the Matsubara frequencies. The
dimensionally reduced effective theory contains the same diagrams, but
with self-energy corrections resummed to give masses on some
propagators. These masses do not change the ultraviolet behavior of the
diagram, but regularize the infrared limit, so the divergence structure
is just @xmath , which precisely cancels against @xmath from the full
theory computation.

The contribution of the scales @xmath can be calculated from the path
integral in Eq. ( 3.3 ) once the dimensionally reduced theory is known.
Before matching, we need to consider the most general renormalizable (in
3d) Lagrangian respecting the symmetries of the full theory,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.10)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have included masses and quartic self-interactions for the
scalar fields @xmath , the former temporal components of the gauge
field. The field @xmath transforms in the adjoint representation of
SU(2), wheres @xmath does not interact with the gauge fields due to the
abelian nature of U(1).

In order to relate the pressure @xmath to the full theory we need to
know the parameters of the effective theory @xmath in terms of the full
theory couplings. For the couplings the leading order results are
sufficient, since the two-loop diagrams in the effective theory are
already of order @xmath . The matching then boils down to absorbing the
factor of @xmath to couplings to give them the correct dimensions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quartic couplings for the adjoint scalars are of higher order than
we need in our computation.

The matching of the mass parameters is more complicated. Since the
leading order (one-loop) diagrams are of the order @xmath , we need
order @xmath terms in the expressions for the masses to get the pressure
up to @xmath . Moreover, the two-loop diagrams contain ultraviolet
divergences, so we need also the @xmath terms for the masses when using
dimensional regularization. The mass parameters in electroweak theory
have already been computed in [ 29 ] apart from the @xmath terms, which
we have evaluated in [ 2 ] . The masses are found by matching the
two-point functions at vanishing external momentum as in Eq. ( 2.38 ).

The general form of the adjoint scalar masses is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and similarly for @xmath . The coefficients @xmath can be found in the
Appendix B.1 of [ 2 ] . It should be noted that there are no divergences
in these coefficients, but the renormalization of the 4d theory is
enough to make the adjoint scalar masses finite. In the 3d theory these
parameters are renormalization group invariant to this order, and only
start running at order @xmath with terms proportional to @xmath and
@xmath [ 62 ] .

The fundamental scalar mass has @xmath divergences that are not removed
by the renormalization of the full theory. These are again related to
the infrared limit of the static modes and are removed by the
counterterms in the effective theory. Looking from the dimensionally
reduced theory, the matching procedure produces the bare mass which we
can either split into the renormalized mass and counterterms, or
continue using the mass parameter with @xmath terms included as we did
in [ 2 ] . Either way, the divergences will cancel in the final result
for the pressure, and @xmath itself is not a physical parameter we would
be interested to study in detail.

Using the @xmath scheme in the effective theory to renormalize the Higgs
mass, we get the finite result

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.13)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

which depends on the @xmath renormalization scale @xmath replacing
@xmath in Eq. ( 2.23 ). The parameters are linear combinations of @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , and they are given explicitly in the Appendix B.2
of [ 2 ] . The mass counterterm can be read from the matching
computations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This coincides with the counterterm computed directly from the effective
theory @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

when the relations ( 3.11 ) between couplings are taken into account.
Since the 3d theory is super-renormalizable and has only a finite number
of divergent graphs, the counterterm in Eq. ( 3.15 ) is actually an
exact result, without any higher order corrections [ 62 ] .

Since we are computing only vacuum diagrams in the effective theory,
matching the fields is not required, apart from what was included in the
mass parameter computations. All the required parameters are then known,
and the pressure @xmath can be computed by evaluating all one-particle
irreducible vacuum diagrams up to three-loop level in terms of these
parameters. Apart from a gauge boson loop with both Higgs and @xmath
self-energy corrections, all the required 3d integrals are computed in [
14 ] . Because of the massive propagators the general structure of the
result is much more complicated than for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.16)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

The coefficients @xmath and the coefficient function @xmath are linear
combinations of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is
the 3d dimensional regularization scale and @xmath can be any
combination of the different mass parameters @xmath . The detailed
expressions can be found in the Appendix C of [ 2 ] .

The part of the pressure coming from the electric scales in Eq. ( 3.16 )
has many new features that are not present in the corresponding
computation for QCD. In particular, the only dimensional parameters in
dimensionally reduced QCD (known as EQCD) are @xmath and @xmath , so the
possible terms are, for dimensional reasons, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, with divergent coefficients containing @xmath . This is in sharp
contrast with the abundance of different terms in Eq. ( 3.16 ); not only
are there many combinations of couplings and masses, but also completely
new kinds of expressions like @xmath and @xmath .

All the coefficients @xmath and @xmath of the @xmath terms have
ultraviolet divergences, but they cancel against the @xmath terms in the
mass counterterm @xmath . The renormalized mass in Eq. ( 3.13 ) depends
on the renormalization scale @xmath through logarithms @xmath , which
come with the divergences as usual. They cancel against the
corresponding logarithms @xmath in Eq. ( 3.16 ), leaving terms like
@xmath . This kind of terms are not present in EQCD, where all the mass
parameters are finite at @xmath . If we choose @xmath , the scale
dependence in @xmath vanishes completely at @xmath and @xmath when the
running of the 4d couplings is taken into account.

The remaining @xmath terms shown explicitly at two-loop level in Eq. (
3.16 ) cancel against the infrared divergences in @xmath , Eq. ( 3.7 ).
Also there the cancellation between terms coming from scales @xmath and
@xmath results in large logarithms of order @xmath . These terms are
also present in the QCD pressure, where they were originally derived
from the requirement that the pressure should not depend on the scale at
@xmath [ 10 ] .

The presence of terms proportional to @xmath shows that we cannot choose
the scale in such way that the large logarithms would completely vanish.
The use of an effective theory to separate the contributions from
different scales is often advocated by the absence of large logarithms,
but as we see, the infrared divergences mix the different scales, and
logarithms of @xmath are left in the final result. A stronger argument
for formulating the problem in terms of effective theories is the proper
handling of resummations and isolating the non-perturbative infrared
behavior into a simpler theory, as discussed in section 2.2.2 .

### 3.2 Pressure near the phase transition

One of the most interesting properties of the electroweak theory is the
crossover phase transition. When the temperature is lowered, the
effective potential of the Higgs field develops a new minimum at some
finite value @xmath . This phase transition gives masses to all quarks
and leptons (except neutrinos) as well as to those gauge bosons
mediating the weak interactions that correspond to the broken part of
the eletroweak @xmath symmetry.

In the deconfinement phase transition of QCD the strong coupling grows
very large and perturbation theory cannot be used to study the phase
transition. This is not the case in the electroweak symmetry breaking,
since the confinement radius of weak interactions is tremendously large
( @xmath has a Landau pole at @xmath m) compared to the relevant
distance scales at the electroweak transition temperatures ( @xmath m
for @xmath GeV). We can then try to use perturbation theory in studying
the electroweak phenomena close to the phase transition, in particular
to extend our previous computation of the pressure down to transition
temperatures. Besides the pressure playing a central role in describing
thermodynamics near the transition, this also allows us to test the
validity of dimensional reduction at the phase transition, something
that cannot be done in QCD.

Note that perturbation theory is not able to describe the transition
itself correctly with physical Higgs masses. Both two-loop effective
potential calculations [ 62 ] , although limited to @xmath , and the
@xmath -expansion analysis extrapolated to @xmath [ 66 ] suggest the
presence of a first order phase transition for large Higgs masses, while
in reality the transition is of crossover type for @xmath GeV [ 31 , 33
, 34 ] . In the unbroken phase the Higgs field has a non-vanishing
vacuum expectation value, which we would have to incorporate in our
computations to build the perturbative expansion around the true,
physical vacuum. Neverthless, because the coupling constant stays small
in the transition we are able to perturbatively compute physical
quantities while approching the transition from above, as long as we
stay in the symmetric vacuum.

The pressure computed in Eqs. ( 3.7 ),( 3.16 ) cannot be directly
continued down to the phase transition, because it becomes singular as
we approach the critical temperature (which exists in perturbation
theory). The reason for this is that the thermally corrected Higgs mass
@xmath in Eq. ( 3.13 ) becomes very small at the phase transition, and
finally turns negative a little below the transition. At leading order
it is this negative mass parameter that makes the symmetric phase
unstable and drives the phase transition. The singular effects of small
thermal Higgs mass can be seen in @xmath , Eq. ( 3.16 ), which contains
terms like @xmath and @xmath .

The origin of this problem is in our power counting, which assumed
@xmath . Close to @xmath this assumption fails and we run into the same
infrared problems as in the original theory, since the resummation of
non-static modes no longer gives a finite mass to the Higgs field. In
Fig. 3.1 we have plotted the ratio of the renormalized Higgs mass to the
SU(2) adjoint scalar mass in both the full standard model (including
strong interactions) and the SU(2) + Higgs theory which we have used as
a weakly coupled toy model. The numerical values of the parameters are
given in section 3.3 , and the renormalization scale for @xmath is
chosen as @xmath . As the figure shows, the mass ratio drops steeply as
the temperature approaches the phase transition, and at @xmath GeV the
assertion @xmath clearly fails.

The solution is to resum yet another class of diagrams, the adjoint
scalar self-energy corrections on the fundamental scalar line. We then
have one more level of dimensional reduction, and instead of Eq. ( 3.5 )
the pressure is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the same as before, Eq. ( 3.7 ), and @xmath is computed
from the effective theory @xmath in Eq. ( 3.10 ), treating now the light
scalar mass @xmath as a perturbation and expanding the integrals in
@xmath . The contribution from scales @xmath is contained in the
contribution @xmath , which is computed from an effective theory
containing only the fundamental scalar field and the spatial components
of the gauge bosons,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the gauge couplings and the scalar self-coupling do not get any
matching corrections at this level, @xmath . The mass parameter,
however, now also resums the adjoint scalar loops, which we have to
compute up to one-loop level ( @xmath in our power counting),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Apart from the @xmath terms, this expression has been previously
computed in [ 29 ] . The correction is of the same order @xmath as the
leading term @xmath , showing that resummation is necessary to get
consistent results.

For simplicity, we have neglected the order @xmath corrections to the
scalar mass. This can be justified by power counting arguments, since
for @xmath the two-loop corrections would contribute parametrically at
order @xmath , which is strictly speaking higher than @xmath we are
considering here. Dropping terms suppressed by @xmath may not be
numerically justified, but we expect their effect to be small, in
particular because this only concerns four out of more than a hundred
degrees of freedom in the standard model. The practical reason is that
we want to avoid computing all three-loop diagrams in the effective
theory, as well as the renormalization and scale dependence of the Higgs
mass at two-loop level.

Evaluating all the three-loop vacuum diagrams of theory @xmath and
two-loop diagrams of @xmath (there are only three of them), and setting
the number of fermion families to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The @xmath two-loop divergences in @xmath cancel against @xmath as
before. In addition, there are @xmath terms left in @xmath whose
coefficients by themselves are of order @xmath but combine to a term
proportional to @xmath , which cancels against the divergence in @xmath
. Unlike in the high-temperature case, there are also @xmath divergences
in @xmath , but these go away when the one-loop corrections in @xmath
multiplying the “sunset” diagram in @xmath are included. The scale
dependence cancels along with divergences, if we take into account the
running of the couplings in the full theory, and set all regularization
scales to be the same, @xmath . The phase transition can now be safely
approached, since the result ( 3.20 ) for @xmath is perfectly
well-behaved as @xmath goes to zero.

### 3.3 Numerical results

To see how the multitude of terms we have computed affects the physical
pressure, we have to supply some numbers for the parameters of the 4d
Lagrangian, Eq. ( 3.1 ). Apart from the yet undiscovered Higgs particle
mass, the standard model parameters have been measured to great
precision in collider experiments, in particular LEP. The values of
couplings can be determined from their tree-level relations to various
mass parameters,

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.22)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath GeV, @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV are the masses of the W and
Z bosons and the top quark, respectively, and @xmath is the Fermi
coupling constant [ 67 ] . The cited values are what we have used in [ 2
, 3 ] , and they remain practically unchanged in the more recent Review
of Particle Physics [ 68 ] , with only the strong coupling being
slightly smaller, @xmath . Searches for the Higgs particle give its mass
a lower limit @xmath GeV but leave it otherwise unknown. We have used
the value @xmath GeV in all our analysis. The pressure of the full
standard model is very insensitive to the Higgs mass when we are not
close to the phase transition, although @xmath itself depends on @xmath
. In [ 2 ] we have shown that increasing @xmath to 200 GeV causes a
relative change of @xmath in the pressure.

In addition to the standard model, we have also studied the simpler
SU(2) + Higgs theory, for which the corresponding results can be found
from those computed above by setting @xmath . Besides simpler analytic
expressions, this model has some advantages over the standard model when
we want to study the behavior of dimensional reduction near the critical
temperature. The Higgs field drives the phase transition, but it only
represents four of the 106.75 effective degrees of freedom in the
standard model, so its effects on the pressure are hard to see. In SU(2)
+ Higgs model the corresponding number is only 10. Also, this toy model
is weakly coupled, with @xmath and @xmath given by Eq. ( 3.22 ), so the
perturbative expansion converges better than in the presence of large
couplings @xmath and @xmath . More details on computations in this model
can be found in [ 69 ] . Thermodynamics of SU(2) + fundamental Higgs
theory have also been studied on lattice [ 70 ] .

In Fig. 3.2 we have plotted the pressure of the full standard model up
to @xmath , combining the results in Eqs. ( 3.7 ),( 3.16 ) and the pure
QCD pressure taken from [ 14 , 11 , *Arnold:1995eb , 13 , 15 ] (with
one-loop quark diagrams subtracted to avoid double counting),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The radiative electroweak corrections also need to be taken into account
in the two-loop electric gluon mass @xmath which we insert in @xmath
above. They have been computed in [ 2 ] , and used in the leading order
term @xmath .

Although the physical pressure is independent of the renormalization
scale, the perturbative expansion depends on the scale through the
renormalization of parameters at orders higher than those included in
the computation, and we need to fix the scale to define the couplings.
As the remaining scale dependence is cancelled by higher order terms,
the magnitude of the unknown corrections can be estimated by varying the
scale. We have chosen to use @xmath , having shown that the scale
dependence is indeed weak.

The pressure in all our plots is normalized to the Stefan–Boltzmann
result of non-interacting gas of relativistic particles,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

for standard model and SU(2) + Higgs, respectively. The number
multiplying @xmath is actually @xmath of Eq. ( 3.7 ) + the gluon
contribution.

Fig. 3.2 shows that the perturbative expansion does not converge very
well at moderate temperatures, but instead the @xmath correction is even
larger than any of the preceeding terms. This behavior is known in QCD,
and the strong coupling constant is still large at electroweak
temperatures, @xmath . In the full standard model the strongly
interacting degrees of freedom sum up to 79, or 74% of the number in
Eq. ( 3.24 ), so the terms with gluon exchange clearly dominate the
higher order corrections, together with the few terms containing Yukawa
interactions. The pressure lies 5-10% below the ideal gas result, and
begins to converge very slowly at temperatures in TeV range.

Close to the phase transition we have to use the resummed result of
Eq. ( 3.17 ) for the pressure. In Fig. 3.3 we have plotted both the
high-temperature result @xmath and light scalar mass resummed result
@xmath . As the figure shows, the high-temperature result is very
sharply peaked at @xmath , whereas the corrected computation goes
through the transition smoothly. Of course, below @xmath the system goes
to the nonsymmetric ground state whose pressure is larger than the
symmetric phase pressure plotted in Fig. 3.3 , since a thermal system
always tries to minimize the free energy, or maximize the pressure. When
@xmath becomes negative slightly below @xmath , the symmetric phase
pressure develops an imaginary part, which can be interpreted as the
decay rate of the unstable symmetric phase [ 71 ] . In this region we
have plotted the real part of the pressure in our figures.

The two curves in Fig. 3.3 differ by a term roughly proportional to
@xmath , but the difference is only about 0.3%. This is because in
@xmath we have resummed another class of diagrams that are not present
in @xmath . We have also left out all three-loop diagrams in @xmath ,
which would contribute at order @xmath , and the @xmath corrections to
@xmath . In particular the terms with strong and Yukawa couplings might
be important even at this order.

Corresponding plots for the simpler SU(2) + fundamental Higgs theory are
shown in Fig. 3.4 and Fig. 3.5 , with parameters taken from Eq. ( 3.22 )
using @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV. In both figures we have also plotted an
approximation of the broken phase pressure below @xmath to indicate the
phase transition at @xmath GeV. It can be derived from the two-loop
(order @xmath ) computations of the effective potential [ 61 ] and the
pressure in the symmetric phase by using @xmath . Fig. 3.4 should not be
trusted near the transition, but away from @xmath it shows that in the
weakly coupled model the perturbative expansion converges nicely and
settles to a level which is about 2% below the ideal gas pressure. Note
that in the one-loop renormalization @xmath grows with @xmath , so there
is no reason to expect free theory behavior even at very high
temperatures.

Close to the phase transition Fig. 3.5 shows a similar peak in @xmath as
in the standard model, while @xmath does not see the transition at all
until @xmath becomes negative at about 15 GeV below @xmath . The
constant (times @xmath ) difference between the two pressures is larger
than in the standard model, about @xmath . The couplings are all small
here, so we expect that the three-loop diagrams in in @xmath and the
@xmath corrections to the fundamental scalar mass are not important.
However, in this model larger fraction of the overall pressure comes
from the Higgs sector, so the result is more sensitive to different
resummations on the scalar propagator.

We have computed the pressure of the full standard model to order @xmath
both near the phase transition and at high temperatures. In principle,
it is possible to go one step further and compute the coefficient of the
last perturbatively accessible term of order @xmath . This computation
has been carried out in QCD [ 15 ] , but because the QCD pressure
dominates the standard model pressure and @xmath is large, we expect
advances in understanding the QCD pressure to be more important than
four-loop diagrams in electroweak theory. Another computable term would
be the neglected three-loop diagrams and @xmath mass corrections in
@xmath close to the phase transition, contributing parametrically at
order @xmath , but these affect only the Higgs sector and are probably
too small to have any physical implications.

## Chapter 4 Mesonic correlation lengths

Dimensional reduction is only useful in cases where the physical
quantity of interest is time-independent. We can then average over any
time coordinates, or, in terms of momentum space Green’s functions, take
the limit @xmath on all external momenta. This is trivially so in the
case of thermodynamic potentials computed in the previous chapter, since
they are computed from vacuum diagrams, having no external legs at all.

Another class of observables undergoing a dimensional reduction are
various screening correlators, which describe the response of the system
to a time-independent external perturbation. At low momenta they are
usually dominated by simple imaginary poles in the momentum space,
leading to spatial correlators that at large scales decay exponentially
with the distance. The characteristic scale of this exponential fall-off
is referred to as the screening length and its inverse the screening
mass. A typical example would be the electric field of a point charge
immersed in electromagnetic plasma, which at large distances is screened
by the electric mass @xmath . It should be noted that in general the
masses of real-time bound states can be very different from the
corresponding screening masses.

Static correlators of bosonic operators have been succesfully studied
using dimensionally reduced effective theories. For example, various
gluonic correlation lengths have been measured by implementing the
three-dimensional theory of static gluons (EQCD) on lattice [ 18 ,
*Karkkainen:1992jh , *Karkkainen:1993wu , 21 , 22 , *Laine:1999hh , 24 ,
25 , 26 ] . In these works the fermionic modes are integrated out as in
sections 2.2 and 3.1 , leaving a theory of soft gluonic excitations
around the perturbative vacuum. However, this is not the only option
when deriving an effective theory, but we can as well expand around any
other saddle point of the action, corresponding to a choice @xmath in
Eq. ( 2.17 ). In particular, not all fermionic modes need to be
integrated out, but the effective theory can constructed around some
specific fermionic state. This opens a possibility to study also
fermionic correlators using dimensional reduction.

Of particular interest are operators consisting of a light
quark-antiquark pair propagating in the hot medium. In [ 72 ,
*DeTar:1987ga ] it was suggested that at scales comparable to the
magnetic scale @xmath the spectrum of quark-gluon plasma consists of
color-singlet modes only, while the colored excitations are dynamically
confined. The lowest lying excitations at these scales would then be the
various glueball modes and the mesonic and baryonic states consisting of
two and three quarks, respectively. In order to better understand the
long-distance behavior of the plasma, the properties of these states
have been measured in detail on lattice. Most of these studies have been
devoted to Euclidean correlators, or the screening properties of these
operators, due to the inherently Euclidean nature of lattice
simulations. In particular the spectrum of the hadronic screening masses
has been carefully measured, the first simulations dating back 20 years
[ 74 , *DeTar:1987xb , 76 ] .

While combining perturbative calculations with lattice simulations using
dimensional reduction has been very useful when measuring the glueball
spectrum, the hadronic screening masses have been measured using
expensive 4d simulations. However, the need for analytical tools is even
greater in the fermionic sector, where the lattice simulations have
difficulties in treating the light dynamical quarks correctly. The
situation is yet worse when we allow for quark chemical potentials,
which make the fermion determinant complex and ruin the conventional
importance sampling. On the other hand, operators built out of quark
fields are usually less infrared sensitive, so perturbation theory
should more applicable in computing their properties.

The first attempts to determine the screening masses of mesonic states
at high temperatures using dimensional reduction were more of a
qualitative nature, since they knowingly left out corrections of the
same order as the leading term [ 77 , *Hansson:1994nb , 79 ,
*Koch:1994zt ] . In particular, the scale inside the logarithm in the
two-dimensional Coulomb potential @xmath was not fully identified. A
more systematic approach was developed by Huang and Lissia in [ 36 ] ,
where it was shown that the dimensionally reduced theory for fermionic
modes can be formulated in terms of massive non-relativistic quarks in
2+1 dimensions. They also discussed the correct power counting of
different operators, and computed one-loop corrections to the quark
self-energy and the quark-gluon interaction vertex. However, although
the effective theory was derived in order to calculate screening
quantities, the authors did not proceed to compute any masses in that
work.

Following [ 36 ] , we used similar methods in [ 1 ] to derive an
effective three-dimensional theory for the lowest fermionic modes @xmath
, which dominate the mesonic correlator at large distances. This theory
takes the form of non-relativistic quarks coupled to EQCD, or the
spatial gluons and an adjoint scalar field. Because the fermionic sector
of the theory is very similar in form and power counting to the
effective theory for heavy quarks in four dimensions known as
“non-relativistic QCD”, we have named the reduced theory @xmath . Using
this theory, we were able to compute the next-to-leading order
correction to mesonic screening masses in perturbation theory, and this
computation was extended to finite quark chemical potentials in [ 4 ] .
In this chapter we will review these results.

### 4.1 Linear response theory and screening phenomena

The correlation functions usually computed in theoretical calculations
are related to physically measurable quantities through linear response
theory. Our short presentation here follows mostly [ 43 ] , and is
somewhat biased towards screening physics.

Consider perturbing the system in equilibrium with some external probe,
described by an interaction Hamiltonian @xmath which vanishes for @xmath
. In the Schrödinger picture the time-development of an unperturbed
state is given by the time-independent Hamiltonian @xmath , while the
effect of @xmath can be written in terms of a time-development operator
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the last equation @xmath , the potential in the unperturbed
Heisenberg picture is seen to emerge. If @xmath is small, @xmath can be
solved recursively as a series in @xmath by integrating Eq. ( 4.1 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The change in the expectation value of an arbitrary operator @xmath in
the Schrödinger picture is then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the operators and the state vectors are now all in the Heisenberg
picture with the unperturbed Hamiltonian @xmath . In particular, Eq. (
4.3 ) applies to the eigenstates of @xmath , so we can sum over all
states in the ensemble with appropriate weights, and replace the
expectation value in a specific state by thermal average.

Typically, the external interaction can be written as a time-dependent
c-number source @xmath coupled to the system through some current @xmath
built of field operators,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the response of the system is measured through the same current.
Eq. ( 4.3 ) can then be written in terms of the retarded correlation
function @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the lower limit of the time integration can be extended to @xmath
because @xmath for @xmath . In this expression the response of the
system is clearly separated into the retarded propagator, which is
specific to the thermal system in question, convoluted with a factor
@xmath depending on the details of the perturbation.

The excitations of the system manifest themselves as large responses to
an external perturbation. Going into the momentum space, the Fourier
transform of Eq. ( 4.5 ) reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

so this is equivalent to having a pole in the propagator for some values
of frequency @xmath and momentum @xmath . In general there are some
real-time excitations, whose frequencies depend on the momentum through
the dispersion relation @xmath . In addition, at the static limit @xmath
the propagator may contain poles at imaginary momenta, corresponding to
perturbations that decay exponentially with distance due to plasma
screening. The former are difficult to study in imaginary time formalism
because of the need to analytically continue the imaginary time results,
but the time-independent screening correlators are well-adapted for
Euclidean computations.

It should be noted that the correlators often have very different
dependence on @xmath and @xmath , since the thermal environment breaks
the Lorentz invariance. The screening states and the real-time
excitations describe completely different physics, and the corresponding
poles need not be related at finite temperature. One should also be
careful when taking limits @xmath , since different orders of limits may
give different results, and the correct procedure depends on the
physical situation. A good comparison of screening and real-time
quantities in the context of solvable 2+1-dimensional Gross–Neveu model
can be found in [ 81 ] .

### 4.2 Mesonic screening states at high temperatures

The Euclidean Lagrangian governing the behavior of quarks and gluons at
finite temperature is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the covariant derivative is defined as @xmath and the gluon field
strength @xmath , @xmath being the generators in the fundamental
representation of SU( @xmath ). We consider @xmath flavors of degenerate
quarks, so the quark field @xmath is an @xmath -component vector in
flavor space, and the mass matrix @xmath is proportional to unit matrix,
@xmath . For simplicity we will set @xmath in most of what follows.

Finite quark densities are included through chemical potentials @xmath
multiplying the quark number density operators @xmath . This is
precisely the same structure as in the momentum time-component, so the
actual effect when doing computations in perturbation theory is a shift
in @xmath , which in absence of chemical potential woud be one of the
fermionic Matsubara frequencies, @xmath . In pure QCD all quark numbers
are conserved separately, so the chemical potential for each flavor can
be chosen independently. Weak interactions, on the other hand, mix
different quark flavors, mostly inside SU(2) doublets but also between
families, because the weak interaction eigenstates differ from the mass
eigenstates (for a brief review on this mixing, see [ 68 ] ). Because of
this, only certain combinations of the baryon number and the different
lepton numbers are conserved in the full standard model. We assume that
the time scales of chemical equilibration through weak interactions are
much larger than the characteristic time scales of QCD processes we are
studying, even when discussing static correlators, and continue to use
independent chemical potentials for ech flavor. In the numerical studies
we will use two distinct cases, isoscalar ( @xmath ) and isovector (
@xmath ) chemical potentials for illustration, but the analytical
results are applicable to general @xmath .

The quark fields @xmath , @xmath can be used to define mesonic operators
of different spin and flavor structures. These operators can be thought
of either as the currents coupling to external perturbations as in Eq. (
4.4 ) or as interpolating operators for physical particle states,
although in the latter case it should be remembered that the real-time
mesonic bound states do not survive at very high temperatures, and that
their properties may be very different from the corresponding screening
states. We denote

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is one of @xmath for scalar, pseudoscalar, vector and axial
vector objects @xmath , respectively. The flavor strucure is written in
terms of the identity matrix @xmath and the traceless matrices @xmath ,
which satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We wish to compute the static correlators of the above operators. The
particular correlators we are interested in are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity in this equation seems different from the retarded
propagator defined in Eq. ( 4.5 ). The number of relevant
propagator-like functions at finite temperature is large because of the
possibilities of having either real or imaginary time coordinates as
well as different orderings of the operators, but they are all related
to the spectral function @xmath , which in turn is given by the analytic
continuation of the Euclidean correlator in Eq. ( 4.10 ). All these
relations can be found in standard textbooks (see e.g. [ 43 ] ), and a
good summary is given in [ 82 ] . The relevant relation for our
computations is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Euclidean correlator in Eq. ( 4.10 ) with an
arbitrary (Euclidean) momentum zero-component @xmath .

We can use the rotational invariance of the system to choose the vector
@xmath , the direction in which we are measuring the correlations, to
point in the @xmath direction, and further average over the transverse
@xmath -plane. The fundamental quantity we are studying here is then the
@xmath -dependent correlator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

At very high temperature the QCD coupling is small due to asymptotic
freedom, and the correlator @xmath can be computed using perturbation
theory. The leading order result is given by the free theory diagram
Fig. 4.1 (a) consisting of two noninteracting quarks propagating in the
hot medium.

When the chemical potentials all vanish, this diagram can be computed in
the momentum space, and apart from constants corresponding to terms
@xmath in the coordinate space, the result is proportional to the
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

summed over all fermionic momenta @xmath with coefficients that depend
on the spin structure of the operator in question. At large distances,
or low momenta, the behavior of the correlator is dominated by the
lowest singularities of this expression, located at @xmath . If we for a
moment imagine rotating the three-dimensional theory of the lowest
Matsubara modes to 2+1 dimensions and treating the direction of @xmath ,
or @xmath , as a time coordinate, this singularity becomes a branch cut
on the real @xmath -axis, and can be understood as the threshold of
producing two free quarks of mass @xmath . When the interactions are
turned on, we expect this singularity to convert into a pole
corresponding to a bound state in the 2+1-dimensional theory.

It should be noted that the temporal components of vector and axial
vector correlators do not have the singularity associated with @xmath ,
since carrying out the Dirac algebra gives these terms a prefactor
@xmath , which regularizes the singularity at @xmath . Computing in the
configuration space, it is easy to see that these correlators are
suppressed by powers of distance and decay even faster, since the
contribution from the lowest singularity is removed. The longitudinal
components @xmath and @xmath of those correlators vanish completely,
apart from contact terms, because of the current conservation @xmath .

When the chemical potentials are turned on, even the free correlator
becomes very hard to compute. This is due to the shift in the temporal
momentum components, which causes the correlator to mix different
Matsubara modes even after integrating over @xmath -direction. If the
two quarks have identical chemical potentials, which is the case for
flavor singlets or isoscalar chemical potential, the correlator @xmath
in Eq. ( 4.12 ) can be computed explicitly. For scalar operator the
result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have also indicated the limiting behavior at small and large
distances, respectively. For @xmath this result agrees with the previous
zero density computation in [ 83 ] . The effect of a small chemical
potential on the correlator is seen as oscillations with wavelength
@xmath inside the zero density envelope, while for a large @xmath the
interaction with the particle bath is so strong that correlator
oscillates wildly, averaging to zero.

The case of arbitrary chemical potentials is much harder because of the
summations mixing different modes, but a good approximation can be found
by only taking into account the lowest modes @xmath , which dominate the
correlator at large distances. The scalar correlator can then be written
in terms of exponential integral function @xmath , which we approximate
at large @xmath to leading order in @xmath , resulting in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.15)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Details of the computation and a more complete
result for the general case can be found in the Appendix A of [ 4 ] . In
this correlator the scale of oscillations is @xmath , a direct
generalization of the isoscalar case. In particular, for isovector
chemical potentials the oscillation vanishes (although it reappears at
terms suppressed by @xmath as @xmath , see [ 4 ] ) and the correlator
has the same functional form as in the @xmath case.

Together all these results show that the free correlator falls off as
@xmath , regardless of chemical potentials. The finite density only
shifts the singularity in @xmath by an imaginary part, which shows as
oscillations in @xmath . We define the screening mass as the coefficient
of this exponential fall-off, or the real part of the pole location,
because that is what determines the asymptotic behavior of the
correlator. In Fig. ( 4.2 ) we have plotted the isoscalar correlator
Eq. ( 4.2 ) for different values of chemical potential. The figure shows
that when the wavelength of the oscillations @xmath is large, @xmath ,
the oscillatory behavior becomes apparent only at distances where the
correlator is exponentially suppressed, and it is hard to discern the
cosine term from an increased exponential fall-off. For larger @xmath
this difference is obvious, and even more so when studying the
asymptotic behavior of the correlator, so in the leading order of
perturbation theory @xmath is the consistent definition also at finite
density.

### 4.3 Effective theory for the lowest fermionic modes

Going beyond the leading order, the location of the singularity in the
static meson correlator is modified by interactions with gluons. We
would like to compute in perturbation theory the next-to-leading order
corrections to the screening masses, which requires computing the
diagrams of types Fig. 4.1 (b,c). Note that the flavor singlet
correlations are also mediated by purely gluonic states, some of which
have masses lower than @xmath . These states are completely
non-perturbative, so we only concentrate in this work on flavor
non-singlets. The couplings of different quark operators to glueballs
have been worked out in [ 1 ] and the masses of these gluonic operators
for both zero and finite chemical potentials have been measured in [ 25
] .

Computing the one-gluon diagrams is not enough, however, since one runs
here into the same infrared problems as always when computing with light
particles at finite temperature. In particular, for soft momenta (which
implicitly requires bosonic zero mode @xmath ) the one-loop correction
to the gluonic zero mode propagator is of the same order as the leading
term and needs to be resummed into the propagator to get rid of infrared
singularities arising from soft gluons. As discussed in previous
chapters, at order @xmath this resummation gives the static temporal
gluon component an electric mass @xmath , which we have to include in
the soft gluon propagators of diagrams Fig. 4.1 (b,c).

Another class of diagrams requiring resummations consists of the graphs
with soft gluon exchanges, as shown in Fig. 4.1 (b). The integration
over @xmath when going to coordinate space gets the largest contribution
from the poles at @xmath , and if the gluon momentum is small, the
additional quark and gluon propagators in the diagram are also nearly
on-shell, @xmath , compensating for the factors of @xmath from the
vertices. To get a consistent next-to-leading order correction we
therefore have to sum over all diagrams with an arbitrary number of soft
gluon exchanges. This is a common requirement for having a bound state
in theory, since summing only a finite number of diagrams with free
propagators cannot give rise to new singularities, and it applies as
well to the screening states under discussion. We wish to avoid the
exceedingly complicated formalism of relativistic bound states, and
instead make use of the hierarchy between the Matsubara modes @xmath and
the momentum scales where the resummations become necessary, @xmath .
This suggests using an effective theory to organize the resummations of
the soft modes, while simply including the effects of the large momenta
in the parameters.

The leading order computation shows that at large distances the
screening correlator is dominated by the lowest Matsubara modes @xmath ,
while the contribution coming from the other modes is exponentially
suppressed. We concentrate on the lowest modes and integrate over all
excitations of momenta @xmath around these modes, which gives an
effective theory only containing the static ( @xmath ) gluons and the
fermionic modes with @xmath . In particular, all the other fermionic
states are off-shell by @xmath , so this theory does not contain any
creation or annihilation of quarks, but the only quark lines are those
entering and leaving the diagrams as external legs. Because we are
computing near the screening pole, these external quarks are almost
on-shell, @xmath , and the interactions with soft gluons do not change
that very much. The relevant expansion parameter is then the
“off-shellness” @xmath , which is of the same order as the momenta of
the soft gluons. If we rotate the 3-dimensional action of the quark
modes into the 2+1-dimensional Minkowski space, the Matsubara mode
@xmath can be viewed as a heavy quark mass, and the restriction to
momenta much lower than this and the separation of quarks from
antiquarks effectively makes the quarks non-relativistic in 2+1
dimensions. Note that there is nothing special in the lowest Matsubara
modes, but we could equally well derive a similar theory for modes
@xmath , for example. The reason we have singled out the lowest modes is
because they dominate the screening correlator, which we aim to compute.

The difference between the purely gluonic EQCD and the effective theory
considered here is the state around which the expansion takes place, and
is dictated by the physical application we have in mind. EQCD is
directed at computing either vacuum diagrams or gluonic correlators,
which do not have any quarks on external legs. Any fermionic excitation
is then off-shell at least by @xmath , and only contributes at the
high-momentum integration. The mesonic operators, on the other hand, are
built out of quark fields, which cannot be integrated out if we intend
to compute with them. Still, given an external quark state, any
additional quarks would again be very much off-shell, so expanding
around that state in low momenta we can neglect all other fermionic
excitations. To compare with QED, the relation between the two theories
roughly corresponds to the Euler–Heisenberg effective Lagrangian for
photon-photon interactions and the non-relativistic quantum mechanics
used to compute hydrogen (or positronium) binding energies. In the
former the electrons have been integrated out completely, whereas in the
latter we can mostly ignore the contribution of the states with e.g. two
electrons and a positron, not because the mass would be much higher (
@xmath vs. @xmath ), but because they are off-shell by @xmath , which is
large compared to typical momenta @xmath .

The bosonic sector of the dimensionally reduced QCD is well-known [ 5 ,
*Appelquist:1981vg ] , and in finite density it reads [ 25 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have also included the cubic @xmath self-coupling proportional
to quark chemical potentials. The parameters are found by matching
gluonic 2- and 3-point functions. We only need the adjoint scalar mass
to one-loop level and other couplings at tree level, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The cubic and quartic @xmath self-interactions can be ignored, since
they contribute to meson correlators only at order @xmath and higher.
The bosonic theory in Eq. ( 4.16 ) describes a 3-dimensional gauge
theory with a massive adjoint scalar @xmath , and has been extensively
used to compute gluonic quantities at high temperatures, as discussed in
the beginning of this chapter.

On the fermionic sector the tree-level Lagrangian is just a sum over the
parts of the full theory Lagrangian containing modes @xmath . For a
single mode @xmath this term reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the gluonic zero mode. We have separated the
@xmath -direction from the other spatial components, anticipating the
choice to measure correlations in that direction. Note that the
interaction with static gluons does not mix different fermion Matsubara
modes, so we have a separate term like Eq. ( 4.18 ) for each mode we
wish to compute with.

Using a non-standard representation for Dirac matrices (see [ 1 , 4 ]
for details) and decomposing the four-component spinor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Lagrangian can be written in a form where the fields @xmath and
@xmath are light and heavy close to the pole @xmath , respectively,
while the roles are reversed at the other pole @xmath . Solving the
equation of motion for the heavy component and expanding the resulting
non-local operators in @xmath , we get the non-relativistic Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

All dependence on the chemical potential at this level is contained in
the shift of the temporal momentum component, @xmath . The Lagrangian is
easier to understand if we again imagine rotating to 2+1 dimensions and
setting @xmath . The zero-point energy is then given by @xmath , while
the other free terms combine to @xmath , the standard nonrelativistic
kinetic term with mass @xmath . If we forget the relativistic origin of
these terms, there is no reason for the zero-point energy and the mass
parameter in the kinetic term to be the same, and as we will see
shortly, the loop corrections will give these parameters different
values. It should be noted that for @xmath the field @xmath has negative
mass, and should be interpreted as the antiparticle of @xmath .

Already at the tree-level the expansion in @xmath gives rise to an
infinite number of terms, and beyond this we will have to take into
account all possible terms allowed by symmetries. To limit the
possibilities, a power counting has to be established. Requiring all the
transverse momenta to be at most of the order of the electric mass,
@xmath , and that the terms in the action to be of order unity, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The off-shellness @xmath corresponds to the kinetic energy in the 2+1
dimensional theory, as can be verified from the poles in the quark
propagators, Eqs. ( 4.25 ),( 4.26 ). For nearly on-shell quarks we can
then estimate the derivative @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this power counting, and keeping only terms required to give the
screening mass to order @xmath , the final form of the fermionic
Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where only the zero-point energy, which we will henceforth denote by
@xmath , needs to be matched beyond tree-level. This matching is carried
out by comparing the poles in the one-loop corrected quark propagator
depicted in Fig. 4.3 . The details of the computation are given in the
original papers, and the result is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

It should be noted that for @xmath , which are the modes of interest
here, the real part of @xmath does not depend on @xmath .

The free quark propagators following from Eq. ( 4.23 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

or in the configuration space

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In these equations it is obvious that for @xmath the field @xmath
propagates forward and @xmath backward in @xmath , the time coordinate
of the 2+1-dimensional theory, confirming our interpretation of @xmath
as the antiparticle of @xmath . For negative modes these roles are
reversed, with @xmath propagating forward in @xmath . In [ 1 ] we
expanded these propagators in @xmath inside loop integrals to make sure
that the transverse momenta are parametrically smaller than the heavy
scale @xmath . However, as discussed in [ 84 ] , while this works well
for (single) heavy quark effective theory, in NRQCD there are
difficulties at two-loop level with this approach, and it is preferable
to keep the kinetic terms summed into the propagators. For our modest
purposes there is no real difference, but in [ 4 ] we chose not expand
in transverse momenta. For consistency, this requires that we expand the
gluon field in multipole expansion, which at this level boils down to
disallowing transverse momentum transfer from gluons to quarks. The
masses and the quark-antiquark potential turn out to not depend on the
way we treat the propagators, whereas in order to compute the full
correlators it is necessary to keep the kinetic terms resummed. As a
check, we have shown that @xmath is able to reproduce the leading order
scalar correlator in Eq. ( 4.2 ) exactly.

In terms of the new fields @xmath and @xmath the operators whose
correlators we intend to compute can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It should be noted that the temporal and longitudinal components of
vector and axial vector currents consist of terms like @xmath and @xmath
, so their correlators are proportional to @xmath and vanish at nonzero
distances. For @xmath and @xmath this follows from current conservation,
whereas the correlators for charges @xmath and @xmath are
power-suppressed, as discussed in the previous section. Apart from those
operators, the correlator in the effective theory is independent of the
spin structure, up to a multiplicative constant, since @xmath . The
flavor structure on the other hand is significant if we allow for finite
chemical potentials.

### 4.4 Solving the screening states

Having derived the Lagrangian for @xmath , which is just the sum of the
bosonic part in Eq. ( 4.16 ) and the fermionic part in Eq. ( 4.23 ), it
remains to find the masses of mesonic operators. These correspond to
bound states in the 2+1-dimensional theory, following from the summation
of diagrams of type Fig. 4.1 (b,c) with an arbitrary number of soft
gluon exchanges. In a nonrelativistic theory the resummation can be
carried out by finding the static potential for a @xmath pair, and then
solving the resulting Schrödinger equation with this potential. Here
“static” should be understood from the 2+1-dimensional point of view,
which means that the potential will be valid for large @xmath . All
these computations can be performed using the effective theory just
derived, since it is only the @xmath gluons with low momenta that need
to be summed beyond the leading order.

The static potential is written as an expansion in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using either the power counting @xmath or the leading order Schrödinger
equation we see that @xmath . The leading Coulomb-type term @xmath in
the potential is then sufficient for computing @xmath corrections to
screening masses, and can be evaluated perturbatively by computing all
one-gluon diagrams in the effective theory. The leading logarithmic term
already gives a confining potential, so there is no qualitative
difference in dropping the linear term, which is parametrically of order
@xmath .

The static potential of a @xmath pair is computed by inserting a
point-splitting in the correlator to give the quarks a small spatial
separation in the transverse direction, and finding the Schrödinger-type
equation satisfied by this correlator at @xmath limit. The details of
this computation can be found Appendix B of [ 4 ] , and the result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a modified Bessel function. The result is both
ultraviolet and infrared finite once we have resummed the gluon
self-energy corrections to an electric mass @xmath , while letting
@xmath we would again find the infrared divergences of the original
theory. The screening masses at this order are not sensitive to the
magnetic screening of spatial gluons, as this would manifest itself as
divergences in the potential. The potential in Eq. ( 4.31 ) depends on
the quark chemical potentials only through @xmath , as the leading order
is only sensitive to the propagation of gluons in the hot medium while
the quarks simply act as static color charges.

The Schrödinger equation satisfied by the correlator was already found
as an intermediate result when computing the potential, and it reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have separated the variables as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the @xmath signs apply for @xmath , respectively. The flavors of the
quarks forming the meson are labelled with indices @xmath , and in
general the flavor symmetry between different mesons is broken by the
different chemical potentials. The parameters @xmath and @xmath are
generally complex when computing with finite chemical potentials, but
for opposite modes they are related by @xmath and @xmath , so the
screening masses satisfy by @xmath . Thus we only need to compute the
masses for @xmath , and in addition these relations guarantee that the
full correlator, which is the sum over all separate Matsubara modes,
behaves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the overall phase of the @xmath correlator. This is of
the same form as the leading order term, with the real part of the mass
parameter giving an exponential decay while the imaginary part
contributes to a cosine-like oscillation term. In particular, this
correlator is real-valued even though the term coming from any single
mode is in general complex.

The Schrödinger equation with potential Eq. ( 4.31 ) cannot be solved
analytically, so we have to find the eigenvalues @xmath using numerical
computations. For this, we cast the equation into a dimensionless form,
which depends on the values of the physical parameters only through the
dimensionless combinations @xmath and @xmath defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.35)
  -- -- -- --------

One should note in @xmath the appearance of the reduced mass, typical of
two-body problems. The physical screening mass is given by @xmath which
we solve numerically,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last equality we have used the fact that for the lowest
modes the real part of @xmath is independent of @xmath .

The numerical solution is found by assuming that the ground state is
cylindrically symmetric, solving the behavior of @xmath around the
origin and then integrating out to larger @xmath and requiring square
integrability. In zero density this is easy since both the wave function
and @xmath are real, and trying different values of @xmath on the real
axis with the condition that @xmath vanishes at large distances is very
fast. We find, with somewhat superfluous precision,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

for different numbers of dynamical quarks @xmath . The number of flavors
only enters in @xmath , so even the case @xmath makes sense if the
creation and annihilation of quarks is suppressed, as in the so-called
quenched simulations on lattice. When the chemical potentials are turned
on, the numerical computation becomes more demanding, as all parameters
and the wave function have complex values, and the solution has to be
searched for in the complex plane instead of limiting to the real axis.
Moreover, the dependence on @xmath cannot be solved analytically, but we
have to repeat the process for each chemical potential separately.

In Fig. 4.4 we have plotted the eigenvalues @xmath for isoscalar
chemical potential with different numbers of dynamical quarks. We have
also studied the case where @xmath , but only the two flavors in the
measured operator have nonzero chemical potentials. This should more
closely correspond to the situation in heavy ion collisions, where the
two colliding nuclei have finite up and down quark densities but
vanishing net strangeness. The figure shows that the poles move along
quadratic curves off the real axis, and the real part of @xmath , which
is the contribution to the screening mass, grows with @xmath for
dynamical quarks. In the quenched case the real part decreases and
becomes negative at @xmath . At large values of the chemical potential
the oscillations due to the imaginary part of @xmath become strong and
the numerical integration is unstable, so it is hard to go beyond @xmath
numerically. On the other hand, in deriving the effective theory using
dimensional reduction we assume that @xmath is larger than any other
mass scale, so our results cannot be trusted for @xmath .

The chemical potential enters the dimensionless Schrödinger equation
only through the parameter @xmath . For the specific cases of isoscalar
and isovector chemical potential that we study numerically, the
dependence is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Fig. 4.4 we can see the twofold influence of the chemical
potential. When @xmath , increasing the chemical potential just shifts
@xmath into more imaginary values, while its real part stays constant.
The following increase in the absolute value of @xmath decreases Re(
@xmath ) like in the @xmath case, Eq. ( 4.37 ). For dynamical fermions
this effect is more than compensated by the increase in @xmath , which
raises the potential and accordingly increases the energy eigenvalues.

In Fig. 4.5 we plot the real part of @xmath , which apart from scaling
and an additive @xmath -independent constant is the same as the
screening mass, see Eq. ( 4.36 ). The isoscalar data is the same as in
Fig. 4.4 discussed above, while for isovector chemical potential we see
that the mass decreases with @xmath for @xmath . This is in agreement
with the previous discussion on the relation between @xmath and @xmath ,
and Eq. ( 4.38 ), where @xmath for isovector chemical potential
increases with @xmath for small number of dynamical fermions.

Numerically the correction we have computed is small, even near the
phase transition where the coupling constant itself is large. For @xmath
the range of screening masses for different values of chemical
potentials fits in the interval

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effective coupling @xmath is estimated to be @xmath when @xmath [ 57
] , giving the next-to-leading order corrections to the screening mass
of about 6–8%. Nevertheless, as long as the coupling is large there is
no reason to expect that the next correction would be smaller by a
factor of the same magnitude.

While the Schrödinger equation Eq. ( 4.32 ) cannot be solved exactly, we
were able to find a simple approximate dependence on the parameters
while writing this introductory part. Realizing that the modified Bessel
function @xmath in the potential interpolates between @xmath and 0, we
can try to estimate the potential by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we expect @xmath . For real values of the dimensionless parameter
@xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.35 ) its effects can be scaled into the
dimensionless variables, giving for the potential in Eq. ( 4.40 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 4.6 we have plotted @xmath vs. @xmath for the numerical data we
have computed, assuming that the expression in Eq. ( 4.41 ) can be
extended for complex values of @xmath as well, if the branch cut is
introduced on the negative real axis. As the figure shows, for isovector
@xmath with real @xmath the behavior is extremely well described by
Eq. ( 4.41 ), and the agreement is also good for the complex values of
@xmath . Fitting a line to both real and imaginary parts separately, we
get slopes -0.78 and -0.74, respectively. To desired accuracy, the
screening masses from our computations can then be summarized by the
two-parameter fit from the left plot in Fig. 4.6 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath can be read from Eq. ( 4.35 ).

### 4.5 Comparison with other results

The static mesonic correlators considered here have also been measured
in the lattice simulations. In zero density there is a long tradition of
measuring the screening masses, for recent results see [ 85 , 86 , 87 ,
88 ] . Early measurements gave large differences between the masses of
different spin structure operators, but in recent works the general
picture is that already at @xmath the masses come close to the ideal gas
result, with @xmath (vector) meson slightly larger than @xmath
(pseudoscalar) and both lying 5–10% below the ideal gas result. The
correction we have computed above is of the same magnitude, but with
different sign. For all @xmath the @xmath results we have computed lie
above the free theory result @xmath , approaching the ideal gas slowly
as @xmath gets smaller due to asymptotic freedom.

The systematic errors in lattice simulations are related to dynamical
quarks, light quark masses, and the difficulties in going to the
infinite volume limit. In [ 87 ] the analysis of the infinite volume
extrapolation is carried out, resulting in slightly higher masses than
those measured earlier, but even then the screening masses are clearly
below the ideal gas result. It should be noted that our perturbative
result is above @xmath also for @xmath , so the potential difficulties
with dynamical quarks cannot completely explain the disagreement with
lattice measurements. On the other hand, because the strong coupling is
large near @xmath , the higher order perturbative corrections can be as
large as the @xmath term we have computed, at least at temperatures
within the reach of lattice measurements. At asymptotically high
temperatures, however, the perturbative calculation should be valid, so
we expect the screening masses to cross above the free theory result at
high enough temperature.

Recently the screening masses have also been computed by evaluating the
meson spectral function in the HTL resummation scheme and determining
the fall-off of the correlator through the spectral function [ 89 ] .
This method is very orthogonal to our computations, but the weak
coupling limit of those results is very similar, and can be summarized
in our terms by setting @xmath in Eq. ( 4.36 ). The difference can be
explained by the soft gluon contributions that were knowingly left out
in [ 89 ] . At temperatures close to the phase transition the meson
properties have been studied analytically in the Nambu–Jona-Lasinio
model, which gives screening masses well below the free theory result [
90 ] . It should be noted that this method is valid at very different
temperature region, and does not necessarily contradict our
high-temperature results.

At finite density the lattice measurements of hadronic screening masses
have been performed only recently [ 91 ] . Simulations at nonzero
chemical potentials are difficult because of the complex fermion
determinants, so these computations were carried out by expanding the
masses as Taylor series in @xmath around @xmath and measuring the
derivatives up to second order response. All measurements in [ 91 ] were
carried out using @xmath flavors of staggered fermions. The leading
order term is just the @xmath mass which behaves as described above, and
the first derivative vanishes for both isovector and isoscalar chemical
potentials. For the latter this follows from symmetry properties,
whereas the response with isovector @xmath is explicitly measured to be
zero. In our perturbative calculation the first derivative at @xmath
vanishes as well for both chemical potentials, as required by the
symmetry @xmath .

The second derivatives give the @xmath -dependence of the masses as
measured on lattice. For isoscalar @xmath the measured second order
response rises steeply at @xmath and settles somewhat below @xmath at
higher temperatures, for both @xmath and @xmath . In the isovector case
the response is small and negative, and approaches zero as temperature
is raised. At small @xmath these results are in qualitative agreement
with our perturbative calculation, but for isoscalar the actual numbers
differ by orders of magnitude. For comparison, we have fitted quadratic
curves to our data to extract the second order response, and the result
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

for isoscalar and isovector, respectively. In terms of physical
parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives second derivatives of order @xmath , two orders of magnitude
smaller than the value measured on lattice. While the masses in both
perturbative and lattice computations are consistent with the free
theory result when all possible error sources are taken into account,
the difference in the second derivatives with respect to isoscalar
chemical potential is striking. One has to be careful, however, to
define the mass the same way in both computations before making any
comparison.

#### 4.5.1 Definition of the screening mass at nonzero density

The correlator @xmath in Eq. ( 4.12 ) is a complicated function of
@xmath already at leading order, as the exact free theory result in
Eq. ( 4.2 ) shows. The screening masses appear as poles in the momentum
space Green’s functions, but in practice the correlator is measured in
configuration space, and only exhibits simple exponential behavior at
asymptotically large distances, the coefficient of this exponential
decay being the screening mass. An effective @xmath -dependent screening
mass can be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in free theory approaches the screening mass roughly as @xmath .
In lattice simulations this complication is often removed by measuring
the one-dimensional correlations between planar sources. On a finite
lattice with periodic boundary conditions the correlator then behaves as
@xmath , which is used in fitting to extract @xmath from data.

When chemical potentials are turned on, the situation becomes more
complicated. The definition of the effective mass in Eq. ( 4.45 ) is
useless because of the oscillations in the correlator which cause @xmath
to periodically go through zero and to negative values, preventing us
from taking the @xmath limit. At short distances the fall-off is faster
than at @xmath because of the cosine term @xmath , but this term does
not contribute to the decay at longer distances. The asymptotic behavior
of the correlator is dominated by the coefficient of the exponential
fall-off, which corresponds to the real part of the momentum space pole
location. At large distances this coefficient can be extracted from
data, but usually one cannot do measurements at arbitrarily large
separations because of the finite lattice size and the exponentially
small value of the correlator.

When determining the mass from short-distance data the potential
oscillatory terms have to be included in the fit in order to get
reliable estimates. For example, the free plane-plane correlator at
finite chemical potential behaves as @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .
Simply fitting an exponential of the form @xmath overestimates the
fall-off because of the oscillations, giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivatives with respect to @xmath are also affected by the
unfortunate choice of the fitting function. For isoscalar chemical
potential @xmath , and even for the @xmath -independent screening mass
@xmath of the free theory Eq. ( 4.46 ) would give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which incidentally is of the same magnitude as the derivatives measured
in [ 91 ] . In the case of isovector chemical potentials @xmath and the
oscillations vanish at leading order in @xmath , so this effect
disappears for @xmath .

As discussed above, the actual lattice simulations are carried out by
measuring the derivatives of correlators at @xmath instead of the full
correlator at @xmath . The expression for the second derivative of
@xmath , given that the first derivative vanishes at @xmath , is [ 92 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last equality we have substituted @xmath and the whole
expression is written in the limit of infinitely long lattice. The
oscillations should then show as quadratic @xmath -dependence of the
second derivative, but at least the data in [ 92 ] does not support the
existence of this kind of term.

Given that the second order response does not show signs of oscillation
in lattice simulations, it is not clear if the cosine terms clearly
visible at the leading order and in one-loop terms survive at the
non-perturbative level. However, understanding the potentially
complicated behavior of the correlator at short distances is necessary
to extract reliable information from data measured at finite distances.
In particular, the oscillatory terms suggested by the perturbative
calculations should probably be taken into account when fitting the
correlator at finite chemical potentials.

## Chapter 5 Review and outlook

Dimensional reduction is an approximate method which is perfectly suited
for computing static observables in weakly coupled high temperature
field theory. It is based on the observation that when the temperature
is large and the coupling small, there is a clear scale hierarchy
between the thermal, electric and magnetic scales @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and makes full use of that hierarchy by applying
effective field theory techniques. In perturbation theory reorganizing
the perturbative expansion by resummation of classes of diagrams is
necessary in order to regulate the infrared divergences, and this can be
carried out systematically using dimensional reduction, without worrying
about double counting diagrams. For non-perturbative lattice simulations
the dimensionally reduced effective theory is appealing because of the
analytic treatment of fermions, lower space-time dimension and the
integration out of scales @xmath , allowing for larger lattice spacing.
For these reasons, dimensional reduction has been extensively used to
compute properties of both QCD and electroweak theory at high
temperatures. However, it is not of use near the QCD phase transition,
where @xmath is large and the weak-coupling hierarchy of scales
disappears. It should be also noted that dimensional reduction
explicitly breaks the @xmath symmetry of degenerate QCD vacua above
@xmath , and the fluctuations between these states become important
close to the phase transition.

In this thesis, we have studied two applications of dimensional
reduction to the standard model physics. The pressure of the electroweak
theory, which was previously undetermined beyond the first terms, was
computed up to three-loop level, or @xmath , in [ 2 , 3 ] . Combined
with the previously known QCD pressure, this enables us to study the
pressure of the full standard model above the electroweak phase
transition. We have shown that the pressure of the symmetric phase goes
smoothly through the transition point once the small value of the Higgs
field mass is taken into account in the effective theory. The pressure
of the whole standard model to this order lies 10–15% below the ideal
gas value, but the perturbative expansion does not converge well because
of the large values of QCD and top quark Yukawa couplings. As a special
case we have studied the weakly coupled SU(2) + fundamental scalar
theory, where the convergence is good as expected.

The correlation lengths of mesonic operators at high temperatures have
been computed in [ 1 ] and extended to finite chemical potentials in [ 4
] . We have computed the leading order (free) correlators in full QCD,
and then formulated a dimensionally reduced effective theory which
includes the lowest fermionic modes in order to compute the first
perturbative correction of order @xmath to masses. The fermionic theory
is seen to correspond to a nonrelativistic theory for heavy quarks in
2+1 dimensions, and draws inspiration from the heavy quark effective
theories used to compute the properties of quarkonia. The screening mass
correction we find is small and positive, and it depends in a
complicated way on the chemical potentials and the number of dynamical
quarks. The finite density result is only in qualitative agreement with
lattice results, and we discuss the potential differences in measuring
the mass at finite distances.

Dimensional reduction has proved to be an efficient tool for computing
bosonic observables at high temperatures both in perturbation theory and
combined with non-perturbative methods. As a prominent example, the
perturbative expansion of the QCD pressure has been computed as far as
possible by purely perturbative means, and it shows good agreement with
4d lattice simulations if the unknown @xmath term related to magnetic
scales turns out to have the right value. This is in accordance with the
conjecture that the truncated perturbative series is close to the actual
result once all dynamical scales have entered the computation [ 93 ] .
Recently, first steps toward computing the missing @xmath correction
have been taken by evaluating the four-loop pressure of massless O(
@xmath ) scalar theory, requiring for the first time the computation of
four-loop sum-integrals [ 94 ] . In the weak coupling regime dimensional
reduction also extends to large values of @xmath , for the actual
requirement is simply that @xmath should be larger than other mass
scales, which for @xmath translates into @xmath as discussed in [ 95 ] .
An often overlooked part of the perturbative computations are finite
quark masses [ 96 ] , which give sizeable contributions near the
thresholds where they enter.

New directions for effective theory computations are provided by the
possibility of studying also fermionic operators, as discussed in
chapter 4 . To estimate the reliability of this method it would be
central to understand the origin of differences between the perturbative
and lattice results for the masses, possibly also implementing @xmath on
lattice.