Many problems that arise in machine learning domain deal with
nonlinearity and quite often demand users to obtain global optimal
solutions rather than local optimal ones. Optimization problems are
inherent in machine learning algorithms and hence many methods in
machine learning were inherited from the optimization literature.
Popularly known as the initialization problem , the ideal set of
parameters required will significantly depend on the given
initialization values. The recently developed TRUST-TECH (TRansformation
Under STability-reTaining Equilibria CHaracterization) methodology
systematically explores the subspace of the parameters to obtain a
complete set of local optimal solutions. In this thesis work, we propose
TRUST-TECH based methods for solving several optimization and machine
learning problems. TRUST-TECH explores the dynamic and geometric
characteristics of stability boundaries of a nonlinear dynamical system
corresponding to the nonlinear function of interest. Basically, our
method coalesces the advantages of the traditional local optimizers with
that of the dynamic and geometric characteristics of the stability
regions of the corresponding nonlinear dynamical system. Two stages
namely, the local stage and the neighborhood-search stage, are repeated
alternatively in the solution space to achieve improvements in the
quality of the solutions. The local stage obtains the local maximum of
the nonlinear function and the neighborhood-search stage helps to escape
out of the local maximum by moving towards the neighboring stability
regions. Our methods were tested on both synthetic and real datasets and
the advantages of using this novel framework are clearly manifested.
This framework not only reduces the sensitivity to initialization, but
also allows the flexibility for the practitioners to use various global
and local methods that work well for a particular problem of interest.
Other hierarchical stochastic algorithms like evolutionary algorithms
and smoothing algorithms are also studied and frameworks for combining
these methods with TRUST-TECH have been proposed and evaluated on
several test systems.

{copyrightpage}

© 2007 Chandankumar Reddy Karrem
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED {biosketch} Chandan Reddy was born in Jammalamadugu,
Andhra Pradesh, India on May 11, 1980. After obtaining Bachelor’s degree
from Pondicherry Engineering College in 2001, he moved to the United
States to pursue his higher education. He obtained his master’s degree
from the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Michigan
State University in August 2003. Later, he joined the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering at Cornell University to pursue his
doctoral studies. His primary research interests are in the areas of
Machine Learning, Data Mining, Optimization, Computational Statistics,
Bioinformatics and Biomedical Imaging. {dedication} Dedicated to my
parents
